CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




nlln 



3 1924 028 853 327 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028853327 




-Vl^tM^a. 'Jil^ A^rt^e^ 



' ij, J-'t ■'I' i iH fi ffi'. 



THE 

HISTORY OF 

DUTCHESS COUNTY 

NEW YORK 



Edited by 
FRANK HASBROUCK 



Puhluhed hy 
S. A. MATTH lEU 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 
1 909 




THEA.V.HAICHTDI). 

PRINTEHS 

roUCHKEEPSie 

HEW YORK 



PREFACE. 

The year of the tercentennial celebration of the discovery of the 
Hudson River seems an eminently fit time for the publication of a 
history of one of the most important counties whose shores are washed 
by its waters. 

The early establishment of trading posts, at its mouth, Manhattan 
(New York), at the head of navigation, Fort Orange (Albany), and 
at the mouth of the Rondout, half way between these two places, 
Esopus (Kingston), determined the first locations along the river's 
banks for permanent settlements, but as immigrants came in larger 
numbers it was not long before they were attracted by the water 
powers of the Fishliill, Wappingers, Caspers Kill, Fallkill, Crum 
Elbow, Landsman's Kill and Roeliff Jansen's Kill, and the fine farm- 
ing lands in the valleys of these streams, to seek new homes and begin 
the settlement of our county. 

Along the river, naturally, the predominant race of the original 
settlers was Dutch, with a sprinkling of French Huguenots, while 
later a considerable number of Palatines were settled in the northern 
part of the county. 

The early settlement of the eastern part of the county through the 
length of the Harlem Valley was made by people from the New Eng- 
land Colonies, aU that part of New York State being originally 
claimed as belonging to and embraced within the New England grants 
of land. 

The Quakers, forming a large element in the settlement of the east- 
ern and northeastern bounds of the county, were among those who 
came from New England, seeking to escape the intolerance of their 
narrow minded neighbors, and to secure freedom for religious opinion 
and expression and practice, insistence upon which has been a noted 
characteristic of the Dutch people for centuries. 

It win be seen also from the pages of this history that there was 
an infusion of the Irish Catholic element into the county long before 
the time of the great Irish famine, to which period, to be sure, most 
of the Irish Catholic immigration must be assigned, for it appears 



10 PREFACE. 

that there were many Irish Catholic soldiers in the armies of the 
Revolution quartered in this vicinity, some of whom, with their fam- 
ilies, settled here at the end of the war. 

It will appear from the Church history, which has been most care- 
fully compiled for this work, that in early times there were even more 
creeds and denominations in the county than there were different 
nationalities; and it will be quite apparent to the thoughtful student 
that while certain settlements along the river, as particularly Pough- 
keepsie, at the earliest dates, were somewhat homogeneous in race 
and religion, and might have been truly designated as Dutch settle- 
ments, the county as a whole, started as a cosmopolitan community. 

Dutchess County does not present a virgin field for the historian. 
It has already been cultivated to a considerable extent. 

In 1877 Philip H. Smith, of PawHng, N. Y., published a "General 
History of Dutchess County from 1609 to 1876 inclusive." His book, 
which is now somewhat rare, shows an immense amount of work of 
investigation, a great fund of general information and tradition 
gathered by its author, and it has preserved many valuable facts and 
documents relating to the history of the county. 

Frequent use has been made in the preparation of the present work 
of the material gathered by Mr. Smith in his history, and due rec- 
ognition is made to him for the same. 

Mr. Smith has also written several of the chapters on the different 
towns, and no one in the community is as well qualified as he to do 
the work that he has contributed to this volume. 

In 1882 there was published by D. Mason & Company, of Syracuse, 
a "History of Dutchess County, New York, with illustrations and 
biographical sketches of some of its prominent men and pioneers," by 
James H. Smith; and in 1897 there was published by J. H. Beers & 
Company, of Chicago (no author) a "Commemorative Biographical 
Record of Dutchess County, N. Y., containing Biographical Sketches 
of prominent and representative citizens and of many of the early 
settled families." The latter was merely a compilation of sketches, 
mostly autobiographical. The historical matter of James H. Smith's 
book was taken mostly from Philip H. Smith's history. 

There have been published too, several histories of localities or 
towns. 

In 1874 John W. Spaight, publisher of the Fishkilt Standard, 



PREFACE. 11 

printed a little book entitled "Local Tales and Historical Sketches" 
by Henry D. B. Bailey. 

This is merely a compilation of a few old woman tales and local 
traditions of no historical value. 

Mr. Bailey, in his preface, stated that "he intended to write a 
history," but he never did. 

Prior to this in 1866, Dean & Spaight published for T. VanWyck 
Brinkerhoof, a "Historical Sketch of the Town of Fishkill," which is 
quite rare, but is full of accurate and interesting information. 

In 1875, DeLacey & Wiley, printers at Amenia, published an 
*'Early History of Amenia" by Newton Reed, containing much 
genealogical and historical information well worth preservation. 

In 1897, Charles Walsh & Company, printers at Amenia, published 
Volume 1 of a "History of Little Nine Partners of Northeast Pre- 
cinct and Pine Plains, New York, Dutchess Coufety," by Isaac Huntt- 
ing. Pine Plains, N. Y. 

This is said by its author to be "A compilation and revision of 
sketches published in the Amenia Times, Dutchess Farmer, Pough- 
heepsie Telegraph and Pine Plains Register." 

There are many documents of the early times published and pre- 
served in this valuable work, and a great deal of accurate historical 
information concerning the early history and families of the locality, 
mixed with some tradition. 

The author very modestly prints as a prefatory motto, "A little 
preserved is better than all lost." 

Unfortunately, as we are informed, his book did not meet with such 
appreciation as its author seemed to think that it deserved, and as it 
really did deserve, and so in a fit of pique, he is reported to have 
burned a large part of the edition which was left upon his hands. 
Volume II never appeared. 

In 1881, Edward M. Smith, as author, published a "Documentary 
History of Rhinebeck in Dutchess County, N. Y., embracing Biographical 
Sketches and Genealogical Records of our First Families and First 
Settlers, with a History of its Churches and other Public Institu- 
tions." This is a creditable and useful work, worthy of the historical 
importance of Rhinebeck Precinct. 

Only last year the eminent lawyer, Howard H. Morse, now of Tarry- 
town, N. Y., formerly of Rhinebeck, published a volume entitled "His- 



12 PREFACE. 

toric Old Rhinebeck," which is a handsome book, full of interesting 
information concerning his old home town and its people. 

Richard Francis Maher, the Town Clerk of Dover, has recently 
privately published a pamphlet entitled "Historic Dover." 

The historical matter contained therein has been made the basis of 
the chapter on the Town of Dover, written by Mr. Maher. 

AH of these previous works, both county histories and town his- 
tories, have been freely laid under tribute in the preparation of the 
present work, due credit in all cases being given ; and the editor desires 
to acknowledge his obligation to their authors and publishers. 

He desires to say, however, that all matters of tradition have been 
ahnost wholly ignored, for it is his experience, gained in long years \ 
of historical and genealogical research, that tradition is mostly in- . 
accurate, if not wholly false. 

It has been his intention in the preparation of this history to go 
only to authentic sources and to publish only facts, backed up in all 
possible cases by documentary evidence. For that purpose not only 
have the records of the County Clerk's office been searched, but those 
of the office of the Secretary of State, the War Office at Washington, 
and the collections of the Historical Society of New York in an en- 
deavor to publish a true history. 

The desire and purpose have been to make and to present through 
this history a veracious record of the people and of the events of the 
past, showing the very earliest settlements, the various patents and 
grants, who were the pioneers, who were the earliest inhabitants, who 
began the settlement and cultivation of the county, who fought the 
battles of their country in the Colonial, the Revolutionary and later 
periods, who were prominent in civil life and took part in the govern- 
ment of the county and management of town affairs and controlled 
the policies of their times, as the actors in the religious, military, 
political and business affairs of the county. 

It is to be hoped that the book will prove a useful reference work 
for all who wish to trace back their lineage to earlier times and to 
learn of the doings of their ancestors. 

A new map of the county has been prepared from the most authen- 
tic sources of government surveys upon which, through the kind 
assistance of Mr. Adrian C. Rapelje, County Engineer, all the main 
improved highways, mostly State roads, are shown. 



PREFACE. 13 

It will be interesting to compare the showing of roads upon this latest 
map with the plates of CoUes' road map published in 1789 which, 
through the kindness and courtesy of Mr. Stuyvesant Fish, the pub- 
lisher of this history has been allowed to reproduce. 

The chapter translating from the French original the account of 
the early travels of the Marquis de Chastellux through our county, 
down the Harlem Valley and up along the Hudson, made in 1780 and 
1782, should be interesting as giving the views of a keen observer in 
that early time of the beauties and possibilities of our lovely county, 
which have materialized even beyond the most optimistic prophesies 
of this observant and far-seeing French sympathizer with our new 
country. 

The special articles in the history on the various towns, on the 
bench and bar, on the medical profession, on the churches, on Free- 
masonry and on the Quakers, have been entrusted to and written by 
the men in each case most eminently fitted for the task. 

For their interest and assistance they are entitled to and have the 
sincere thanks of both publisher and editor. 

Accuracy and veracity have been the constant aim of the editor, 
and he desires to express his appreciation of his invariably pleasant 
relations with the publisher, Mr. Samuel A. Matthieu, who, in the 
most liberal spirit, has met and fully satisfied all the demands and 
requirements made upon him by the editor, to the attainment of that 
end. 

No doubt a better history could be made, but this work is put forth 
with the confident expectation that the subscribers and readers will 
confirm the sincere belief that the conscientious and faithful efforts of 
its publisher have produced the best history of the County of Dutchess 
up to the present time. 

Frank Hasbrotjck. 

Poughkeepsie, July 26, 1909. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. PAGE 

Exploration of Hudson's River 17 

CHAPTER II. 
The Aboriginal People 24 

CHAPTER III. 
Topography and Geology 38 

CHAPTER IV. 
Indian Deeds. Land Patents 33 

CHAPTER V. 
Pioneer Settlements and Early Inhabitants 44 

CHAPTER VI. 
Civil Organizations and Divisions 57 

CHAPTER VII. 
Dutchess County Civil List 67 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Colonial Military Organizations 80 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Revolutionary War 93 

CHAPTER X. 
The Revolutionary War. Continental Line 120 

CHAPTER XI. 
The Revolutionary War. Muster Rolls 136 

CHAPTER XII. 
The Revolutionary War. Local Events 171 

CHAPTER XIII. 
De Chastellux's Travels Through Dutchess County 181 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Dutchess County in the Rebellion jgo 



Contents. 15 

Chapter xv. page 

Tofliof and City of Poughkeepsie, By Edmund Piatt 199 

CHAPTER XVI. 
TlW Town of Amenia By S. R. Free 258 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Tto Town Of Beekman 367 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
The Town of Clinton 272 

CHAPTER XIX. 
The Town of Dover By Richard F. Maher 278 

CHAPTER XX. 
The Town of East Fishkill 293 

CHAPTER XXI. 
The Town of Fishkill By William E. Verplanek 299 

CHAPTER XXII. 
The Town of Hyde Park By Rev. Amos T. Ashton, D. D 353 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
TJte Town of La Grange 363 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Towniof Milan 369 

CHAPTER XXV. 
The Town of Northeast By PhiUp H. Smith 374 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
'm^.^Bwa of Pawling By Philip H. Smith 389 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
Tki-^sm of Pine Plains By Philip H. Smith 405 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 
The Town of Pleasant Valley 419 

CHAPTER XXIX. 
The Town of Red Hook 426 

CHAPTER XXX. 
'me Tt)wn of Rhlnebeck 437 



16 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 'AOE 

The Town of Stanford By PhiUp H. Smith 4S1 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
The Town of Union Vale By Philip H. Smith 460 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 
The Town of Wappinger By CUnton W. Clapp 465 

CHAPTER XXXIV, 
The Town of Washington By Rev. John Edward Lyall 476 

CHAPTER XXXV. 
The Bench and Bar of Dutchess County. .By Frank B. Lown 498 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 
The Medical Profession By Guy Carleton Bayley 538 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 
The Masonic Fraternity ..•• 597 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
The Catholic Church 608 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 
Friends' Meetings in Dutchess County. . . .By John Cox, Jr 661 

APPENDIX. 

The Milton Ferry By Captain C. M. Woolsey 659 

The Clinton House in the Revolution 665 

Persons Registering Brand Marks in Poughkeepsie Precinct. 668 

A Surrey of the Roads of the United States of America, 1789. 

By Christopher CoUes 670 

PART II. 

Biographical and Genealogical 681 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS 



CHAPTER I. 
EXPLORATION OF HUDSON'S RIVER. 

FROM an account given by John de Verazzano, a Florentine, sail- 
ing in the service of France, it is believed he entered the harbor 
of New York in 1524. No results followecyhis voyage, and it is 
not known that New York was again visited by Europea,ns till 1609* 
when Henry Hudson, an Enghshman by birth, set sail from Amsterdam, 
Holland, April 4th, 1609, under the auspices of the Dutch East India 
Company, with a commission to discover the Northwest Passage, or to 
verify the dream of geographers of that period of a short cut between 
Europe and China. His vessel, a yacht of eighty tons burden called 
"Halve Maan," the "Half Moon," was manned by a crew of twenty sail- 
ors, partly Dutch and partly English. In the month of July Hudson 
reached Newfoundland, and passing to the coast of Maine, spent some 
days in repairing his ship, which had been shattered in a storm. Sail- 
ing thence southward, he touched at Cape Cod, and by the middle of 
August found himself as far south as the Chesapeake. Again he 
turned to the north, determined to examine the coast more closely, and 
on the 28th of the month anchored in Delaware Bay. From thence he 
proceeded northward, and appears to have crossed the bar now called 
Sandy Hook on the third day of September. He remained in the bay 
several days making surveys and trafficking with the Indians. On the 
sixth, five of the crew were sent in a boat to examine the channel. They 
sounded the Narrows and proceeded to Newark Bay, but on the re- 
turn, for some unexplained reason, were attacked by the natives in two 
canoes, and John Colman, who had accompanied Hudson in his Polar 
explorations, was killed by an arrow shot in his throat, and two of his 
companions were wounded. Colman was buried at Sandy Hook, and 



18 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Colman's Point, where his remains were interred, perpetuates the mem- 
ory of the first European victim of the natives in these waters.^ On 
the eighth Hudson permitted two Indians to board his vessel, whom he 
detained and dressed in red coats. The following day he moved cau- 
tiously through the Narrows, and anchored In New York harbor on 
the eleventh. September 12th he commenced the memorable journey 
up the picturesque river which bears his name. In the journal m 
which he recorded his daily doings, are found the following interesting 
notes of his voyage and his intercourse with the natives.^ 

"The thirteenth, faire weather, the wind northly. At seven of the clocke in the 
morning, as the floode came wee weighed, and turned four miles into the river. 
The tide being done wee anchored. Then there came four canoes aboord, but we 
suffered none of them to come into our ship. They brought great stores of very 
good oysters which wee bought for trifles. In the night I set the variation Of the 
compasse and found it to be thirteen degrees. In the afternoone wee weighed and 
turned in with the floode two leagues, two leagues and a half further we anchored 
all night, and had five fathoms of soft ozie ground, and had a high point of land 
which showed out to us bearing north by east five leagues of us. 

"The fourteenth, in the morning being very faire weather, the wind southwest, 
we sailed up the river twelve leagues, and had five fathoms and five fathoms and a 
quarter lesse and came to a straight between two points, and had eight, nine and 
ten fathoms, and it trended northwest by north one league, and we had twelve, 
thirteen and fourteen fathoms. The river is a mile broad; there is very high land 
on both sides. Then wee went up northwest a league and a halfe, deepe water, 
then northwest by north five miles, then northwest by north two leagues and an- 
chored. The land grew very high and moimtainous. The river is full of fish. 

"The fifteenth, in the morning was misty until the stmne arose; then it cleared. 
So wee weighed with the wind at south and ran up the river twentie leagues passing 
by high mountains. Wee had a very good depth, as six, seven, eight, nine, twelve 
and thirteen fathoms, and great store of salmons in the river. This morning our 
two savages got out of a port and swam away. After wee were under saGl they 
called to us in scome. At night wee came to other mountains which lie from the 
river's side. There wee found very loving people and very old men, where wee were 
well used. Our boat went to fish and caught great store of very good fish. 

"The sixteenth faire and very hot weather. In the morning our boat went again 
to fishing, but could catch but few by reason their canoes had been there all night. 
This morning the people came aboord and brought us ears of Indian come and 
pompions and tobacco, which we bought for trifles. Wee rode still all day and 
filled fresh water, at night wee weighed and went two leagues higher and had 
shoaled iwater so wee anchored all day. 

1. History of New Netherlands, Tol. I, S6. 

2. The Jaurnal of Hudson's voyage up the North River, will be found In N. Y. Biat 
*8oc. Trans. I, IK. 



EXPLORATION OF HUDSON'S RIVER. 19 

"The seventeenth, faire sunshining weather and very hot. In the morning as 
soon as the sun was up, wee set sail and run up six leagues higher and found shoals 
in the middle of the channel and small islands, but seven fathoms water on both 
sides. Towards night wee borrowed^ so near the shore that wee grounded, so we 
layed out our small anchor and heaved off againe. Then wee borrowed on the bank 
in the channel and came aground againe. While the flood ran wee hoved off and 
anchored all night. 

"The eighteenth in the morning was faire weather, and wee rode still. In the 
afternoone our master's mate went on land with an old savage, a governor of the 
countrie, who carried him to his house and made him good cheere. 

"The nineteenth was faire and hot weather. At the floode, being near eleven of 
the clocke, wee weighed and ran higher up two leagues above the shoals, and had 
no lesse water than five. Wee anchored and rode in eight fathoms. The people 
of the countrie came flocking aboord and brought us grapes and pompions which 
we bought for trifles. And many brought us bever skinnes and otter skinnes which 
wee bought for beades, knives and hatchets. So we rode there all night. 

"The twentieth in the morning was faire weather. Our master's mate with four 
men more went up with our boat to sound the river, and found two leagues above 
us but two fathoms water and the channel very narrow, and above that place be- 
tween seven or eight fathoms. Toward night they returned and wee rode still all 
night. 

"The one-and-twentieth was faire weather and the wind all southerly. We de- 
termined yet once more to go further up into the river, to try what depth and 
breadth it did beare, but much people resorted aboord, so we went not this day. 
Our carpenter went on land and made a foreyard, and our master and mate de- 
termined to try some of the chief men of the countrie whether they had any 
treacherie in them. So they took them down into the cabin and gave them as much 
wine and aqua-vitae that they were all merrie, and one of them had his .wife with him 
who sat as modestly as any of our countrie-women would do in a strange place. 
In the end one of them was drunke which had been aboord of our ship all the time 
we had been there; and that was strange to them for they could not tell how to 
take it. The canoes and folks went all on 'shore, but some of them came again 
and brought stropes of beades, some had six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and gave him. 
So he slept all night quietly. 

"The two-and-twentieth was faire weather. In the morning our master's mate 
and foure more of our companie, went up with our boat to sound the river higher 
up. The people of the countrie came not aboord tiU noone, but when they came 
and saw the savages well they were glad. So at three of the clock in the aften- 
noone they came aboord and brought tobacco and more beades, and gave them to 
our master, and an oration, and showed him the countrie all around about. Then 
they sent one of their companie on land, who presently returned, and brought a great 
platter full of venison, dressed by themselves, and they caused him to eat with 
Ihem. Then they made him reverence and departed, all save the old man that lay 

1. Borrow, — nautical term, "take shelter." To approach either land or the wind closely. 
Century Dictionary. 



20 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

aboord. This night at ten of the clocke our boat returned in a shower of raine, 
from sounding Of the river, and found it to be at an end for shipping to goe in. 
For they had been up eight or nine leagues and found but seven foot water and un- 
constant soundings. 

"The three-and-twentieth faire weather; at twelve of the clocke wee weighed and 
went down two leagues, to a shoal that had two channels, one on one side and an- 
other on the other, and had little wind, whereby the tide layed us upon it. So there 
wee sat on the ground the space of an hour, till the floode came. Then we had a 
little gale of vidnd at the west. So wee got our ship into deepe water and rode all 
night very well. 

"The four-and-twentieth was faire weather and the wind at the northwestj wee 
weighed and went down the river seven or eight leagues, and at hal^e ebb wee 
came on ground on a bank of oze in the middle of the river, and sate there tUl the 
floode. Then wee went on Vaad and gathered good store of chestnuts. At ten of 
^:he clocke wee came off into deepe water and anchored. 

"The five-and-twentieth was faire weather, and the wind at south a stiffe gale. 
Wee rode stiU and went on land to walke of the west side of the river, and found 
good ground for corne and other garden herbs, with a great store of goodly oakes, 
and walnut-trees, and chestnut-trees, ewe-trees and trees of sweet wood in great 
abundance, and great store of slate for houses and other good stones. 

"The sixth-and-twentieth was faire weather, and the wind at the south a stifFe 
gale. Wee rode stiU. In the morning our carpenter went on land with the master's 
mate, and foure more of our companie, to Cut wood. This morning two canoes 
came up the river from the place wee first found loving people, and in one of them 
was the old man that had layen aboord of us at the other place. He brought an- 
other old man with him, which brought more stropes of beades, and gave them to 
our master, and showed him all the countrie thereabout, as though it were at his 
command. So he made the two old men dine with him, and the old man's wife^ 
for they brought two old women and two young maidens of the age of sixteen or 
seventeene yeares with them, who behaved themselves very modestly. Our master 
gave one of the old men a knife, and they gave him and us tobacco. And at one 
of the clocke they departed down the river, making signes that wee should come 
down to them, for wee were within two leagues of the place where they dwelt. 

"At seven-and-twentieth in the morning was faire weather, but much wind at 
north; wee weighed and set our foretop sayle, and our ship would not flot, but 
ran on the ozie bank at halfe ebbe. Wee layed out anchor to heave her off but 
could not, so we sate from halfe ebbe to halfe floode; then wee set our fore sayle 
and main top sayle and got down six leagues. The old man came aboord and 
would have had us anchor and go on land to eat with him, but the wind being 
faire wee would not yield to his request, so he left us being very sorrowful for our 
departure. At five of the clocke in the afternoone the wind came to the south- 
south-west. So wee made a board or two and anchored in fourteen fathoms water 
Then our boat went on shore to fish, right against the ship. Our master's mate 
,and boat swaine and three more of the companie went on land to fish, but could 



EXPLORATION OF HUDSON'S RIVER. 21 

not find a good place. They tooke four or five and twenty Mullets, Breames, 
Bases and Barbils, and returned in an hour. Wee rode still all night. 

"The eight-and-twentieth being faire weather, as soon as the day was light, wee 
weighed at halfe ebbe and turned down two leagues bylowe water. At three of the 
clocke in the afternoone wee weighed, and turned down three leagues until it was 
dark; then wee anchored. 

"The nine-and-twentieth was dry, close weather, the wind at south and south by 
west; wee weighed early in the morning and turned down three leagues by lowe 
water and anchored at the lower end of the long reach,i for it is six leagues long. 
Then there came certain Indians in a canoe to us but would not come aboord. Af- 
ter dinner there came the canoe with other men, whereof three came aboord us. 
They brought Indian wheat which wee bought for trifles. At three of the clocke 
in the afternoon wee weighed as soon as the ebbe came, and turned downe to the 
edge of the mountains and anchored, because the high land hath many points, and 
a narrow channel, and hath many eddie winds. So wee rode quietly all night in 
seven fathoms water. 

"The thirtieth was faire weather and the wind at southeast a stiffe gale between 
the mountains. Wee rode still the afternoone. The people of the countrie came 
aboord us and brought some small skinnes with them which wee bought for knives 
and trifles. This is a very pleasant place to build a towne on. The road is very 
near and very goode for all winds, save an east-north-east wind. The mountaynes 
look as if some metal or mineral were in them. For the trees that grow on them 
were all blasted, and some of them barren with a few or no trees on them. The 
people brought a stone aboord like to emery (a stone used by glasiers to cut glass), 
it would cut iron or steel. Yet being bruised small and water put to it, it made a 
colour like blackeleade glistening. It is also good for painters colours. At three 
of the clocke they departed and wee rode still all night. 

"The first of October faire weather, the wind variable between the west and 
north. In the morning wee weighed at seven of the clocke with the ebbe arid got 
downe below the mountaynes which was seven leagues. Then it fell calme and the 
flood was come, and wee anchored at twelve of the clocke. The people of the 
mountaynes came aboord us, wondering at our ships and weapons. Wee bought 
some small skinnes of them for trifles. This afternoone one canoe kept hangjing 
under our sterne with one man in it, which wee could not keep from thence, who 
got Up by our rudder to the cabin window and stole out my pillow and two shirts 
and two bandeleeres. Our master's mate shot at him and strooke him on the brest 
and killed him. Whereupon all the rest fled away, some in their canoes arid some 
leapt out of them into the water. 

"Wee manned our boat and got our things againe. Then one of them that 
Swamme got hold of our boat, tUnking to overthrow it. But our cooke took a 

1. The stretches of current between the ditferent points and bends of the shore of the 
Hudson, were named "reaches" or in the Dutch Vernacular "racks." The Long Reach — 
also termed Fisher's (Vischer's) Reach — extended from the northern gate of the High- 
lands to Crom Elbow, a distance of about twenty miles. This, undoubtedly, is the earliest 
reference to the reaches of this river that occurs in any European language. [Editoe.] 



22 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

sword and cut one of his hands, and he was drowned. By this time the ebbe was 
come, and wee weighed and got downe two leagues, by that time it was dark, so 
we anchoijed io foftr fathoms water and rode well. ' 

"The seconde, f aire weather, at break of day wee weighed the wind being at 
northwest and gqtr flown seven leagues; then the flood was come strong so wee 
anchored. Then came one of the salvages that swamme away from us at our going 
up: the river, with, piany other, thinking to betray us, but wee perceived their in- 
tent and suffered none of them to enter our ship. Whereupon two canoes full of 
men with their bowes and arrow's shot at us after our steme; in recompence where- 
of wee discharged; sdx musketsi and killed two or three of them, then about an 
hundted of themcame to a point of land to shoot at us. There I shot a falcon at 
them and killed ;tSTO of them, whereupon the rest fled into the woods. Yet they 
m^un^d off another .canoe, with nine or ten men which came to meet us. So I shot 
at it also a f alcott, and shot it through and killed one of them. Then our men with 
Itoir, muskets killed, three or four more of them so they went their w^y within a 
while after wee got downe two leagues beyond that place, and anchored in a bay, 
oleere from all danger of them, on the other side of the river -where wee saw a very 
good, piece of ground, and hard by it there was a cliffe, that looked of the colour 
of a white green as; though it were either copper or silver mayne, and I think it to 
be ope, of them by the trees that grow upon it for they be all burned, and the other 
places; are greene a? grasse, it is on that side of the river that is called Manna-hatta. 
There wee saw no people to trouble, us, and rode quietly all night; but had much 
wind and rains. 

"The third was very stonnie; the wind at east-north-east. In the morning in a 
gust of wind and ralne, our anchor came home, and wee drove on ground; but it was 
ozie. - Then as , we were about to have out an anchor, the wind came to the north- 
northwest and drove us off agajnct Then wee shot an anchor and let it fall in 
foure fathoms water and weighed the other. Wee had much wind and raine, with 
thick weather, so wee rode still, all night. 

"The fourth, was faire weather, and the wind at north-northwest, wee weighed 
and came out of the river into which wee had runne so farre. Within a while 
after. \vee came out also of the great mouth of the great river that runneth up to 
the. northwest,; borrowing upon the norther side of the same, thinking to have deepe 
water;,, for wee had sounded a great way with our boat at our first going in, and 
found seveuj six, and five fathoms. So wee came out that way but wee were- de- 
ceived,, for wee had but eight foot and a half water, and so to three fathoms and a 
halfe. And then three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten fathom's. And 
by, twelve of the clocke wee were cleere of all the inlet. Then wee tooke in our 
boat and set our main sayle and sprit sayle and our top sayles, and steered away 
east southea^st and southeast by east, off into the mayne Isea; and the land on the 
souther side of the bay did beare at noone west and south foure leagues from us. 

"The,. fifth wa)s faire weather and the wind variable between the north and the 
east. Wee held on our course southeast by east. At noone I observed and found 
our height to be thirty-nine degrees thirty minutes. Our compasse varied six de- 
grees to the west. 



EXPLORATION OF HUDSON'S RIVER. 23 

"Wee continued our course toward England, without seeing any land by the way, 
all the rest of this month of October. And on the seventh day of November, stilo 
nouv, being Saturday by the grace of God, wee safely arrived in the range of Dart- 
mouth, in Devonshire, in the yeere 1609." 

In 1610 a second vessel was sent over by the shrewd merchants of 
Amsterdam, and a successful trade was opened with the natives along 
the river.^ Other vessels followed in the three succeeding years, all of 
which returned with rich cargoes of furs. In 1614 the States General 
of Holland granted a charter to the merchants engaged in these ex- 
peditions under the title of United New Netherlands Company, giving 
exclusive privileges of trade for four years. Foremost in these busi- 
ness ventures were Captains Hendrick Christiansen, John DeWitt, 
Adrian Block and Cornelius Jacobsen Mey. Block and Mey directed 
their explorations along the coasts of Long Island and New Jersey, 
while Captain DeWitt sailed up the North River and gave his name to 
one of the Islands near Red Hook. Hendrick Christiansen ascended 
the stream to Castle Island where he established a trading post. At 
the expiration of their charter so profitable had the fur trade become, 
that the States General refused to renew it, giving instead a temporary 
license for its continuance. 

The energies of the Dutch were directed more to commerce than 
colonization, and up to 1628 no systematic attempt at colonizing was 
made. Settlements commenced at New Amsterdam, Paulus Hook and 
adjacent neighborhoods resulted in conflicts and massacres. These 
hostilities, however, have no direct reference to this County, which had 
not a single white settler during the whole period of Dutch occupancy. 

1. This river was called by the Iroquois the Cohatatea, while the Mohicans and the 
Lenapes called it the Mahioanituk. The Dutch gave it the name of Mauritius river, as 
earl; as 1611, in honor of Prince Maurice of Nassau. The English, in recognition of the 
work of the explorer, conferred the title of Hudson's River. 



24 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER H. 
THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. 

WHEN European explorers penetrated into the valley of the 
Hudson, they found it peopled by sub-tribes of the great 
Algonquin nation. The Mohicans occupied the country 
along the east bank of the Hudson, from a site opposite Albany down 
to the Tappan Sea, and eastward a distance of ten or fifteen miles 
along the streams wich formed the pathways of aboriginal commerce. 
They were, says Rev. John Heckewelder, who spent forty years among 
the Indians as a Moravian missionary, a branch of the Lenni Lenape 
or Delaware family, who occupied the west side of the Hudson from 
its mouth up as far as the CatskiU, and westward to the headwaters of 
the Delaware and Susquehanna rivers. 

The territory of the Wappingers,^ a tribal division of the Mo- 
hicans, covered the major portion of Dutchess County. Their govern- 
ment scarcely differed from that of the Mohicans and other branches 
of the Delawares. Each tribe had its sachem and counsellorsj who 
made their own laws, treaties, etc. These, says Loskiel, "were either 
experienced warriors or aged and respectable fathers of families." 
Likewise each had its specific device or totem denoting original con- 
sanguinity. Although the prevailing totem of all the Hudson River 
cantons was the Wolf, borne alike by Minsis, Wappingers and Mo- 
hicans," the particular symbol of the Wappingers was the opossum, 
tatooed on the person of the Indian, and often rudely painted on the 
gable-end of his cabin. I 

The Wappingers were a peaceful tribe, and manifested a friendly 
feeling toward the white settlers at Rondout in Ulster County, whom 
they visited frequently, their canoes ladened with fish and venison 

1. A corruption of wabun, east and ocfti^ land, which as applied hy the Indians them- 
selves, may be rendered Eastlanders. The Dutch historians are responsible for Wwfpina- 
ers, perhaps from their rendering of the sound of the original word, and perhaps as 
expressing the fact that they were, In the Dutch language, wapen, or half-armed Indians. 
IniUan Tribes of Hudson's River, SlO-Sni. 
,2. Indian Tribes of Hudson's River, 50. 



THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. 25 

which they traded for powder, lead and brandy. They took no gen- 
eral part in the Esopus wars, except to act as mediators, and to as- 
sist in effecting a satisfactory exchange of prisoners between the 
Dutch and the Esopus Indians. 

Of the chief sachems of this tribe four names appear in 
official documents. One is that of Goethals, who was present 
at a treaty of peace concluded with certain tribes of River Indians, 
March 6, 1660, by Peter Stuyvesant. At the last treaty con- 
cluded by Stuyvesant with the Indians, May 16, 1664, Tseessaghgaw, 
a chief of the Wappingers participated in behalf of that tribe. The 
name of Megriesken, sachem of the Wappinger Indians, appears in an 
Indian deed, dated August 8, 1683, for lands embraced in the Rom- 
bout Patent, while Daniel Ninham, who was made chief sachem of the 
Wappingers in 1740, distinguished himself not l^s by his persistent 
effort to recover lands included in the Philipse Patent, of which his 
tribe were defrauded, than by his tragic death at the battle of Court- 
land Ridge, Westchester County where he and some forty of his fol- 
lowers, including his son, were killed or wounded August 31, 1778, by 
the Britishj against whom they had espoused the cause of the Colonists.^ 

The location of the principal village of the Wappingers tribe is not 
positively known, but presumably near the falls on the creek which 
perpetuates their name. Van der Doncks map locates three of their 
villages on the south side of this stream. From Kregier's Journal of 
the "Second Esopus War" (1663), it is learned that they had a castle 
in the vicinity of Low Point, and that they maintained a crossing place 
to Dans Kamer Point. Tradition locates other villages in various 
parts of the country. 

Their burying ground is a familiar spot to many of the residents of 
Wappingers Falls. It was just south of the Episcopal church, known 
as the "gravel bank," the property of the Garner Company. In this 
bank was recently found a ball of clay containing nine flint spear 
heads, four of which are in possession of the Roy brothers of that 
village. 

Of the possessions of the Wappingers on the Hudson there is but one 
"perfect title on record," says Ruttenber, that being for the land in- 
cluded in the Rombout Patent, dated 1683. This deed, however, covers 

1. Simcoe's Military Journal. 



26 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

a tract of land secured from the Indians by Arnout Viele in 1680, men- 
tion of which appears in a subsequent chapter. The Indians pa,rted 
with their lands for a small, yet an apparently satisfactory, consider- 
ation, but did not immediately vacate the premises. They continued 
to hunt and fish, and the squaws to till their fields of com and beans 
for at least fifty years after the above deeds had been recorded. Their 
numbers were gradually diminished in consequence of the introduction 
of spirituous liquors among them. They became scattered and addict- 
ed to wandering, removing to different parts, mingling with other 
nations. 

Remnants of difi'erent clans chose a hunting ground in the vicinity 
of the present hamlet of Shekomeko,^ and it was on this spot that the 
evangelization of the aborigines in Dutchess county was begun in 
1740, by that zealous Moravian missionary. Christian Henry Rauch.^ 
Arriving August 16th of that year, he was received by the Indian 
chiefs Tschoop and Shabash, whom he had previously met in New 
York. They announced him as the man they had appointed to be their 
teacher, and he addressed them on the subject of his mission, and the 
means of redemption, to which they listened "with great attention." 
In subsequent exhortations he perceived that his words excited deri- 
sion, and finally, they "openly laughed him to scorn." He persevered 
in his eflForts, however, and at length his zeal and devotion was re- 
warded by the conversion of Tschoop, "the greatest drunkard among 
them." Shabash was soon after awakened "and the labor of the Holy 
Spirit became remarkably evident in the hearts of these two savages." 
Such was the success of this missionary that many Indians not only 
in Shekomeko but other neighboring settlements became convinced of 
the truth of the gospel. 

In January, 1742, Gottlob Buttner, another Moravian missionary, 
joined Ranch, as the spiritual harvest at Shekomeko demanded more 
laborers; In the summer of the same year Count Zinzendorf visited the 
mission, baptized a number of converts, and here formed the first con- 
gregation of Indians estabhshed by the Moravians in North America. 
Other brethren who subsequently arrived to engage in the work were 

1. She com eko from she "great' and oomaco "house," "the great lodge or -village" 
Dr. Trumbull. 

2. See writings of George Henry Loskiel, and Eev. Sheldon Davis, concerning Morayian 
•Missions in New York. 



THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. 27 

Martiii Mack, Joseph Shaw, Christopher Pyrlaens, Gottlob Senseman 
and Christian Frederick Post. At the close of the year 174.3, the 
congregation of baptized Indians consisted of sixty-three persons. 
The success and peace of the Shekomeko mission was disturbed in 174i4i 
by grave difficulties. Malevolent white settlers who had been accus- 
tomed to make the dissolute life of the Indians, especially their love for 
liquor, subservient to their advantage, branded the missionaries as 
papists and enemies of the English colonists. The civil authorities were 
urged to interfere. After several examinations before a court in 
"Pickipsi" the missionaries showed clearly that they had no affihation 
with papacy. Thereupon a law was passed by the Assembly, Sep- 
tember 21st, 1744), forbidding any person "to reside amongst the In- 
dians under the pretense of bringing them over to the Christian faith, 
without the license of the Governor and consent of the council," No- 
vember 27th, 174)4, the Governor, directed the Deputy Clerk of the 
council to write to the sheriffs of the counties of Albany, Dutchess and 
Ulster, "to give notice to the several Moravian and vagrant teachers 
among the Indians in their respective counties * * * * to .de- 
sist from further teaching or preaching, and to depart this Province."^ 
December 15th of the same year the sheriff and three justices arrived 
at Shekomeko, and commanded the missionaries to . again appear be- 
fore the court at "Pickipsi," where they were edified by the reading of 
the act in question. The brethem decided to remove to Bethlehem, 
Penn., — all but Buttner, whose health had become impaired. He died 
February 23rd, 174*5, in the presence of the Indian converts, and was 
buried at Shekomeko. A monument erected by the Moravian Histori- 
cal Society, July 11th, 1859, marks the grave of this martyr to the 
cause of aboriginal salvation. 

After the burial of Buttner, although the Indians were without a 
missionary, they continued for a time to meet as usual. They oc- 
casionally visited Bethlehem, and ten families comprising forty-four 
persons finally removed there. Others formed a settlement on the east 
border of Indian Pond in the town of Sharon, Conn. It seems a harsh 
condition that the Indian was thus driven from his country, where he 
had ever been hospitable and friendly to the white pioners. 

1. Doe. Biat. III. 1019-1020. 



28 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER III. 
TOPOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY. 

THE County of Dutchess, in the State of New York, lies upon the 
east bank of the Hudson along which it extends for a distance 
of about forty-five miles, thence eastward to the Connecticut 
line. It is bounded on the north by Columbia county, and on the south 
by the County of Putnam. The area included in these limits is 4<74!,68S 
acres. 

The surface of the county is generally hilly, presenting in the 
southern and eastern portions a battlement of mountainous elevations. 
The Fishkill mountains upon the south border, form the northern ex- 
tremity of the Highlands, and extend across the southern part of the 
county. The highest summits. Old Beacon, and North Beacon or 
Grand Sachem, are respectively 1471 and 1685 feet above tide, and 
are intimately identified with the military history of the country. 
They derive their names from beacons placed upon their summits dur- 
ing the revolution, to flash intelligence to the patriots, and warn them 
of the approach of the British. A break in the southeast part of 
these mountains, opening toward the south, is known as Wiccopee Pass, 
a name applied to a settlement of the Highland Indians. This pass 
was guarded in revolutionary times to protect military supplies at 
Fishkill. 

The Taconic or Taghkanic mountains, occupy the eastern border 
of the county. They rise from three hundred to six hundred feet above 
the valleys, and from one thousand to thirteen hundred feet above 
tide. These elevations, like the Fishkill mountains, are in many 
places rocky and precipitous. Other lofty peaks are Clove Mountain 
in the town of Union Vale, 1,403 feet high; Stissing Mountain in the 
town of Pine Plains, with a height of 1,380 feet; and Dennis iJill in 
the town of Dover, rising 1,365 feet above tide. These, with other 
hills, will be noticed more particularly in the town histories. 
• In the western part of the county, between the streams, are rolling 



TOPOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY. 29 

ridges which terminate abruptly on the river, and form a series of 
bluffs, from one hundred to two hundred feet in height. 

The principal streams of the county, in the drainage arrangement 
are the FishkiU, Wappinger, Casper, Fall Kill, Crom Elbow, Lands- 
man and Saw Kill, tributaries of the Hudson, all flowing in a south- 
westerly direction. Ten Mile riyer, near the eastern border of the 
county, receives Swamp river from the south, and discharges its waters 
into the Housatonic. Croton river has its source in the southeast part 
of the county, and Roeliff Jansen's Kill flows for a short distance with- 
in the northern border. There are a great variety of smaller streams, 
tributaries of those above mentioned, which rise in springs upon the 
miountain slopes. 

FishkiU Creek. The headwaters of this stream^ for the most part, 
drain the western slope of Chestnut Ridge mountains. From a cen- 
tral point in the town of Beekman, it flows in a southwesterly 'direction 
through the towns of East FishkiU and FishkiU, emptying into the 
Hudson, near the south border of the latter town. It is rapid in the 
upper and lower parts of its course, but sluggish through the Fish- 
kiU plains. Between FishkiU Village and the Landing, a distance of 
five miles, it makes a descent of nearly two hundred feet, over slate 
and limestone ledges, thus affording valuable hydraulic power. In its 
course it receives many small streams, the principal of which is Sprout 
Creek, which forms the boundary between East FishkiU and Wap- 
pinger. 

Wappinger Creek, a highly picturesque stream, and the largest 
in Dutchess, rises in Stissing Pond, in the town of Pine Plains, at an 
elevation of eight hundred feet above tide, and traverses the county 
for a distance of about thirty-five miles, in a southerly direction. It 
passes diagonally through the towns of Stanford and Pleasant Valley, 
thence it forms the boundary between the towns of Poughkeepsie, La- 
Grange and Wappinger, flowing into the Hudson at New Ham- 
burgh. It receives several branches that water the rich agricultural 
region through which it passes. 

Casper Creek. This stream has its source in the southeastern cor- 
ner of the town of Hyde Park. It flows southerly, through the cen- 
tral portion of the town of Poughkeepsie, reaching the Hudson some 
two miles north of the viUage of New Hamburgh. In early documents 



30 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

it bears a variety of Indian names, and is identified by the statement : 
"Knowne by the Christians for Jan Casperses Creek." 

The Fall Kill Creek rises in the southwest corner of the town of 
CHnton. In its upper course, for a distance of six miles, it flows rap- 
idly over a gravel bed, between high and rocky hills, thence passing 
through swampy and low meadow lands in the town of Hyde Park, it 
winds its way to the Hudson, through an improved channel within the 
limits of the city of Poughkeepsie. 

Crom Elbow Creek is a crooked stream, some nine miles in length, 
rising among the hills at the intersection of the towns of Milan, Clinton 
and Rhinebeck. It flows in a southwesterly direction, forming the bound- 
ary between Rhinebeck and Clinton. At East Park, it turns in an 
abrupt elbow to the west, uniting with the Hudson, near the village 
of Hyde Park. 

Landsman Kill which at one time propelled several valuable mills, 
rises in the northwest part of the town of Rhinebeck. At Fritz mill 
pond it is joined by the Rhinebeck creek. Just below this junction, 
the stream descends over a rocky precipice some sixty feet, forming a 
beautiful cascade, known as Beechwood Falls. It empties into the 
Hudson at Vanderberg Cove. 

The Saw Kill flows through the centre of the town of Red Hook, 
from Spring Lake or Long Pond, whence it has its source in the 
northeast corner of the town, reaching the Hudson at South Bay. 

Ten Mile River rises by several branches in the east part of tKe 
county, and flows south through the towns of Amenia and Dover, to 
the village of South Dover, where it txirns eastward, emptying into the 
Housatonic between Schaghticoke mountain and Ten Mile hill. Its 
principal tributaries are Swamp River, Wassaic and Webatuck Creeks. 
In the central and eastern portions of the county are numerous little 
lakes, of which Whaley Pond, in the town of Pawling, and Sylvan Lake 
in the town of Beekman, are the largest. 

A mere outKne of the rock groundwork underlying the county so 
far as it necessarily bears upon the economic interests and historical 
associations, is all that properly seenis to come within the scope of 
this work.^ 

In the Highland region, and in a narrow belt along the east bor- 

1. Authorities consalted.: Professor William W. Mather, and Heinrlch Rles. 



TOPOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY. 31 

der of the countjj the metamorphic rocks of the Primary system obtain. 
Extending thence westerly to Hudson's River and beyond it, are classed 
the rocks of the Champlain division of the New York system, consist- 
ing of a series of slates, shales, grits, limestones and siliceous and 
calcareous breccias and conglomerates. The rocks of the Hudson 
River group composed mostly of dark brown, blue and black slates 
and shales, and bluish-grey thick-bedded grits, are remarkably well 
developed in the county. Together with those of the Champlain di- 
vision they range through the towns of Red Hook, Milan, Rhinebeck, 
Clinton, Hyde Park, Pleasant Valley, Poughkeepsie, LaGrange and 
Wappinger. 

The prevailing types of crystalUne rock composing the strata of 
the Fishkill and Taconic mountains are gneisse^ granites, granulyte,. 
quartz-syenite and mica-schist. The varieties under these heads are 
very numerous, since the constituent minerals are present in so vary- 
ing proportions. 

The ore deposits are in two principal ranges and limestone valleys- 
First, the Fishkill-Clove belt, stretching northeast from the High- 
lands of the Hudson across the towns of Fishkill, East Fishkill, Beek- 
man and Union Vale; second, the north-south valley, traversed by 
New York and Harlem Railroad. The limonite, or hematite ore, is 
found in small pockets of irregular shape, and also in large deposits, 
which are associated with ochreous clays, and in some cases, with a 
gray carbonate of iron, in beds underlying it. These ore bodies are 
wholly in the limestone or between the limestone and the adjacent slate 
or schist formations. Near Fishkill and at Shenandoah, the deposits 
are at the border of the Cambrian sandstone and at the foot of the 
Archaean ridges.^ 

The limestones in the eastern part of the county are a continuation 
of those found in Westchester county, while those found in the central 
and western portions of the county are a continuation of the Orange 
county Cambro-Silurian limestone belts. The former are meta- 
morphosed limestones and partake of the nature of marble, being 
highly crystalline, while the latter are not. Although there are out- 
crops of the limestone at a number of points in the valley followed by 
the Harlem Railroad, only two large openings have been made. These 
are at Dover Plains and South Dover. 

1. 1898 Report Nevfr York State Museum, Vol. IV, 220. 



32 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The limestones in the western part of the county, are usually a hard 
fine grained bluish-gray rock, containing less magnesia than the whiter 
phases to the southeast and east. It has been used for lime, but on 
the whole is so silicious that the resulting lime would be lean. The 
western belt has been quarried in large quantities at Clinton Point, two 
miles north of New Hamburgh. 

"The great mass of the limestone," says Professor W. B. Dwight,^ 
"along the Wappinger Creek from Willow Brook to New Hamburgh 
appears to be calciferous and shows its fossils in many places all along 
this line. The Trenton rock and fossils are much more limited in their 
exposures, and yet there are long stretches of this formation usually 
lying on the eastern side of the limestone ridges. A little Trenton 
crops out at a quarry, near Salt Point, ten miles northeast of Pough- 
keepsie. It appears largely at Pleasant Valley, then at Rochdale, and 
for about one mile south of that place. Fossiliferous Trenton forms 
the eastern edge of the limestone ridge from this point, for at least 
three miles south. It also appears in the parallel ridges to the west 
of Cliffdale, and further south." 

Extensive and important clay formations occur in southern Dutchess, 
along the bank of the Hudson. The clay is chiefly blue, but where 
the overlying sand is wanting or is of slight thickness, it is weathered 
to yellow, this weathering sometimes extending to a depth of twelve 
feet below the surface. At some localities the layers of the clay are 
very thin, and alternate with equally thin layers of sandy clay. 

Several brick manufacturers having yards near Dutchess Junction 
obtain their clay from the escarpment of an eighty foot terrace. The 
clay has a fairly uniform thickness, the upper four to eiglit feet are 
yellow, the rest blue. The greatest thickness of clay known, for this 
locality, is at Aldridge Brothers' yards, where a well was sunk sixtv- 
five feet through the clay, which added to the height of the bank 
(sixty-five feet) gave a total thickness of one hundred and thirty feet 
at this point. 

The varied character of the soil of this county, adapts it to mixed 
farming, and all of the branches of agriculture, possible in the climate 
have been more or less followed. Stock raising has also received con- 
siderable attention. In more recent years dairying has increased in 
many of the interior towns, and has been followed with much success 
1. Transactions Vassar Brothers' Institute 1883-'84, Vol. II, 149. 





' A^Mn-f-thieti. PtitiLsHsir 



INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 33 



CHAPTER IV. 
INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 

THE early divisions of the territory embraced within the limits 
of Dutchess county, and other lands in this vicinity, pos- 
sessed many peculiarities, and led to uncommon experiences 
by the pioneers. While the Dutch authorities sometimes made land 
grants to colonists regardless of the Indian rights, the English after 
they came into power adopted a different policy, and first aimed to 
extinguish the Indian title by treaty. When the Province of New 
Netherlands was surrendered to the English, September, 1664, the 
third article of the terms of capitulation stipulated that "All people 
shall continue free Denizens, and shall enjoy their Lands, Houses, and 
goods, wheresoever they are within the country, and dispose of them 
as they please." Many of the old Dutch grants were upheld by con- 
firmatory English grants, issued previous to 1674, when English 
possession was forever established by the treaty signed at West- 
minster. In June of that year the Duke of York, obtained a new 
grant of the same territory included in that of ten years earlier. The 
duke through his appointed governor of the province, made many 
grants in fee, and after his accession to the throne continued their 
issue under seal of the province through authority given to the gov- 
ernors, who acted under instructions from the crown. In only two 
instances were grants of land made under the seal of Great Britain. 
Purchases made from the Indians were held not to give legal title, the 
King only being considered the true source of title. Governor Tryon 
in his report to the Captain General and Governor-in-Chief of the 
Province of New York, in 1774, says, "Purchases from the Indian 
natives, as of their aboriginal right, have never been held to be a legal 
title in this province, the maxim obtaining here, as in England, that 
the King is the fountain of all real property, and from this source 
all titles are to be derived." 

Colonial grants were broad in their terms, indefinite in their boun- 



34 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

daries, and a common condition was the payment of an annual quit- 
rent, sometimes in money but more frequently in furs, grain or some 
other article that merely represented the acknowledgment of indebted- 
ness. 

Following the division of the Province of New York into counties 
in 1683 all the lands in Dutchess county were taken up in large tracts, 
less than a dozen in number, by men of influence or capital who under- 
took "to settle, build up and cultivate the new county" and let them 
whoUy or in part for a term of years, at a nominal rent, or merely for 
the payment of taxes. 

Francis Rombout and Gulian Verplanck took the initial step in 
securing the immense tract embraced in the Rombout Patent, granted 
October 17, 1685. This was followed by the patent granted to Robert 
Sanders and Myndert Harmense October 24, 1686. Schuyler's Patent, 
in two tracts, one near Red Hook and one south of Poughkeepsie, 
June 2, 1688. On the same date a patent was granted to Artsen and 
Co. for a small tract. The Nine Partners' Patent (Great or Lower) 
May 27, 1697. Rhinebeck and Beekman Patents June 25, 1703. 
Little or Upper Nine Partners' Patent, April 10, 1706. The Oblong 
Patent, covering a narrow strip along the east borders of Dutchess, 
Putnam and Westchester counties, was ceded to the State of New 
York by Connecticut, May 14, 1731. These patents, with the excep- 
tion of the Oblong, were granted under Colonial Governors, Dongan, 
Fletcher and Cornbury. 

The Rombout Patent covered a tract of 85,000 acres, which em- 
braced the present towns of FishkiU, East Fishkill and Wappinger, 
the westerly part of LaGrange, and nine thousand acres within the 
southern limits of the town of Poughkeepsie. 

A license to purchase the above named tract of the Wappinger 
Indians, was given to Francis Rombout and Gulian Verplanck by 
Governor Thomas Dongan, February 8, 1682. The purchase was 
consummated and the native title extinguished August 8, 1683 and 
a patent issued therefor October 17, 1685, but prior to the latter 
date Verplanck died, hence Stephanus Van Courtlandt became asso- 
ciated with Rombout, and Jacobus Kipp became the representative of 
Verplanck's children. 

In 1708, by authorization of the Supreme Court, a partition was 



INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 35 

made of the lands embraced in this patent lying between the Fishkill 
and Wappingers Creek, the lands to the north and south of those 
streams being still held in common by the patentees or their repre- 
sentatives or heirs. In this division the southern third fell to the lot 
of Catherine, wife of Roger Brett, daughter and sole heir of Francis 
Rombout, and the intermediate third to the children of Gulian Ver- 
planck. 

The patentees were required to pay to the governor for this im- 
mense tract "six bushels of good and merchantable winter wheat every 
year." The Indian deed for this purchase is an interesting document, 
recorded on page 72, volume V, Book of Patents, in the Secretary of 
State's office, an exact copy of which follows: 

"To AU CHRISTIAN PEOPLE To Whom This Present Writeing ShaU Come, 
Sackoraghkigh for himselfe, and in the name of Megriesken, Sachem of the Wap- 
pinger Indians, Queghsijehapaein, Niessjawejahos, Queghout, Asotews, Wappege- 
reck, Nathindaeniw, Wappappee, Ketaghkainis, Meakhaghoghkan, Mierham, Pea- 
pightapeieuw, Queghitaeuw, Minesawogh, Katariogh, Kightapiuhogh, Rearowogh, 
Meggrek, Sejay, Wienangeck Maenemanew, and Ginghstyerem, true and Lawful 
Owners and Indian proprietors of the land herein menchoned, send Greeting. 
KNOW YEE — ^that for and in Consideracon of a Certain Sume or Quantity of 
Money, Wampum, and diverse other Goods in a ScheduU hereunto Annexed Per- 
ticularly Menconed and Expressed to them the said Indians, in Hand Payed by 
Mr. ffrancis Rumbouts and Gulyne Ver Planke, both of the Citty of New York, 
Merchants, the Receipt whereof they, the said Indians, Doe hereby Acknowledge, 
and herewith ownes themselves to be fully payed. Contented and Sattisfied, and 
thereof of every Parte and Parcell, Doe hereby Acquitt, Exonerate and Discharge 
them, the said ffrancis Rumbouts and Gulyne V. Planke, their Heires and As- 
signes, have Given, Granted, Bargained, Sold, Aliened, Enfoeffed, and Confirmed, 
and by these Presents Doe fully Cleerly and Absolutely Give, Grant, Bargaine, 
Sell and Alien, Enfeoffe, and Conflrme unto the said Francis Rinnbout and Gulyne 
Ver Planke, All that Tract or Parcel of Land Scituate, Lyeing and being on the 
East side of Hudson's River, at the north side of the High Lands, Beginning from 
the South side of A Creek Called the fresh Kill, and by the Indians Matteawan, 
and from thence Northward along said Hudson's River five hund Rodd bejond the 
Great Wappins Kill, caUed by the Indians Mawenawasigh, being the Northerly 
Bounds, and from thence into the Woods fouer Houers goeing, always Keeping 
five hund Rodd Distant from North side of said Wapinges Creeke, however it 
Rimns, as alsoe from the said fresh Kill or Creeke called Matteawan, along the 
said fresh Creeke into the Woods att the foot of the said High Hills« including 
aU the Reed or Low Lands at the South side of said Creeke, with an Easterly 
Line, fouer Houers going into the. Woods, and from thence Northerly to the end 
of the end of the fouer Houers Goeing or Line Drawne att the North side of the 



36 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

five hund Rodd Bejoyond the Greate Wappinger Creek or Kill called Mawenawasigh, 
together with all the Lands, Soyles, Meadows, both fresh and Salt, Pastures, Com- 
mons, "Wood Land, Marshes, Rivers, Rivoletts, Streames, Creekes, Waters, Lakes, 
and whatsoever else to the said Tract or Parcell of Land within the Bomids and 
Limitts aforesaid is Belonging, or any wise Appurteining, without any Reservation 
of Herbage, Trees or any other thing Growing or Being thereupon. To have and 
to hold said Tract or Parcell of Land, Meadow, Ground, and Primisses, with their 
and every of their Appurtennces, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Clayme 
and Demand of them the said Indian proprietors and each and every of them, of, 
in, and to, the same, and Every Parte thereof, unto them the said ffrancis Rumbout 
and Gulyne Ver Planke, their Heires and Assigns, to the Sole and only Proper 
use, Benefitt and Behoofe of them, the feaid ffrancis Rumbout and Gulyne Ver 
Planke, their Heires and Assignes, to the Sole and only Proper use. Benefit and 
Behooffe of them, the said ffrancis Rumbout and Gulyne Ver Planke, their Heires 
and Assignes for Ever, And they thes said Indians Doe for themselves and their 
Heires and every of them Covenant, Promise and Engage that the said ffrancis 
Rumbout and Gulyne Ver Planke, their Heires and Assignes, shall and may 
henceforth for ever Lawfully, Peacably, and Quietly have, hold, Possesse, and En- 
joy the said Tract or ParceU of Land, and all and Singuler other the Primisses, 
with their Appertences without any Lett, Hindrance, or Interrupeon whatsoever 
of or by them, the said Indians, Proprieters or their Heires, or of any other 
Person or Persons whatsoever clayming or that hereafter shall or may Clayme by, 
from, or imder them, or Either of them. And that they shall and wiU, upon Rea- 
sonable Request and Demand made by the said Francis Rumbouts and Gulyne 
Ver Planke, Give and Deliver Peaceably and Quiettly Possession of the said Tract 
or ParceU of Land and Primisses, or of some Parte thereof, for and in the Name 
of the whole, unto such Person or Persons as by the said ffrancis Kumbout and 
Gulyne Ver Planke, shall be Appointed to Receive the same. In witness whereof, 
the said Sackoraghkigh, for himselfe and in the Name of Megriskar, Sachem of 
Wappinger Indians, Queghsjehapeieuw, Niesjawehos, Queghout, Asotewes, Wap- 
pergereck, Nathindaew, Wappape, Ketaghkanns, Meakaghoghkan, Mierham, Pea- 
pithapaeuw, Queghhitaeuw, Memesawogh, Katariogh, Kightapinkog,; Rearawogh, 
Meggiech, Sejay, Wienangeck, Maenemaeuw, Guighstierm, the Indian Owners and 
Proprietors aforesaid, have here unto sett their Hands and Seals in N. Yorke the 
Eighth Day of August, in the 36th Yeare of his Maties Reigne, Anno Dom, 1683. 
"The marke of X SAKORAGHUCK, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X QUEGHSJEHAPAEIN, (L. S.) 
' "Signed Sealed and Delivered 

in the psen of us 

"Antho BrockhoUs, 

"P. V. Courtlandt, 

"John West. 
"The marke of CLAES the Indian Inter. (Verite.) 
"The marke of X MERHAM, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X PEAPIGHTAPAEW, (L. S.) 



^"Siiir 




INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 37 

"The marke of X QUEGHHITABMm (L. S.) 
"The marke of X MBINESAWOGH, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X KOTARIOGH, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X KIGHTAPINKOJH, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X REAROWOGH, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X MEGGENKSEJAY, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X WIENARGECK, (L. S.) 
"The Marke of X MAENEMANEW, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X GUIGHSTJEREM, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X KETAGHKANNES, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X MEAKHAJH, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X OGHKAN, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X NIESSJAWEJAHOS, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X QUEJHOUT, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X SJOTEWES, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X WAPPEGERECK, (L. St) 
"The marke of X NATHINDAEUW, (L. S.) 
"The marke of X WAPPAPE, (L. S.) 

"A Schedull or Perticuler of Money, Wampum and other goods Paid by ffrands 
Rumbout and Gulyne "Ver Planke for the purchase of the Land in the Deed here- 
unto annexed. 

"One hund Royalls, One hund Pound Powder, Two hund fathom of Wirite Wam- 
pum, one hund Barrs of Lead, One hundred fathom of Black Wampum, thirty 
tobacco boxes ten holl adges, thirty Gunns, twenty Blankets, forty fathom of 
Duffills, twenty fathom of stroudwater Cloth, thirty Kittles, forty Hatchets, forty 
Homes, forty Shirts, forty p stockins, twelve coattis of R. B. & b. C, ten Drawing 
Knives, forty earthen Juggs, forty Bottles, forty Knives, fouer ankers rum, ten 
halfe fatts Beere, Two hund tobacco Pipe?. &c.. Eighty Pound Tobacco. 

"New York, -August the 8th, 1683. 
"The above Perticulers were Delivered to the Indians in the Bill of Sale Men- 
coned in the psence of us 

"Antho. Brockhalls, 
"P. V. Courtlandt, 
"John West. 

"I do hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy of the Original Record, com- 
pared therewith by me. 

"Lewis A. Scott, Secretary." 

There is, however, another Indian deed which antedates the above, 
and covers a portion of the same tract.^ It conveys land consisting of 
three flats, to Arnout Cornelissen Viele, as a present, by the Indian 
owners Kashepan alias Calkoen, Waspacheek alias Spek, and Phil- 
lipuwas, having power of attorney from Awannis, one of the owners, 

1. Colonial Hist. N. T. XIII. 545. 



38 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

and bears date of June 15, 1680. Through this land flows the 
Wynachkee'^ "opposite Danskammer," which is none other than Wap- 
pinger Creek.^ The tract includes the woodland adjoining this stream, 
from the river to Matapan fall, "and stretching about two English 
miles to the North and one mile to the South." It wiU be noticed there 
is no similarity in the names of the Indian owners of this tract and 
those appearing in the Rombout purchase, executed nearly three years 
later. 

Viele in 1704 petitioned Governor Cornbury for a patent covering 
this land. Although it had been patented to others, the reverse side 
of his petition bears the following minute : "Read in council 15 April, 
1704, ordered to lay on the table 4th May, 1704, granted." 

The boundaries of the land conveyed to Robert Sanders and Myn- 
dert Harmense, known as the Minnisinck Patent, dated October 24, 
1686, are very indefinite. Beginning at a point on the Hudson "north 
of the land of Sovryn aHas Called the Baker with the arable and Wood 
Land Marshes with the Creeke Called Wynachkee with Trees Stones 
(or Tones) and further Range or out Drift for Cattle and the fall of 
Watters Called Pondanickrien and another marsh to the north of the 
fall of Watters Called Wareskeechen." 

Schuyler's Patent, dated June 2, 1688, grants to Col. Peter Schuy- 
ler two tracts, the boundaries of which are thus defined: 

First tract "Situate, lying and being on the east side of Hudson's 
river in Duchess county, over against Magdalene Island, beginning 
at a certain creek called Metambesem (now the Sawkill) ; thence run- 
ning easterly to the south-most part of a certain meadow called 
Tauquashqueick, and from that meadow easterly to a certain small 
lake or pond called Waraughkameek ; from thence northerly so far 
till upon a due east and west line it reaches over against the Sawyer's 
Creek; from thence due west to the Hudson's river aforesaid; and 
thence southerly along the said river to the said creek called Metam- 
besem." 

Second tract, "Scituate, Lying and being on ye East side of Hud- 
son's River in Dutchess county at A Certaine Place Caled ye Long 
Reach Slenting Over Against JufFrow's Hook, At a Placed Called 

1. "Wynogkee, Wynachkee and Winnakee are," says Euttenber. "record forms of the 
na&e of a district of country, from which it was extended to streams. The derivatives 
are Winne 'good, flna, pleasant,' and acM 'land'." 

Z History of Poughheepaie, 11. 



INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 39 

the Rust Plaest. Runs from Thence East Ward into the wood to A 
Creek Caled by The Indians Pietawickquasick Knowne by the Chris- 
tians for Jan Casperses Creek Northwarde to a Water fall where the 
Saw Mill belonging to Myndert Harmense Stands Upon and so South- 
warde Alongst Hudson's River Aforesaid to said Rust Plaest.'" 

In 1689 Col. Schuyler sold to Harme Gansevoort, a brewer, of 
Albany, one-half of what he estimated to be one-fourth of the former 
tract. He also conveyed August 30, 1699, to Messrs. Sanders and 
Harmense all the land embraced in the second tract. The uncertain 
boundaries and ambiguous descriptions of land patents in the vicinity 
of Poughkeepsie evidently caused much confusion for Sanders and 
Harmense had prepared for settlement a portion of the land included 
in Schuyler's patent at least two years previous to the above trans- 
fer. It also led to the practice of fraud, evidenced by the granting 
of the so-called Poughkeepsie Patent, May 7, 1697, to Henry Ten 
Eyck and eight associates, by Governor Fletcher. The grant in- 
cluded the greater portion of the town, and proved to be fraudulent, 
as the land was covered by previous patents. This could hardly have 
been the result of ignorance, inasmuch as Governor Fletcher was re- 
garded as one of the most corrupt officials the Province ever had. 
Lord Bellamont complains of him, that he made grants to persons of 
no merit. 

The patent granted Gerrit Artsen, Arie Rosa and Jan Elton, June 
2, 1688, covered twelve hundred acres in the southwest part of the 
present town of Rhinebeck. The Indian title was extinguished by 
deed dated June 8, 1686. This patent was granted with the under- 
standing that adjoining lands deeded to Hendrick Kip by the Indians, 
July 28, 1688, were to be covered by the same Royal Patent. 

The Pawling patent granted to Neiltie, widow of Henry Pawling, 
and her seven children. May 11, 1696, contained four thousand acres 
north and west of Crom Elbow Creek. 

The forming of associations to obtain large grants was a frequent 
occurrence in different counties, often composed mainly of those hold- 
ing official positions under the government. The men composing the 
co-partnership of the Nine Partners' Patent (Great or Lower) were: 
Caleb Heathcote, Major Augustus Graham, James Emott, Lieut. 
Col. Henry Filkins, David Jamison, Hendryck Ten Eyck, John Aar- 

1. Dutchess County Deeds. Liber A, p. 276. 



40 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

etson, William Creed, and Jarvis Marshall. Governor Fletcher granted 
this patent May 27, 1697, described by the following boundaries : "A 
Tract of Vacant Land Situate, Lying and Being on Hudson's River 
in Dutchess County. Bounded on the west by the said Hudson River 
Between the Creek called Fish Creek (Crum Elbow.?) at the marked 
Trees of pauling (Including the said Creeke) and the Land of Myn- 
dert Harmensen & Company then Bounded southerly by the Land of 
the said Myndert Harmense and company as far as their bounds goes 
westerly by the Land of the said Harmense and until a southerly line 
runs so far south until it comes to the south side of a certain Meadow 
wherein there is a White Oak Tree markt with the Letters H. T. then 
southerly by an east and west Line to the Division Line between the 
province of New York and the colony of Connecticut and so Easterly 
to the said Division Line and Northerly by the aforesaid Fish Creeke 
as far as it goes and from the head of said Creeke by a parallel line 
to the south Bounds east and west Reaching the aforesaid Division 
Line." 

The tract covered that portion of the present town of Hyde Park, 
south and east of Crom Elbow creek, the greater portion of the towns 
of Clinton and Stanford, the entire towns of Pleasant Valley and 
Washington, and that part of Amenia and the southern section of 
North East not included in the Oblong. This great tract was divided 
into thirty-six principal lots, and nine "water lots," the latter front- 
ing upon the Hudson. 

The "Calendar of Land Papers" says that in 1695, Henry Beek- 
man, the son of William, petitioned the government for a patent for 
land in Dutchess county, lying opposite Esopus Creek. He obtained 
the patent April 22, 1697, and also secured a grant of all the land 
east of Rombout's Patent to the Connecticut line. These are known 
as the Rhinebeck and Beekman Patents. For each of these tracts 
he was to pay an annual rental of forty shillings to the crown of 
England. Concerning the grants Lord Bellamont writes Secretary 
Popple July 7, 1698, as follows: "One Henry Beekman, a Lieut. 
CoU, in the Militia, has a vast tract of land as large as the Midline 
county of England, for which he gave Fletcher a hundred dollars 
abgut twenty-five pounds in English, and I am told he values his pur- 
chase at £6,000." 



INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 41 

As the boundaries of the first tract were not as definite as Mr. Beek- 
man desired he obtained another patent in its place granted June 25, 
1703, which sets forth the boundaries as follows: "All that tract of 
land in Dutchess County aforesaid, situate, lying and being on the 
east side of Hudson's river, beginning at a place called by the Indians 
Quaningquious, over against the Klyne Sopus Effly, being the north 
bounds of the lands called Pawling's purchase, from thence extending 
northerly by the side of the Hudson's river aforesaid, until it comes 
to a stone creek, over against the Kallcoon Hoek, which is the south- 
erly bounds of the land of Colonel Peter Schuyler; from thence so far 
east as to reach a certain pond called by the Indians Warangh- 
keemeek; and from thence extending southerly by a hue parallel to 
Hudson's river aforesaid until a line run from the place where it first 
began easterly into the woods does meet the said parallel hne, and 
southerly by the line drawn from the place where it was first begun, 
and meeting the said parallel line, which is the northern bounds of 
the said land before called Pawling's Purchase." 

Mr. Beekman also surrendered the grant for land east of Rombout's 
Patent, receiving a new patent therefore granted June Si5, 1703. It 
embraced the northeast half of the present town of LaGrange, all of 
the towns of Union Vale and Beekman (except a few hundred acres 
in the southern angle of Beekman), about 8000 acres of the northwest 
portion of Pawling, and the western part of Dover. A strip one 
and three-eights of a mile wide along the east side of the two latter 
towns formed a portion of the Oblong. 

Little or Upper Nine Partners' Patent, granted to Broughton & 
Company, April 10, 1706, was bounded as follows: "Beginning at 
the North Bounds of the Lands And then lately purchased by said 
Richard Sackett in Dutchess county, and runs thence South Easterly 
by his north bounds to Wimposing thence by the mountains southerly 
to the south east comer of the said Sackett's Land and thence Easterly 
to the Colony Line of Connecticut and thence Northerly by the said 
colony Line and Wiantenuck River to the south bounds of lands pur- 
chased by John Spragg &c. at Owissetanuck thence westerly by the 
said purchase as it runs to the south-west corner thereof thence to 
the Manor of Livingston and by the south bounds thereof unto the 
lands purchased and patented to Coll. Peter Schuyler over against 
Magdelons Island and so by the said purchase and patent To the 



42 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

patent of Coll. Beekman for Land Lying over against Clyne Esopus 
Fly and thence by the said Land to the said south east corner and 
thence to the place where it begun." 

This tract comprised the present towns of Milan and Pine Plains, 
the north half of North East, and the small portions of Clinton and 
Stanford not included in the Great Nine Partners' Patent. It was 
confirmed September 25, 1708, by Queen Anne to the following 
patentees: Samson Broughton, Rip Van Dam, Thomas Wenham, 
Roger Mompesson, Peter Fauconier, Augustus Graham, Richard 
Sackett, and Robert Lurting. A law authorizing its partition was 
passed by the Colonial Assembly in 1734. 

The Oblong Patent, termed in Colonial documents "Equivalent 
Land," led to much controversy between the States of New York and 
Connecticut. It covers a narrow strip along the east borders of 
Dutchess, Putnam and Westchester counties, containing 61,440 acres. 
It was in dispute between the officials of New Netherland and the 
United English Colonies. An effort to adjust the difficulty was made 
at Hartford, September 19, 1650, by representatives of both govern- 
ments, but agreements then arrived at were not adhered to. When 
the English superseded the Dutch in 1664, commissioners were ap- 
pointed by Charles II of England, who determined on a line parallel 
with the Hudson and twenty miles distant from it on the east. This 
Hue gave rise to a dispute respecting the right of government over 
the towns of Rye and Bedford in Westchester County. Another 
agreement was concluded in 1683, and these towns were adjudged to 
be subject to New York government, and confirmed by the Crown 
March 28, 1700. "Nineteen years afterward" says Smith in his His- 
tory of New York "a probationory act was passed, empowering the 
Governor to appoint commissioners, as well to run the line parallel to 
Hudson's River, as to re-survey the other lines and distinguish the 
boundary. The Connecticut agent opposed the King's confirmation 
of this act, totis viribus ; but it was approved on the 23d of January 
1723. Two years after, the commissioners and surveyors of both 
colonies met at Greenwich, and entered first into an agreement re- 
lating to the method of performing the work. The survey was im- 
mediately after executed in part, the report being dated on the 12th 
or May, 1725, but the complete settlement was not made till the 14th 



. DIAGRAM 

Sluwdn^theTdaliscposiiinii aCvaninKline!* 

re/bred' ta fn the' 
, REPORT OFTHECOMMISSIONERSONTHE 
NEWYORK& CONNECTICUT BOUNDARY. , ^ 




Lhu'.'ti-mibyS u r vtyuiy in.lfi&l 
niidTvmn!v(!^<dliiK'nimiii8sinii 
ors nilT2S. C. D.E & L .D. 

TiUHIsSlu.'viyt'Jliy fninnriwii on . 

«cs&»SHrvBynES mlBO. E.F.G. 
M F.B e 



:^ M ^yr 



»IJE ]R S E X 



INDIAN DEEDS. LAND PATENTS. 43 

of May, 1731, when indentures, certifying the execution of the agree- 
ment in 1725, were mutually signed by the commissioners and survey- 
ors of both colonies. At this time the tract known as the Oblong was 
ceded to New York as an equivalent for the lands near the Sound, the 
peaceable possession of which Connecticut had enjoyed during all the 
intervening years." 

Further disputes arose in regard to surveying the boundary and 
jmarking it with suitable monuments. Finally a survey was made in 
1860 which was subsequently agreed to by both States. 

The Oblong was annexed to the contiguous counties in this State 
May 31, 1733, and December 17, 1743, the Precincts of South, Beek- 
mans, Crom Elbow and North were extended across the tract to the 
Connecticut line. To facilitate the collection of quitrents, the patent 
was divided into lower, middle and upper districts. 

A patent conveying the Oblong to Sir Joseph Eyles & Company 
was granted in London May 15, 1731. The Colonial government, 
however, patented the greater part of the same tract to Thomas Haw- 
ley and others, June 8, 1731. The consequent htigation was termi- 
nated by the Revolutionay war, the American patentees maintaining 
possession. 



44 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER V. 
PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 

WITH the extinguishment of the native title to lands des- 
cribed in the foregoing chapter, the settlement of Dutch- 
ess coimty began. Nicholas Emigh is credited in previous 
County Histories with being the first pioneer. Authorities differ as to 
the date of his settlement at the mouth of Fishkill creek, but it is gener- 
ally conceded that he was here in 1685. He came to America with 
Robert Livingston in 1683. On the ocean voyage he courted and 
married a Dutch lass from Holstein, and the couple remained for a 
time on the Livingston domain. Becoming dissatisfied, they went 
to Fort Orange, intending to settle on an island in the Hudson which 
constituted a part of the Manor of Rensselaerwyck. Here they had 
the misfortune to be drowned out by a Mohawk flood, and young 
Emigh and his wife removed to the site of Fishkill. He bargained 
with the Indians for a large tract of land, only to learn that it had 
been recently covered by the Rombout Patent. He then purchased 
of the patentees, lands in the Clove district where he subsequently 
removed. 

While living at Fishkill, they became the parents of a daughter, 
the first white child born in the county. She received the name of 
Katrina, and at maturity married a young Hollander named Peter 
Lasink,^ who located in the county previous to 1700.* The young 
couple settled in the town of East Fishkill where four sons and four 
daughters were born to them. 

The next settler near the mouth of the Fishkill, according td Bai- 
ley's Historical Sketches, published in 1874, was Peche Dewall who 

1. Peter Laslnck is the ancestor of a numerous family In Dutchess County, different 
branches of which spell their name variously, Lasslng, Lossing, Lawson, etc. He is sup- 
posed to have heen a son of Peter (Pleterse) Lasslngh, who migrated from Holland about 
1658, and settled at Albany, where he died 1695. 

2.^ Mr. Edmund Piatt Is of the opinion that Lasini located in the county as early 
Bmlgh. He is unquestionably the same Peter Lansing, or his son, to whom Arnout Vlele 
sold his land near the mouth of Wappinger Creek. 



PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 45 



arrived in the Spring of 1688. He evidently did not remain long as 
his name does not appear in subsequent records. 

The settlements in Poughkeepsie and Rhinebeck were nearly, if not 
quite contemporaneous with those in Fishkill. In the grant of 1686 
to Sanders and Harmense reference is made to the land of "Sovryin, 
alias called the Baker," but there is no evidence that he settled here, 
nor is the name of record as a patentee. The names of Jan Smeedes, 
Peter Lansing and Gerret Lansing, are quoted in early documents 
pertaining to land in the vicinity of Poughkeepsie, and apparently 
they had begun a settlement previous to 1690. The Kips were the 
first to build and settle in what is now the town of Rhinebeck. On the 
east side of the stone house, built on Hendrick Kip's south lot, were 
inscribed the figures "1700." 

Inasmuch as Dutchess county was for some years provisionally at- 
tached to Ulster, on account of the paucity of its inhabitants, a de- 
tached census was not made until 1714. The total number of souls 
was four hundred and forty-five of whom twenty-nine were slaves. 
The list of sixty-seven heads of families then resident in the county 
contains the following names : 



Abraham Beuys 
John Beuys 
Roger Brett 
John Breines 
hendrick bretsiert 
Andreis Daivedes 
Peter De Boyes 
John De Grave 
Frans De Langen 
Peck De Wit 
Roelif Duijtser 



Catrine Lasink Wedo 
Peter Lasink 
Frans Le Roy 
Lenar Le Roy 
Lenard Lewis 
Aret Hasten 
Gysbert Oosterhout 
Whilliam Ostrander 
Lowrans Ostrout 
John Ostrow 
William Outen 



Johanis Dyckman Sienjer Maghell Pallmatir 

Johannis Dyckman Jim j or Peter Palmater 

Aenderis Gerdener 

Isaac Hendricks 

Bartolumus Hoogenboom 

Jacob Hoghtelingh 

James Husey 

Jacob Kip 

John Kip 

Harmen Knickerbacker 



Hendrick Pells 
Tunis Pieterse 
Jacob Plowgh 
Harmen Binders 
Thomas Sanders 
WiUem Schot 
ey Scouten 



henderck Sissum 
Louwerens knickerbacker .».Matieis Slejt 
Cellitie kool Johannis Spoor 



Mellen Springsteen 
Jeurey Springsten 
Johnes Terbots 
WiUiam Tetsort 
Adaam Van alsted 
Elias Van Bunchoten 
Elena Van De Bogart 
Meindert Van Den Bogart 
Henry Van Der Burgh 
Abraham Van Dusen 
Balthus Van Kleck 
Barent Van Kleck 
Johanes Van Kleck 
Garatt Van Vleit 
Evert Van Wagenen 
Swart Van Wagenen 
Abraham Vosburgh 
Jacob Vosburgh 
Peter Vely 
Dirck Wesselse 
Willem Wijt 



46 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

This census further enumerates the total number of male persons 
above sixty years of age, 11 ; male persons from sixteen to sixty years 
of age, 89; male persons under sixteen, 120; number of females over 
sixty, 1 ; females from sixteen to sixty, 97 ; females under sixteen, 98 ; 
slaves, 29. 

In the original tax roU^ of 1718 the total assessed valuation of 
property in the county was *1300, divided among one hundred and 
twenty-nine tax payers as follows: 

The Inhabetents Residents Sojorners and frieholders of Dutchess County are 
Rated & assesed By ye assesors Chosen for ye Same the Day of Janury the 17, 
1717/18 

for ye North Ward Viz 

Wedwen Van Harmen Kneckerbaker 

Lowerens Knickerbaker 

Adam Van Alstyn 

Barent Van Benthuyse 

Jacob Jacobse 

Jacob hooghtylingh 

Jurrie Loonart 

Phillip Loonart 

Hans Jacob Denkes 

Arent ffinhout 

Necolas Rou 

Fallentyn Penner 

Phillip ffeller 

Johanis Risdorph 

Barent NoU 

Jureie Toefelt 

Lowerence hendereik 

Barent Sieperell 

Ananieas Tie! Wagener 

Frederick Mayer 

Karel Neaher 

Jurreye Teder 

Hans meigel wegele 

Hans Jurrie priegell 

Hans Adam freherick 

1. The First Book of the Superrlsors and Aseessors, 1718-1722, printed for Vassar 
Brotbers' Institute (1908), from which much new data for this History has been obtained 
was unearthed In the County Clerk's Office by Edmund Piatt, In his search for orlelnai 
material tot the History of Pougbkeepsle (1905). 



L 


L 


■ s 


d 


20 


00 


18 


9 


10 


00 


9 


4^ 


5 


00 


4 


8^ 


5 


00 


4 


8J4 


1 


00 





1114 


5 


00 


4 


614 


S 


00 


4 


8J4 


5 


00 


4 


8J4 


4 


00 


3 


9 


6 


00 


4 


8J4 


5 


00 


4 


8% 


4 


00 


3 


9 


1 


00 





11J4 


3 


00 


2 


10 


3 


00 


2 


10 


6 


00 


S 


7J^ 


6 


00 


5 


"^'A 


8 


00 


7 


6 


2 


00 


1 


lOi^ 


2 


00 


1 


1054 


5 


00 


4 


8J4 


4 


00 


3 


9 


3 


00 


2 


10 


4 


00 


S 


9 


3 


00 


2 


10 



PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 47 

L L s d 

Henderick Scheerman 3 00 1 IO54 

Wednwe Van Jacob Kapontsier 4 00 3 9 

Johanis Backtis 5 00 4 814 

Andris Contreman 1 00 11J4 

Jureian Saltman 3 00 1 lOj^ 

Hans feelten Woleven S 00 4 8J4 

Peiter Wouleben 6 00 6 7}4 

Anthony Cremere 5 00 4 854 

Frans Kelder 6 00 5 7j4 

Joosep Reykert 8 00 7 6 

Hendrick Shever 7 00 6 6 

Peiter Van oosterande 6 00 5 7j4 

De wedn marritie oosterande 3 00 3 10 

Wellem Trophage 13 00 11 3J^ 

Jacob Kip 60 02 16 3 

Hendrick Kip * 13 00 11 Sj^ 

i/kathys Sleight IS 00 14 

Jan Van Gelder 3 00 1 IO54 

Evert Van Wagenen 30 00 5 

Hendriccus Heermans 7 00 6 8 

Goose Van Wagene 8 00 7 6 

Lourens Oosterhout 7 00 6 8 

HenriciiB Beekman 40 01 17 6 

Jacob ploegh 3 00 3 10 

Tunis Pear 6 00 5 7j4 

Louwerens Tedder 3 00 1 lOj^ 

Peiter TypeU 3 00 3 10 

Albartus Schriver 4 00 3 9 

Necolas Eemeig 5 00 4 854 

Hendrick Ohle 4 00 3 9 

Carel Ohle 3 00 1 10j4 

Adam Eykert 7 00 6 8 

Hans Lambert 7 00 6 8 

Stefan fredrich 5 00 4 S% 

Marttyn Bock 3 00 3 10 

Peiter dob S 00 4 8J4 

Johanis Dob 1 00 llj^ 

June De Mont 3 00 1 10j4 

Martyn Whitman 3 00 1 lOy^ 



Calculated to lid 1 far Pr pound 
Janury the 30 Annoq 1717/18 

Henricus Beekman Asesor 
Hendrick Kip Asesor 



L436 L19 19 4^^ 



48 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The Inhabeteiits Residents Sojorners and frieholders of Dntchis County are 
Rated & assesed by ye assessores Chosen for ye Same the Day of 1717/18 for ye 
meedel Ward Viz 

Thomas Sanders 
Elias Van Bunchoote 
Zacharias Flegelar 
Hendrick Van Der Burgh 
Jacob Titsort 
Josias Crego 
Evert Van Wagene 
Johannes Van Kleck 
Myndert Van Den bogert 
Harmon Rynderse 
Jan Ostrom 
Baranet Van Kleck 
Fransoy Le Roy 
Lowarance Van Kleck 
Jacobus Van Den Bogart 
Damon Palmater 

De Weden Van Baltus Van Kleck 
De Weden Van Myndert harmese 
Jan De Graef 
Bartholomous Hoogeboom 
Leonard Lewis 
De Weden Van Jan Keep 
Pieter Vielee 
Hendrick Pels 
Willem Titsoor 
Magiel Palmetier Junr 
Magiel Palmetier Siniur 
Pieter Palmetier 
Hendrick Buys 
John Egerton 
Thomas Lewis 
Thomas Shadwick 
^onas Slodt 
Richard Sackett 

As Wettniss our hands SS4 33 09 6iA 

Henry V D Burgh assr 

Johanes Van Kleck assor 

Lowerens Van Cleeck assor 

Jymes hussey 

Jacobes Van Den boogert assor 

H V Dr Burgh Clk 



L 


L 


s 


d 


35 


03 


03 


3J4 


10 


00 


13 


1 


4 


00 


04 


10 


53 


03 


04 


0J4 


04 


00 


04 


10 


06 


00 


or 


3 


10 


00 


13 


1 


11 


00 


13 


S}4 


30 


01 


04 


3)4 


01 


00 


01 


354 


13 


00 


15 


8^ 


35 


03 


03 


3^ 


3* 


01 


09 





05 


00 


06 


OH 


05 


00 


06 


oy2 


03 


00 


03 


7^ 


58 


03 


10 


1 


53 


03 


02 


10)4 


11 


00 


13 


sy2 


05 


00 


06 





55 


03 


06 


5 


OS 


00 


106 





23 


01 


06 


7 


13 


00 


15 


854 


13 


00 


15 


854 


03 


00 


3 


7/2 


45 


02 


14 


454 


14 


00 


16 


11 


03 


00 


03 


75^ 


01 


00 


01 


354 


01 


00 


01 


354 


03 


00 


03 


sy. 


03 


00 


03 


syz 


10 


00 


13 


1 







dfefwifc-. i- 




PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 49 



The Inhabetents Residents Sojorners and 
Rated & assesed By the assessores Chosen 
Ward Viz 

Juerien Springhsteen 

Jacobus Cranckheit 

Lodewick De Dnytser 

John Brions 

Hendrick De Duytser 

Isack Hendricks 

De Weden Van Mr Roger Breet Decsd 

Pieter De Boys 

Rober Dengon 

James Hussie 

Johnnes Terbo'ss 

Jan Buyes 

Johnnes Buyes 

Abram Buyes 

Johnnes Metteler 

Everhert Jonge 

De Widive Van Simon Schoute 

John Scouten 

Pieter Lasselng 

Richard Cook . 

Isack Lassink 

Jan De Langen 

Frans De Langen 

Andries Frederick Pech 

Johnnes Devensher 

Gerret Van Vlied 

Markus Van Bomeln 

Aart Hasten 

Peter Teackselar 

Jacob Cooun. 

Hendrick Sweteslar 

Henry Van Derburgh 
Johnnes Van Kleeck 
James Hussey 
Lowrance Van Kleeck 
Jacobus Van Den Bogart 
assTS 



free Holders of Dutchis County are 
for the day of 1717/18 For ye South 



L 


L 


s 


d 


OS 


GO 


06 


oy2 


03 


00 


02 


6 


06 


00 


07 


3 


06 


00 


07 


3 


OS 


00 


6 


054 


08 


00 


9 


8 


57 


03 


8 


loy^ 


23 


01 


6 


7 


OS 


00 


6 


oy2 


15 


00 


18 


154 


53 


03 


04 


oy2 


07 


00 


8 


sy 


05 


00 


6 


oy2 


07 


00 


8 


sy 


06 


00 


7 


sy 


05 


00 


6 


ay 


17 


01 





ey 


04 


00 


4 


10 


07 


00 


8 


6y 


01 


00 


1 


ay 


10 


00 


12 


1 


01 


00 


1 


^y 


13 


00 


14 


6 


03 


00 


3 


S 


02 


00 


2 


5 


34 


01 


9 





06 


00 


7 


3 


09 


00 


10 


10 


05 


00 


6 


oy 


02 


00 


2 


5 


04 


00 


4 


10 



Tottall L330 L19 



The county tax list of December 1722 contains one hundred and 
eighty-three names with a total assessment of ^2243. A year later 



50 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



the population of the county, including forty-three slaves, was 1,083. 
For many years the progress of settlement was slow, and up to 1731 
Dutchess was the least populous county in the Province, its inhabi- 
tants then numbering only 1,727 of whom one hundred and twelve 
were "blacks." In 1740 the list of freeholders numbered two hundred 
and thirty-five, certified by "Ja. Wilson Sheriff." Many of these 
names are perpetuated to the present generation. For convenience 
they are here arranged alphabetically, but the original orthography, 
as in preceding lists, has been adhered to: 



Ackert, Jury 
Auchmoty, James 
Backus, Johannis 
Baily, John 
Beekman, Henry 
Berringer, Coeuradt 
Bloome, Ephraime 
Bogardus, Cornelius 
Bonesteel, Nicholas 
Boss, Daniell 
Brinckerhoff, George 
Brinckerhoff, Isaac 
Brinckerhoff, Jacob 
Brinckerhoff, John 
Britt, Robert 
Britt Francis 
Calkin, John, Junr. 
Carman, John 
Cole, William 
Concklin, John 
Cook, John 
Cool, Jacob 
Creed, Augustine 
Crego, Josias 
Crego, Stephen 
Davinport, Thomas 
De Dutcher, David 
De Graafl, Mosis 
De Graeff, Abraham 
DeWitt, Jacob 
De Yeo, Jacobus 
Drake, William 
Di%m, Jacob 
Dollson, Johannis 



Dollson, Issac 
Du Bois, Christian 
Du Bois, Mathys 
Du Bois, Lewis 
Du Bois, Peter, Jr. 
Du Bois, Jacob 
Du Bois, Jonathan 
Du Bois, Mathew, Jr. 
De Peyster, Jacobus 
Karnest, Mathys 
Ellsworth, George 
Emigh, Nicholas 
Emons, John 
Feder, Jury 
FeUer, Philip 
Filkin, Henry 
Filkin, Issac 
Filkin, Frans 
Flegelaer, Simon 
Flewellen, John 
Foelandt, Philip 
Freer, William 
Freer, Teunils 
Freer, Simon 
Freer, Abarham, Jr. 
Frelick, Stephen 
Gamble, John 
Gay, John 

Gerbrantz, Lowrance 
Germain, Issac 
Germain, Issac, Jr. 
Gonselesduck, Manuell 
Gtiffen, Joshua 
Griggs, Alexander 



Haber, Zacharias 
Hagaman, Francis 
HaUstead, Samuel 
Hasbrook, Benjamin 
Heermans, Hendrickus 
Hendrick, Godfreed 
Hendrickse, Arie 
Hermans, Andries 
Heyner, Hans 
Hoff, Jacob 
Hoff, Lowrance 
Hoffman, Martinus 
Hoffman, Nicholas 
Humphreys, William 
Kidney, Robert 
Kip, Abraham 
Kip, Jacob 
Kip, Hendrick 
Kip, Issac 
Kip, Johannis 
Kip, Roeloff 
Knickerbacker, Evert 
Knickerbacker, Lowrenc* 
Koens, Nicholas 
Kool, Simon 
La Count, Bowdewine 
Lambert, Hans 
Langdon, Thomas 
Lassing, Peter 
Lassing, Isaac 
Lassing, William 
La Roy, Frans 
La Roy, Simon 
Lewis, Thomas 



PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 51 



Londen, Philip 
Lossee, John 
Lossee, Cornelis 
Lossee, Lowrence 
Low, Jacob 
Marshall, Nathaniel 
Mathews, Samuel 
Middelaer, Johannis 
Montross, John 
More, Philip 
Mowl, Jacob 
Mufford, Hendrick 
MufFord, Peter 
Nauthrop, Mosis 
Neker, Fran 
Nellson, Francis 
Oosterhout, Lowrence 
Ostrander, Adam 
Ostrander, Peter 
Ostrander, Maes 
Ostrander, Arent 
Ostrom, Jan 
Ostrom, RoelofF 
Ostrom, Hendrick 
Outwater, Peter 
Owl, Hendrick 
Palmer, Joshua 
Palmer, Joseph 
Palmer, Peter 
Palmer, Samuel 
Palmer, William 
Palmatier, Peter 
Peelen, Gybsert 
Pells, Magiel 
Philip, Hendrick 
Polver, Michael 
Polver, Wendal 
Richart, David 
Rtfsekrans, Hendrick 
Rosekrans, John 
Ross, Josias 
Row, Nicholas 
Runnels, Issac 
Runnels, Issac, Jr. 
Runnels, Nehmiah 



Runnels, John 
Rykert, Joseph 
Sackett, Richard 
Schutt, WilUam 
Scott, William 
Secundus, William Smith 
Sheffer, Hendrick 
Sheffer, Hans felte 
Shoe, Martinus 
Shonk, Martin 
Shriver, Albartus 
Simon, William 
Simpson, Peter 
Sipperly, Fredricke 
Sipperly, Michael 
_St6ght, Mathys 
Smith, Zacharias 
Snyder, Johannis P. 
Snyder, Christophell 
Soefelt, Jury 
Soefelt, Jury Adam 
Spaller, Johannis 
Swartwoudt, Rudolphus 
Swartwoudt, Bamardus 
Swartwoudt, Abraham 
Swartwout, Jdcobiis 
Syfer, William 
Tappon, Johannis 
Ter Boss, Jacobus 
Ter Boss, Hendrick 
Ter Boss, Johannis 
Tiel, Martin 
Tiel, Lowrance 
Tietsort, Isaac 
Tippell, Peter 
Trever, Basteaan 
Van Amburgh, Isaac 
Van Benthuysen Jan 
Van Benthuysen, Johannis 
Van Benthuysen, Barent 
Van Bomell, Christaphell 
Van Bomell, Jacobus 
Van Bomell, Marcus 
Van Buntschoten, Elias 
Van Buntskoten, Teimis 



Van Campen, Jacob 
Van den Bogart, Jacobus 
Vandenbogart, Myndert 
Vandenburgh, Henry 
Van Dyck, Frans 
Van Etten, Peter 
Van Etten, Jacobus, Jr. 
Van Keuren, Mathewis 
Van Kleeck, Baltus B. 
Van Kleeck, Baltus J. 
Van Kleeck, Ahaswarus 
Van Kleek, Lowrence 
Van Kleek, Barent 
Van Kleek, Johannis 
Van Steenberg, Benjamin 
\San Tesell, Hendrick 
Van Vliet, Arie 
Van Vliet, Tunis 
Van Voorhees, Johannis 
Van Voorhees, Johannis 
Van Voorhees, Coert 
Van Vreedingburgh, 

William, Jr. 
Van Vreedingburgh, 

William 
Van Wagenen, Goese 
Van Wagenen, Jacob 
Van Wagenen, Evert 
Van Wajgenen, Nicholas 
Van Wagenen, Gerret E. 
Van Wyck, Corneliis 
Van Wyck, Theodorus 
Veile, Peter 
Viele, Arnont 
Ver Planck, William 
Ver Veelen, Gideon 
Weaver, Johannis 
Westfall, Gysbert 
Widerwox, Andries 
WUlsie, Hendrick 
Willsie, Johannis 
Willsie, Cornelis 
WoUever, Hans felte 
Yager, Wendell 
Yomens, Daniel 



52 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

From 1749 to 1756 the county increased rapidly in population, 
exceeding, in the latter year, that of any other county in the Prov- 
ince, except Albany, as shown by the following table: 

Whites Blacks Whites Blacks 

New York X0,768 2,272 Westchester 11,919 1,338 

Albany 14,805 2,619 Kings 1,863 845 

Ulster 6,605 1,500 Queens 8,617 2,169 

Dutchess 13,289 859 Suffolk 9,345 1,045 

Orange 4,446 430 Richmond 1,667 465 

It is interesting to note a description of the county in 1756, which 
then included Putnam, by Judge William Smith, the New York his- 
torian. 

"The south part of the county is mountainous and fit only for iron 
works, but the rest contains a great quantity of good upland well 
watered. The only villages in it are Poughkeepsie and the Fish 
Kill, though they scarce deserve the name. The inhabitants on the 
banks of the river are Dutch, but those more easterly. Englishmen, 
and, for the most part, emigrants from Connecticut and Long Island. 
There is no episcopal church in it. The growth of this county has 
been very sudden, and commenced but a few years ago. Within the 
memory of persons now living, it did not contain above twelve fami- 
lies; and, according to the late returns of the militia, it will furnish 
at present, above two thousand five hundred fighting men." 

In what is now the town of Germantown, which was a part of 
Dutchess, until 1717, when it was annexed to Albany county (now 
Columbia), was planted in 1710 a colony of German refugees, from 
the Palatinate, on the Rhine, numbering 1194. Their villages, which 
were nothing more than a series of small lodges or temporary huts, 
were located on a tract of six thousand acres, covered with a growth 
of pine timber, especially adapted to the industry in which it was 
proposed to give them employment, that of raising hemp and making 
tar pitch and resin for the English Navy.^ A similar colony was 
located on the west side of the river, in the town of Saugerties, Ulster 

1. At a council between the Governor and deputies representing the Palatines at the 
Manor of Livingston, the deputies "told his excellency that they would rather lose their 
lives than remain where they are, that they are cheated hy the contract, It not being the 
same read to them In England. That seven years after they had had forty acres given 
to^hem, they were to repay the Queen by hemp, mast-trees, tar and pitch or anything else 

so that it may be no damage to any man or his family 

See letters of Hunter to Lords of Trade, Col. Hist., Vol. V. 



PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 53 

county, and the two settlements were designated respectively East 
Camp and West Camp. Their affairs were managed by a board of 
commissioners, composed of Robert Livingston, Richard Sackett, 
John Cast, Godfrey Walsen, Andrew Bagger and Henry Schureman. 
These Palatines, however, soon became restive under the restraints 
imposed on them, and many removed to the Mohawk and Schoharie 
valleys. Others located at Rhinebeck about 1715, where they were 
known as the "High Butchers." They occupied the land of Henry 
Beekman north of the Hog Ridge and about the old German Re- 
formed Church at Pink's Corner, and the name of Ryn Beek was con- 
fined to these lands until the organization of the Precinct in 1734. 

The sheriff's list of landowners in the county in 1740, does not 
cpntain the names of the Quakers who formed a little community 
at Quaker Hill in the present town of Pawling, begun in 1730. Ben- 
jamin Ferris and Nathan Birdsall were here as early as 1728, coming 
from the town of Rye, Westchester county. Between the years 1730 
and 1740, the tide of emigration was brisk to this fertile section of the 
county. Among those who arrived at that period are found the 
names of Aiken, Irish, Wing, Taber, Osbom, Briggs, Hoag, Dakin, 
Toffey, Merritt, Russell. Many of these settlers came from Massa- 
chusetts and Rhode Island, although John Cox, Jr., Librarian of 
the Yearly Meeting of the Society of Friends, says "the records do 
not show in any direct way where the members came from." Follow- 
ing a Colonial act passed February 19, 1755, relative to regulating 
the militia, an enrollment was made of the Friends or Quakers in the 
county who claimed exemption from military duty. They are thus 
recorded with their locations and occupations. 



Joshua Shearman, 




Beekman Precinct, 


Shoemaker. 


Moses Shearman, 




do. 


Laborer. 


Daniel Shearman, 




do. 


do. 


Joseph Doty, 




do. 


Blacksmith, 


John Wing, 




do. 


Farmer. 


Zebulon Ferris, 




(Oblong) do. 


do. 


Joseph Smith, son 


of Richard, 


do. 


Laborer. 


Robert Whiteley, 




Oblong, 


Farmer. 


Elijah Doty, 




Oblong House, 


Carpenter. 


Philip Allen, 




Oblong, 


Weaver. 


Richard Smith 




do. 


Farmer. 


James Aiken, 




do. 


Blacksmith. 



54 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Abraham Chase, son of Henry, 

David Hoeg, 

John Hoeg, 

Jonathan Hoeg, 

Amos Hoeg, son of John, 

William Hoeg, son of David, 

John Hoeg, son of John, 

Ezekiel . Hoeg, 

Judah Smith, 

Mathew Wing, 

Timothy Dakin, 

Jonathan Dakin, 

Samuel Russell, 

John Fish, 

Reed Ferriss, 

Benjamin Ferris, Junr., 

Joseph Akin, 

Israel Howland, 

Elisha Akin, 

Isaac Haviland, 

Nathan Soule, son of George, 

James Birdsall, 

Daniel Chase, 

Silas Mossher, Oswego in 

WiUiam Mosher 

Silvester Richmond, 

Jesse Irish, 

David Irish, 

WiUiam Irish, 

Josiah Bull, 

Josiah Bull, Junr., 

Allen Moore, 

Andrew Moore, 

William GifFord, 

Nathaniel Yeomans, 

Eliab Yeomans, 

William Parks, 



Oblong 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
da 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
Beekman Precinct, 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 



Farmer. 

Parmer. 
Blacksmith. 
Laborer. 
Farmer. 

Laborer. 
Tailor. 

Farmer. 
Laborer. 

do. 
Farmer. 
Shoemaker. 
Laborer. 
Blacksmith. 
Farmer. 

do. 
Blacksmith. 
Farmer. 
Laborer. 
Farmer. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 



Rev. Warren H. Wilson of Brooklyn, published in 1907, a socio- 
logical study entitled "Quaker Hill," in which he gives a list of the 
heads of families in the Oblong Meeting of 1760; also those who had 
accounts at the store of Daniel Merritt, on Quaker Hill, in 1771, as 
the jiames appeared in his Ledger. These names, with those above 
quoted, practically include all the families who formed this interesting 



PIONEER SETTLEMENTS AND EARLY INHABITANTS. 55 

community, an account of which appears in the town history of Paw- 
ling. 

A summary of the population by towns according to the first Fed- 
eral census, taken in 1790, and published in 1908 by the U. S. Census 
Bureau, places the total number of inhabitants in the county at 45,266, 
thus classified: 



TOWNS. 



Amenia 

Beekman 

Clinton 

FishkiU 

Frederickstown 
North East .. 

Pawling 

Pbilipstown . . . 
Poughkeepsie . 

Rhinebeck 

South East . . . 
Washington . . 



VI 


».«w 




tS«-l 






o 


o E o 




So 






o 

II 


white males 
ars and upwa 
ding heads 
lies! 


H 
it 


"4i 


£ 
Sid 


s 


11 


oes-: 


oS 


93 


og 


> 






III 

* 


%i 


s 

09 


440 


768 


780 


1449 


29 


52 


510 


847 


951 


1682 


11 


106 


696 


1173 


1112 


2115 


31 


176 


88S 


1366 


1290 


2643 


41 


601 


914 


1437 


1540 


2851 


41 


63 


600 


839 


863 


1597 


22 


80 


676 


1031 


1068 


2098 


91 


42 


331 


517 


593 


942 


2 


25 


371 


617 


573 


1092 


48 


199 


514 


875 


756 


1544 


66 


421 


141 


231 


241 


433 


3 


13 


740 


1267 


1295 


2494 
20940 


55 


78 


6718 


10968 


11062 


440 


1856 



e 



3078 
3597 
4607 
5941 
5932 
3401 
4330 
2079 
2539 
366S / 

921 
5189 



45260 



Details of settlements are remanded to the histories of the towns 
in which they came to be included, a sufficient number of persons hav- 
ing been named who wrought the evolution of the county in the pioneer 
era. 

Fortunately these pioneers were not harassed by Indian wars which 
desolated other counties, but their herds and flocks did not enjoy equal 
immunity from the savage denizens of the forest. In 1726 and 1728 
laws were passed by the State Legislature for the destruction of wolves 
in Albany, Dutchess and Orange counties. Again in 1741 an act 
was passed "to encourage the destroying of wolves and panthers in 
Dutchess county." 



56 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Contrary to the unfavorable opinion entertained of lands in the 
western portion of the county, which certain Dutch burghers from 
Ulster county reported were not worth crossing the river for, the soil 
possessed a fertihty unknown to the lands in many portions of the 
State, responding generously to the exertions of the pioneers. 





dpc-c^ c:P<^ 



'^ 



S. ^.y^^z///.. i^u. /'''': hhs/! a 



CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 57 



CHAPTER VI. 
CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 

WHEN Col. Thomas Dongan was appointed Governor of 
the province in 1682, he was instructed to organize a 
Council, to be composed of not exceeding ten of "the 
most eminent inhabitants," and to issue writs to the proper officers 
for the election of "a general assembly of all th* freeholders by the 
persons who they shall choose to represent them," in order to consult 
with him and his council "what laws are fit and necessary to be made 
and established" for the good government of the province "and all 
the inhabitants thereof." On the t7th of October, 1683, the assembly 
thus authorized met at Fort James in New York. It was composed 
of delegates from all parts of the province, and during its session 
of three weeks passed fourteen several acts, which were assented to 
by the Governor and his Council. Among these laws was one "To 
Divide the Province and Dependencys into Shires and Countyes," 
passed November 1st. Twelve counties were erected as follows: Al- 
bany, Cornwall, Duke's, Dutchess, Kings, New York, Orange, Queens, 
Richmond, Suffolk, Ulster, and Westchester. The county of Corn- 
wall consisted of what was known as the district of Penaquid (now 
in Maine), and Duke's county consisted of several islands on the coast 
of Massachusetts. These counties wtjre included in the patent to the 
Duke of York. They were detached on the reorganization of the 
government in 1691. 

The boundaries of Dutchess were thus defined: "to be from the 
bounds of the County of Westchester on the South Side of the High- 
lands along the east side of Hudson's River as far as Roelof Jansens 
Creeke and eastward into the woods twenty miles." This territory 
included the present county of Putnam and the towns of Clermont 
and Germantown in Columbia County. The latter were a part of 
Livingston's Manor and were annexed to Albany county May 27, 



58 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1717. Putnam was constituted a separate county June 12, 1812. 
Although thus organized in 1683 it was only a county in name, — a 
district in the wilderness with boundaries upon paper; supposed to 
be uninhabited by white men ; and October 18, 1701, "having very few 
inhabitants," was provisionally annexed to Ulster county, where its 
freeholders were entitled to vote. It retained that connection until 
October 23, 1713, when having increased in population, a provincial 
act empowered the Justices of the Peace to issue warrants for an 
election to be held "at any time before the first Tuesday in Septem- 
ber next (1714), to make choice of one Free-holder to be supervisor, 
one Treasurer, two Assessors and two Collectors," for each ward. 
Although no records can be found of such election, it appears to have 
been held within the specified time, as evidenced by the following 
receipt, which names the collectors in the south ward.^ 

New Yorke 13 Augts: 1715. 
Then Received off John D: graeff & John Schouten Col- 
lectors off ye South ward In Dutchess County on ye Tenn 
thousand pound Tax the Summe off Seventeen pounds three 
pence halfe penny & Eight Shillings Eight pence halfe 
penny for ye Treasurers Salary I say Receved by ye hands 
of Mr. Richd: Saccatt. 

A. D. Peyster treasur 

Further indication of civil organization in the county at that period, 
is apparent from the fact that the name of Leonard Lewis is men- 
tioned in the civil list, as representing the County of Dutchess in the 
Fifteenth Assembly, 1713-1714; and Capt. Richard Sackett was ap- 
pointed the first county clerk in 1715. Lewis was a resident of Pough- 
keepsie and received the first appointment of the Court of Common 
Pleas in the county. Sackett, the pioneer settler of Amenia, lived in 
New York City until 1704. In 1711-12 he was assisting in the man- 
agement of the affairs of the Palatines at East Camp, and was prob- 
ably living in Amenia at the time he became county clerk. 

Records appear of elections held at Poughkeepsie the first Tuesday 
in A|)ril, 1718 and 1719, at which there was but one Supervisor chosen 

1. First Book of the Supervisors, 1718-1722. 



CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 59 

— Henry van Der Burgh — presumably for the Middle ward. Various 
other officers were elected for the three wards. In the election re- 
turns of April 5, 1720, the officers for each ward are thus given :^ 

Att an Ellection held at Pocapsing the first Tusday In April It being on the 
Sth of the Same Instant for the Year 1720 These are Officers Chosen for 
Dutchis County In Every Ward 

For the Middel Ward Pocapesing are Chousen 

Henry Van Der Burgh Supervisor 

Coll Leonard Lewis Treasurer 

Johannes Van Den Bogart Constable & Collector 

Johannes Van Kleck & Thomas Lewis Assessors. 

Fransoy Van Den Bogart Over Sere of the Kings High Way 

Peter Veley & Hendrick pels Survayors of the fencess 
For the South Ward the fSsh Kill are Chosen • 

James Hustey Constaple & Collector 

Johannes buys & Johannes Terbos Juner Assessors 

Johannes TerbosS Supervisor 

Robert Dingen Oversere of the Kings High Way 

Frans De Lange Oversere of the Way for pagquaick 

Gerrett Van Vledt & Jan Buys Survayors of the ffences 
For the North Ward are Chosen 

Jurie Priegel Constable & Collector 

Lourens Knickerbacker & Falentyn benner Assessors 

William Trophage Supervisor 

Tunnes Pier Oversere of the Kings High Way. 

William Trophage & Tunnes Pier Survayors of the ffences 

Ponnder for ofending beasts Jacob Ploeg 

Colonial act of June 24, 1719, legalized the division of the county 
into the Southern, Middle and Northern Wards and defined their 
boundaries. From the receipt previously quoted, and from the tax 
list given in a preceding chapter it is evident this division existed as 
early as 1715. The South Ward extended from the southern border 
of the county below the Highlands north to Wappinger Creek; the 
Middle Ward thence to Cline Sopus Island (Esopus Island opposite 
the central portion of the town of Hyde Park) and the North Ward 
thence to RoelaiF Jansens Kill. Although no eastern boundaries are 
stated, these wards probably extended to the Connecticut line. 

Each ward was entitled to one supervisor, chosen annually, of 
which the following is a complete list: 

1. First Book of the Supervisors, 1718-1722. 



60 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 





'■1720 


Johannes Terboss 


1729 


Jacobus Du Poyster 




1721 


Peter Du Boys 


1730 


do do 




1722 


Jacobus Swartwout 


1731 


do do 




1723 


do do 


1732 


James Hussey 


SOUTH. 


1724 


do do 


1733 


do do 




1725 


James Hussey 


1734 


do do 




1726 


Peter Du Boyes 


1735 


do do 




1727 


Jacobus Swartwout 


1736 


Cornelius Van Wyck 




1728 


Abraham Brinckorhoif 


1737 


do do 




1719 


Henry Van Der Burgh 


1729 


Isaac Titsoort 




1720 


do do do 


1730 


do do 




1721 


do do do 


1731 


do do 




J 723 


Barent Van Kleeck 


1732 


Frans Filkins 


^Tr\T>T f? 


1723 


do do 


1733 


do do 


l.l.UULdlU< 


1724 


Jacobus Van Den Bogert 


1734 


do do 




1725 


Johannes Van Kleeck 


1735 


do do 




1726 


Myndert Van Den Bogert 


1736 


do do 




1727 


Peter Parmantor 


1737 


do do 




1728 


Hendrick Pells 








-1720 


William Trophage 


1729 


Hendricus Heermanse 




1721 


do do 


1730 


do do 




1722 


Hendricus Beekman 


1731 


do do 




1723 


do do 


1732 


Barent Van Benthuysen 


NORTH' 


1724 


Barent Van Wagenen 


1733 


do do 




1725 


do do 


1734 


Hendricus Heermanse 




1726 


Barent Van Benthuysen 


1735 


do do 




1727 


Hendricus Heermanse 


1736 


do do 




1728 


do do 


1737 


do do 



By Colonial act of December 16, 1737, Dutchess county was divided 
into seven Precincts — designated Beekman, Crom Elbow, North, 
Poughkeepsie, Rhinebeck, Rombout and South, with municipal regu- 
lations similar to those of towns. Beekman's covered a tract nearly 
corresponding with the boundaries of that patent. Crom Elbow cov- 
ered a portion of the Great Nine Partners grant and continued its 
existence until 1762, when it was divided into the precincts of Char- 
lotte and Amenia. North comprised the Little Nine Partners tract, 
and in 1746 was designated North East after its extension across the 
Oblong. Poughkeepsie corresponded with the present town of that 
nam% Rhinebeck included the towns of Red Hook, Rhinebeck and 
the northern half of Hyde Park. Rombout comprised the territory 




S3 S 



s 
ft 



^ 


t; 




c 


o 






'^ 


en 


1— ( 
4> 






ffi 


> 




t; 


H 


jj 




c 
r! 


as 






o 


H 


-3 




c 


>5 


O 




O 


O 


«fH 




43 


J 


o 




-H 


1— 1 




CO 


=fH 


c 


uu 


O 


w 


o 

en 


I— ( 


>^ 


K 


-a 


c 


■w 
4» 


CO 




f) 


HH 


h 


rn 


n 


fe 


M) 


?3 

rl 


W 


!z 






-< 




1—1 


1— 1 








1-1 


& 


m 


. 


t3 


4) 


'a 


in 


O 


> 


1 


n 


"3 




C 

g 


S 


^ 




P3 




1—1 


S 


sw 






-H 


o 




I— 1 




s 




4-> 


T-l 


ii 




^ 


C 


r. 




o 


C8 


r^ 




^ 




P 






c 





ffl -A 



,iK 



CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 61 

of the Rombout patent; and South extended below the Highlands to 
the southern border of the county. 

A reorganization of South in 1772, created the precincts of Philipse, 
Frederickstown and South East within the present limits of Putnam 
county. Other divisions of the original precincts were North East, 
December 16, 1746, comprising the territory of the present towns 
of Milan, Pine Plains and North East; Pawling, set off from the east- 
ern half of Beekman's, December 31, 1768, including the present 
towns of Pawling and Dover; Charlotte, March 20, 1762, consist- 
ing of the western portion of the Great Nine Partners tract ; Amenia, 
March 20, 1762, consisting of nine of the easternmost lots of the Great 
Nine Partners tract and of that part of the Oblong between these lots 
and the Connecticut line. 

By the act of 1737 the inhabitants of the Precincts were required 
to elect annually supervisors, assessors, collectors, etc., but Precinct 
clerks were not authorized until 1741. They neglected, however, to 
report a record of elections, and in 1748, Arnout Viele, Justice of the 
Peace, holding Court of General Sessions at Poughkeepsie, "ordered 
that all and every precinct clerk in this county * » * * make 
due return of the election of their respective precincts of the officers 
chosen * * * * unto the clerk of the peace, under penalty of 
thirty shillings to be paid by every such precinct or town clerk omit- 
ting." Whether the clerks in all precincts complied with this order 
cannot be ascertained. The earher records, which undoubtedly would 
contain much of historical interest, have, through the frequent changes 
of officials and their removal from place to place, been lost or destroyed, 
and those records now in possession of the towns, with a few excep- 
tions, are fragmentary and disconnected. 

The first record of Precinct Officers in the County Clerk's office be- 
gins with the year 1754. Officers of Poughkeepsie Precinct are com- 
plete from 1742, and the record book is preserved in the Adriance 
Memorial Library. 

From the records of Supervisors' Meetings beginning with the year 
1738, a hst of the Supervisors who were present appears as follows: 

1738 Francis Filkin, Hendricus Heermanse, Francis de Lange, Isack Filkin, John 
Montross. 

1739 Johannes Van Kleeck, Hendricus Heermanse, John Montross, Isack Filkin, 
John Carman. 



62 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESSv 



1740 Henry Heermans, John Van Kleeck, John Montross, John Carman, Henry 
Filkin, Francis Nellson. 

1741 Henry Heermans, John "Van Kleeck, Francis Nellson, John Carman, Henry 
Filkin, John BrinckerhofF. 

1742 Henry Heermans, John Van Kleeck, Francis Nellson, John Carman, Henry 
Filkin, John Brinckerhoff. 

1743 John Van Kleeck, Henry Heermans, Henry Filkin, Francis Nellson, John 
BrinckerhofF, George Ellsworth. 

1744 John Van Kleeck, Francis Nellson, Henry Filkin, Jacob Rutsen, John 
Brinckerhoff, Thomas Barker. 

1745 John Van Kleeck, Henry Brinckerhoff, Samuel Field, Jacob Rutsen, Henry 
Filkin, Isaiah Ross, Thomas Barker. 

1746 John Van Kleeck, Henry Filkin, Samuel Field, Henry Ter Boss, Jacob Rut- 
sen, John Carman. 

1747 John Van Kleeck, Samuel Field, Henry Filkin, Henry Terboss, James Dun- 
can, Arnout Viele, Martin Hoffman. 

1748 John Van Kleeck, Henry Filkin, Samuel Field, James Dunean, Martin 
Hoffman, Arnout Viele. 

With the exception of Poughkeepsie and Rhinebeck Precincts, the 
supervisors for the years 1749, '50, '51, '52 and 53 cannot be given, as 
diligent search and inquiry fails to locate the "Fourth Book of the 
Supervisors" covering that period. The following list classifies the 
supervisors according to Precincts: 





RHINEBECK. 


1763— '65 


Caleb Smith 


1749— 'SI 


John Van Dense 


1766 


Elisha Colven 


I7S2— '56 


Gerrett Van Benthuysen 


1767- '69 


Andrus Bostwick 


1756— '58 


Petrus De Witt 


1770 


James Attwater 


1759- '60 


Gerret Van Benthuysen 


1771— '74 


Morris Graham 


1761 


Petrus De Witt 


1775— '76 


Israel Thompson 


1762 


Peter Van Benthuysen 


1777— '78 


Hugh Rea 


1763— '66 


Peter Ten Brook 


1779— '81 


Lewis Graham 


1767— '71 


John Van Ess 


1782 


Hugh Rea 


1772— '74 


James Smith 


1783 


Uriah Lawrence 


1775 


John Van Ness 


1784 


Lewis Graham 


1776— '80 


Peter De Witt 


1785— '87 


John White 


1781— '85 


Anthony Hoffman 




CROM ELBOW. 


1786— '87 


Peter Contine 


1754— '55 


Isaac Germond 




NORTH EAST. 


1756— '58 


William Doughty 


17S4r-'55 


Arnont Viele 


1759— '61 


Charles Crooke 


1756— '60 


James I. Ross 


Divided into Precincts of Amenii 


1761 • 


No record given 


and Charlotte, 1762. 


1762 


James I. Ross 







CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 



63 



AMENIA. 

1762 Capt. Stephen Hopkins 

1763 Edmund Perlee 
1764— '66 Stephen Hopkins 
1767 Edmund Perlee 
1768— '75 Ephraim Paine 
1776 Silas Marsh 
1777— '78 Roswell Hopkins 
1779— '80 Dr. John Chamberlain 
1781 Colbe Chamberlain 
1783— '83 Ephrlam Paine 

1784 — '86 Isaac Darrow 

1787 Barnabus Paine 

CHARLOTTE. 

1762— '67 Tobias Stoutenburgh 
1768— '70 James Smith 
1771 No record given 

1773 Lewis Barton 

1773 Cornelius Humfrey 

1774 Jonathan Lewis 

1775 Cornelius Humfrey 
1776— '80 James Smith 
1781— '82 James Talmage 
1783 No record given 
1784— '85 Isaac Bloom 

Divided into Precincts of Washington 
and Clinton, 1786. 

WASHINGTON. 

1786 James Talmage 

1787 No record given 

CLINTON. 

1786 Cornelius Humphrey 

1787 Richard Cantillon 

POUGHKEEPSIE. 
1742— '52 John Van Kleeck 
1753— '58 Lawrence Van Kleeck 

1759 Capt. Teimis Tappen 

1760 Gabriel H. Ludlow 
1761— '67 Leonard Van Kleeck 

1768 Richard Snedeker 

1769 Gilbert Livingston 
1770— '71 Richard Snedeker 
1772_'76 Zephaniah Piatt 
1777_'79 Samuel Dodge 



1780— '82 


John Bailey, Junr. 


1783 


Peter Tappen 


1784 


Gilbert Livingston 


1785 


Lewis Du Boice 


1786 


Lewis Duboys 


1787 


John Van Kleeck 




BEEKMAN. 


1754— '58 


John Carman 


1759— '60 


No record given 


1761— '62 


Bartholomew Noxon 


1763 


William Humfrey 


1764— '69 


Bartholomew Noxon 


1770— '74 


Joshua Carman 


1775— '79 


James Van Der Burgh 


1780— '83 


Jonathan Dennis 


1784— '86 


Ebenezer Cary 


1787 


Jonathan Dennis 



ROMBOUT. 

1754 — '55 Thomas Langdon 

1756— '58 Dirck BrinckerhofF 

1759 — '60 No record given 

1761— '67 Dirck Brinckerhoff 

1768 — ^'73 Henry Rosekrans, Junr. 

1774 — '75 Jacobus Swartwout 

1776 Daniel Ter Boss, 

1777— '79 Abraham Brinckerhoff 

1780 Martin WUsie 

1781— '86 Abraham Brinckerhoff 

1787 William B. Alger 

SOUTHERN. 
1754— '56 Samuel Fields 
1757- '59 Petrus Du Boys 
1760— '62 PhiUp PhiUpse 
1763— '65 Beverly Robinson 
1766 Philip Philipse 

1767— '69 Beverly Robinson 
1770— '71 TertuUus Dickenson 
Divided into Philipse, Fredricksburgh, 
and Southeast in 1772. 

PHILIPSE. 

1772 Beverly Robinson 

1773 Moses Dusenberry 

1774 Beverly Robinson 



64 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



177S 


Joshua Nellson 


1773 


Joseph Crane, Jr. 


1776— '85 


No record given 


1774— '78 


John Field 


1786 


George Lane 


1779— '80 


William Mott 


1787 


John Hyalt 


1781 


Joseph Crane 


FREDRICKSBURGH. 

1772— '75 TertnUus Dickenson 
1776— '78 Henry Ludington 
1779— 'S4 Ruben Ferris 


1782 
1783— '87 

1770 


Isaac Crosby 
Joseph Crane 

PAWLING. 
Nathan Pearce 


1785 


No record given 


1771— '73 


John Kane 


1786 


Capt. John Drake 


1774— '75 


Andrew Morehouse 


1787 


Ruben Ferris 


1776— '80 


Jeremiah French 




SOUTH EAST. 


1781— '83 
1783— '86 


Isaac Talman 
William Pearse 


1773 


No record given 


1787 


No record given 



The following assessment table shows the relative wealth of pre- 
cincts at different periods: 



PRECINCTS. 


1747 


1757 


1767 


1771 


Southern 


£ 742 


£ 813 


£1,113 


£1,377 


Rombout 


1,970 


2,441 


3,027 


1,888 


Beekman 


931 


1,490 


1,834 


786 


Poughkeepsie 


895 


933 


801 


808 


Crom Elbow 


891 


2,175 






Charlotte 






1,807 


1,908 


Amenia 






840 


816 


Rhinebeck 


2,366 


2,893 


3,303 


1,971 


North East 


106 


436 


485 


547 


Pawlings 








923 


Total 


7,791 


11,180 


11,109 


11,024 



A general organization act passed March 7, 1788, divided the State 
into fourteen counties, which were subdivided into townships instead of 
Precincts. Dutchess then comprised the following towns: Amenia, 
Beekman, Clinton, (formed March 13, 1786, from portions of Char- 
lotte and Rhinebeck Precincts) Fishkill, North East, Pawling, Pough- 
keepsie, Rhinebeck and Washington. The towns of Kent, Philipstown 
and South East, now in Putnam county, were also qrected by this act. 
Towns were formed by the Legislature until 1849, when power was 
given to the several Boards of Supervisors (except in New York 
County) to divide or erect new towns when such division does not place 



CIVIL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIVISIONS. 65 

parts of the same town in more than one assembly district. Towns 
'erected subsequent to the general organization act are: Stanford, 
March 12, 1793; Carmel and Patterson (now in Putnam) March 17, 
1796; Dover February 20, 1807; Red Hook, June 2, 1812; Milan, 
March 10, 1818; Hyde Park, January 20, 1821; Pleasant Valley, 
January 26, 1821 ; La Grange (formerly Freedom) February 9, 
1821; Pine Plains, March 26, 1823; Union Vale, March 1, 1827; 
East Fishkill, November 29, 1849; W^appinger, May 20, 1875. A 
list of Town Supervisors will be found in connection with the various 
town histories. 

The construction of a county house and prison in Dutchess county 
was authorized by an act of the General Assembly passed July 21, 
1715. It directed the freeholders to elect two ^of their number to 
supervise its erection at such "place as to them shall be meet and con- 
venient, for the most ease and benefit of the Inhabitants of the said 
County." It further directed that a tax be levied on the county not to 
exceed "the Sum of Two hundred and fifty Ounces of good Mexico, 
PiUar or Sevill Plate," to defray the expense ; and that the building be 
constructed "within two years after the publication thereof." Ap- 
parently no action was taken by the freeholders at that time, and a 
second act passed May 27, 1717, directed the construction and com- 
pletion of the building within three years "at or near the most con- 
venient place at Poughkeepsie." Pursuant to the latter act the free- 
holders met at Poughkeepsie, June 22, 1717, near the house of Leon- 
ard Lewis, and chose "by plurallety of Voyses Capt. Bareendt Van 
Kleeck & Mr. Jacobes Van Den Bogert Tow Be the Supervisors and 
Direcktors for building & finisching the County house and presin att 
pochkeepsen." Subsequent records^ indicate that the first court house 
and jail were completed within the required time, and not in 1745 as 
stated in French's State Gazetteer. Taxes were collected in 1718 and 
1720 towards payment of the cost of this building, and the report of 
County proceedings in 1722, state that meetings were held in the court 
house. Colonial act passed December 17, 1743, authorized "the 
Justices of the Peace in Dutchess County to build a Court House & 
Goal or to enlarge and Repair the old one." This building was erected 
in 1746 ; the assessment of $18,000 being distributed among the vari- 

1. First and Second Books of the Supervisors and Assessors. 



66 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ous precincts according to their population and valuation. The pre- 
cinct of Rhinebeck and Rombout paid one half of this assessment. The 
money was received and disbursed by Mr. Henry Livingston, chief of 
the Board of Commissioners, appointed to supervise its construction. 
It was in this Structure that the Legislature frequently held Sessions 
during the Revolution. Early in 1785 the building was destroyed 
by fire, and April 4th the Sheriff was directed to transfer his prisoners 
to the Ulster county jail. April ll, 1785, the sum of £1^500 was ap- 
propriated for its reconstructi6n,,and in 1786 arid 1787 a further tax 
amounting to £3,300, was levied. 

In 1788 the Legislature resumed its session in the new Court House. 
This building was also doomed to destruction by fire, which originated 
in one of : the lower apartments of. the jail, the night of September 
35th, 1806. Despite these fires, it is noteworthy that the public docu- 
ments were saved. Prepafa^tions for rebuilding were soon begun, and 
by act of March 24j 1809, $12,000 was set aside for that purpose; 
this sum was supplemented in 1810 by an additional $13,000. The 
building was erected on the same site, although many favored rebuild- 
ing in a new location. This court house and jail was succeeded in 
1902, ,by;the construction of the present commodious building, which 
the growth of the county necessitated. 

On the east side of this edifice a tablet was erected, in 1904), by the 
Daughters of theAmerican Revolution, in commemoration of the con- 
stitutionar convention of 1788, inscribed as follows: 

THE PEOPLE 

Of The 

STATE OF NEW YORK 

By Their Convention 

Assembled In a Former 

Court House 

Which Stood 

On This Ground 

RATIFIED 

The Constitution 

Of The 

United States of America 

July 36, A. D. 1788. 

Asi account of this most important event in the history of the State 
of New York, will be found in Chapter XII. 




GEN. JOHN HENRY KETCHAM. 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



67 



CHAPTER VII. 

DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 

1713-1909. 



Represeittatives iir Colonial Assembly, 

1713-'14 Leonard Lewis 1737-'43 

1715 Leonard Lewis 

Baltus Van Kleeck 174,3-'S1 

1716-'26 Leonard Lewis 

Baltus Van Kleeck 1752-'S8 

Johannis Terbosch 

Henry Beekman 17S9-'68 

1726-'37 Henry Beekman 

Johannis Van Kleeck 1768-'7S 



Henry Beekman 
Jacobus TerBoss 
Henry ^eekman 
Johannis Tappen 
Henry Beekman 
Henry Filkin 
Robert Livingston 
Henry Livingston 
Leonard Van Kleeck 
Dirck Brinckerhoff 



COUKCIL OF THE CoLOlfT OF NeW YobK. 

One member from Dutchess, John Johnson, 1716-1722. 
Delegates to PaoviifCLAL Conventiok, 177S. 

Egbert Benson, Morris Graham, Robert R. Livingston. 
Deputies to Pboviitcial Congbesses. . 



First Congress, 177S. 
Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Anthony Hoffman 
Zephaniah Piatt 
Richard Montgomerie 
Ephraim Paine 
Gilbert Livingston 
Jonathan Landon X 
Gysbert Schenck r 
Melancton Smith 
Nathaniel Sackett 

Second Congress, 177S-'76. 
Petrus Ten Broeck 
Beverly Robinson 
Cornelius Humphreys 
Henry Schenck ■^ 
Gilbert Livingston 



John Kaine 
Jacob Everson 
Morris Graham 
Robert G. Livingston 
Third Congress, 1776. 
Robert R. Livingstdn 
James Livingston 
Gilbert Livingston 
Jonathan Landon 
Morris Graham 
Henry Schenck ^ 
Theodorus Van Wyck 
John Schenck "^ 
Anthony Hoffman 
Paul Schenck / 
Nathaniel Sackett 



Cornelius Humphreys 
Zephaniah Piatt 
James Vanderburgh 
Benjamin Delavergne 
John Field 
Fourth Congress, 177e-'77. 
Zephaniah Piatt 
Nathaniel Sackett 
Gilbert Civingston 
Doctor Crane 
Henry Schenck 
James Livingston 
John Schenck / 
Anthony Hoffman 
Robert R. Livingston 
Jonathan Landon 



68 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

First Council of Safety. 

May to September, 1777, Zephaniah Piatt. 

Second Cousrcii, or Safety. 

October 8, 1777, to January 7, 1778, Egbert Benson, Jonathan Landon. 

Council of Appointment. 

Zephaniah Piatt, appointed October 17, 1778, re-appointed October 25, 1781. 
Ephraim Paine, September 11, 1780.1 Jacobus Swartwout, January 31, 1784, 
re-appointed January 19, 1786. Anthony Hoffman, January 18, 17S8. Thomas 
Tillotson, January 14, 1791. Abraham SchencKf January 7, 1796. Abraham 
Adriance, February 7, 1804. Robert Williams, January 31, 1810. Peter R. 
Livingston, January 31, 1810. Stephen Barnum, February 3, 1819. 

FEDERAL OFFICERS. 
Sechetahies of War. 

John Armstrong, appointed by President MadisoA 1813; Daniel S. Lamont, 

appointed by President Cleveland 1893. 
Secretaries op the Navt. 

Smith Thompson, appointed November 9, 1818. 

James K. Paulding, appointed June 35, 1838. 

VlCE-PfiESmENT or THE UNITED StATES. 

Levi 'P. Morton, 1889-1893. 

Judge op the Supreme Court op the United States. 
Smith Thompson, appointed September 21, 1833. 

Judge of the United States Circuit Court. 

Egbert Benson, appointed February 30, 1804. 

Minister Plenipotentiary to France. 

John Armstrong, appointed June 30, 1804. 

Commissioner of the District of Columbia. 

John Henry Ketcham, appointed by President Grant 1874-1877. 

United States Senators. 

John Armstrong, appointed November, 1800. Theodorus Bailey, 1803. Nathan- 
iel P. Tallmadge, 1833, re-appointed 1840. 

Representatives in Congress. 

1789-'93 Egbert Benson 1817-'19 James TaUmadge, Jr. 

1793-'97 Theodorus Bailey 1819-'21 RandaU S. Street 

1797-'99 David Brooks 1821-'2S WilUam W. Van Wyek 

1799-'03 Theodorus Bailey 1835-'27 Bartow White 

1803-'— Isaac Bloom 1827-'29 Thomas Taber 

1803-'09 Daniel C. Verplancka 1839-'31 Abraham Bockee 

1809-'13 James Bmott 1831-'33 Edward H. Pendleton 

1813-'15 Thomas J. Oakley 1833-'37 Abraham Bockee 

•1815-'17 Abraham H. Schenck^ 1837-'39 Obadiah Titus 

1. Vacated by expulsion from the Senate, Marcb 15, 1781. 

2. Blected October 8, vice Bloom, deceased. 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 69 

1839-'41 Charles Johnson 1863-'65 Homer A. Nelson 

1841-'4S Richard D. Davis 186S-'73 John H. Ketcham 

184,S-'4,7 William W. Woodruff ].873-'7T John O, Whitehouse 

18S1-'S1 Gilbert Dean 1877-'91 John H. Ketcham 

1854-'S5 James Teller 1897-'05 John H. Ketcham 

18S7-'S9 John Thompson 1906-'08 Samuel P. McMillan 

1861-'63 Stephen Baker 1909-'— Hamilton Fish 

STATE OFFICERS. 

JtrDOE OP THE Court of Appeals. 

Charles H. Ruggles, elected June 7, 1847, re-elected November 8, 18S3. 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Smith Thompson, appointed February 3, 1814. 
Puisne Justices op the Supreme Court. 

Morgan Lewis, appointed December 24, 1792; Egbert Benson, appointed Janu- 
ary 39, 1794; Smith Thompson, appointed January 8, li03. 
Circuit Judges (Secoxtd Circuit). 

James Emott, appointed February 21, 1827; Charles H. Ruggles, appointed 

appointed March 9, 1831; Seward Barculo, appointed April 4, 1846. 
Justice of the General Term of the Supreme Court. 

Joseph F. Barnard (Second Dept.), appointed December 25, 1870. 
Justices of the Supreme Court. 

Seward Barculo, elected June 7, 1847; Gilbert Dean, appointed June 26, 18S4; 

James Emott, elected November 6, 1855; Joseph F. Barnard, elected November 

3, 1863, re-elected 1871 and 1885, retired 1893; Joseph Morschauser, elected 

1906, term expires 1920. 
Governors. 

Morgan Lewis, elected April 1804; Levi P. Morton, elected November 6, 1894, 
Lieutenant-Governobs. 

James Tallmadge, elected November 1, 1834; Peter R. Livingston, elected 

February 16, 1828; Lewis Stuyvesant Chanler, elected November 6, 1906. 
Adjutant General op the State. 

J. WatiSs de Peyster, appointed January 1, 1855. 
Secretaries of State. 

Thomas Tillotson, appointed August 10, 1801, re-appointed February 16, 1807; 

Robert R. Tillotson, appointed February 12, 1816; Homer A. Nelson, elected 

November 5, 1867. 
Treasurers of the State. 

Joseph Howland, elected November 5, 1865; James Mackin, elected November 

6, 1877. 
Attorneys-General. 

Egbert Benson, appointed May 8, 1777; Morgan Lewis, elected November 8, 

1791; Thomas J. Oakley, elected July 8, 1819. 



70 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



State Tax Cosimibsiod'ebs. 

James L. WiUiams, appointed April 18, 1883; William H. Wood, appointed 
January 10, 1893; Martin Heermance, appointed January 20, 1896. 

Caxal Commissioners. 

James Hooker, appointed February 8, 1842. 

Fbisos' Inspector. 

James Teller, appointed April 1, 1811, re-appointed March 7, 1815 and Feb- 
ruary 24, 1821. 

Board of Regents. 

First Board, Anthony Hoffman, Cornelius Humphrey; Second Board, Gilbert 
Livingston; under system adopted 1787, Smith Thompson, appointed March 
13, 1813. 

Commissioners State Board of Charities. 

Harvey G. Eastman, appointed June 17, 1867, re-appointed March 19, 1873; 
James Roosevelt, appointed February 12, 1879; Sarah M. Carpenter, appointed 
January 21, 1880. 

Ptrntic Service Commissioner. 

James E. Sague, appointed 1907; re-appointed 1909. 

DELEGATES TO STATE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS. 

1788 — Jonathan Atkins, John De Witt, Gilbert Livingston, Zephaniah Piatt, Mel- 

ancton Smith, Jacobus Swartwout, Ezra Thompson.^ 
1801 — Jonathan Akin, Isaac Bloom, Caleb Hazen, Peter Huested, Edmund Farlee, 
Smith Thompson, Joseph Thorn, John Van Benthuysen, .Theodorus Van 
Wyck, Ithamer Weed. 
1821 — EUsha Barlow, Isaac Hunting, Peter R. Livingston, Abrahai^ H. Schenck, 

James Tallmadge. 
1846 — Peter K. DuBois, Charles H. Ruggles, James TaUmadge. 
1867— B. Piatt Carpenter, Wilson B. Sheldon, Homer A. Nelson.2 
1894--Charles W. H. Arnold. 
State Senators. 

1777-'79 Jonathan Landon 

1777-'83 Zephaniah Piatt 

1779-'81 Ephraim Paine 

1782-'8S Ephraim Paine 

1784-'95 Jacobus Swartvifout 

1787-'89 Cornelius Humfrey 

1788-'90 Anthony Hoffman 

1791-'99 Thomas Tillotson' 

1796-'99 Abraham Schenck 

1798-'01 Peter Cantine, Jr. 



1800-'02 Isaac Bloom 

1801-'02 David Van Ness 

1803-'06 Abraham Adriance 

1804-'07 Robert Johnston 

1808-'ll Robert Williams 

1811-'1S Morgan Lewis 

1812-'1S William M. Taber 

1816-'22 Peter R. Livingston 

1818-'21 Stephen Barnum 

1826-'29 Peter R. Livingston 



1." Atkins and Swartwout voted against the Constitution. Thompson did not vote. 
2. Dele(?ate-at-Iarge. 




5 (b 



Cu^iaJIo^ 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



71 



1830-'33 Nathaniel P. Tallmadge 

1834-'37 Leonard Maison 

1838-'41 Henry A. Livingston 

1842-'4S Abraham Bockee 

1848-'49 Alexander J. Coffin 

18S2-'S3 John H. Otis 

1856-'S7 William Kelly 

1860-'61 John H. Ketcham 

1864-'6S John B. Dutcher 



1868-'69 Abiah W. Pahner 

1870-'71 George Morgan 

1873-'73 Abiah W. Palmer 

1876-'77 B. Piatt Carpenter 

1882-'83 Homer A. Nelson 

1884-'85 Thomas Newbold 

1892-'93 Edward B. Osborne 

1909-'— John F. Schlosser 



MEMBERS OP ASSEMBLY. 



1777-'78 Egbert Benson 

Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Anthony Hoffman 
Gilbert Livingston 
Andrew Moorhouse 
John Schenck 
Jacobus Swartwbut 

1778-'79 Egbert Benson 

Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Joseph Crane, Jr. 
Samuel Dodge 
Anthony Hoffman 
Andrew Moorhouse 
Jacobus Swartwout 

1779-'80 Egbert Benson 

Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Annanias Cooper 
Samuel Dodge 
Henry Ludenton 
Brinton Paine 
Nathaniel Sackett 

1780-'81 Egbert Benson 
Ebenezer Cary 
Samuel Dodge 
Henry Ludenton 
Brinton Paine 
Guisbert Schenck 
Jacobus Swartwout 

1781-'82 Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Jonathan Dennis 
Cornelius Humfrey 
Ebenezer Husted 
Abraham Paine 
Thomas Storm 
Jacobus Swartwout 



1782-'83 Benjamin Birdsall 
Jonathan Dennis 
Corneliuls Humfrey 
Ebenezer Husted 
Matthew Patterson 
Thomas Storm 
Jacobus Swartwout 

1784 Dirck Brinckerhoff 

Jonathan Dennis 
Anthony Hoffman 
Cornelius Humfrey 
Ebenezer Husted 
Matthew Patterson 
Thomas Storm 

1784-'85 Adam Brinckerhoff 
Dirck Brinckerhoff 
Ebenezer Cary 
Cornelius Humfrey 
Brinton Paine 
Matthew Patterson 
James Tallmadge 

1786 Dirck Brinckerhoff 
John De Witt 
Lewis Duboys 
Jacob Griffin 
Henry Ludenton 
Brinton Paine 
Matthew Patterson 

1787 Dirck Brinckerhoff 
John De Witt, Jr. 
Lewis Duboys 
Jacob Griffin 
Henry Ludenton 
Brinton Paine 
Matthew Patterson 



72 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1788 Egbert Benson 

Isaac Bloom 
Peter Cantine, Jr. 
John De Witt, Jr. 
Morris Graham 
Matthew Patterson 
Thomas Tillotson 

1788-'89 Jonathan Akin 

Samuel A. Barker 
Isaac Bloom 
John De Witt 
Jacob Griffin 
Gilbert Livingston 
Matthew Patterson 

1789-'90 Samuel A. Barker 
Isaac Bloom 
Joseph Crane, Jr. 
Jacob Griffin 
Ebenezer Husted 
Isaac J. Talman 
Thomas Tillotson 

1791 Jonathan Akin 

Samuel A. Barker 
Isaac Bloom 
James Kent 
Henry Schenck 
James Tallmadge 
David Van Ness 

179S Jonathan Akin 

Samual A. Barker 
Isaac Bloom 
Daniel Graham 
Morgan Lewis 
Matthew Patterson 
James Tallmadge 

1792-'93 Jonathan Akin 
Josiah Holly 
James Kent 
Ebenezer Mott 
Matthew Patterson 
Barnabas Payen 
WUliam Raddift 

1794 Samuel A. Barker 

James Bockee 
David Brooks 



John De Witt 
Jesse Oakley 
Jacob Radclift 
Isaac Van Wyck 

1795 Samuel A. Barker 
Jacob Brockee 
David Brooks 
Jesse Oakley 
Jacob Radclift 
Jacob Smith 
Isaac Van Wyck 

1796 David Brooks 
Richard Davis 
Jesse Oakley 
Jacob Smith 
Solomon Sutherland 
Jesse Thompson 
Isaac Van Wyck 

1796-'97 Samuel A. Barker 
Jacob Bockee 
Joseph Crane, Jr. 
Richard Davis 
Jesse Oakley 
William Pearce 
Jacob Smith 
Jesse Thompson 
William B. Verplanck 
William Wheeler 

1798 WilUam Barker 

Lemuel Clift 
Luther Holly 
Joseph Potter 
Philip J. Schuyler 
Jacob Smith 
John Thomas 
Jesse Thompson 
Samuel Towner 
WUliam B. Verplanck 

1798-'99 Abraham Adriance 
Lemuel Clift 
Henry Dodge 
Robert Johnston 
Ebenezer Mott 
William Pearce 
Piatt Smith 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



73 



Jonathan Soule 

William Taber 

John van Benthuysen 
1800 Abraham Adriance 

William Barker 

William Emott 

Joseph C. Field 

Robert Johnston 

Ebenezer Mott 

Isaac Sherwood 

William Taber 

Samuel Towner 

John Van Benthuysen 
1800-'01 Abraham Adriance 

Benjamin Akin 

EUsha Barlow 

Nichtdas H. Emlgh 

Robert Johnston 

Ebenezer Mott 

Zalman Sanford 

Isaac Sherwood 

Smith Thompson 

John M. Thurston 
1803 Abraham Adriance 

Benjamin Akin 

Theodorus Bailey 

Elisha Barlow 

Nicholas H. Emigh 

Harry Garrison 

Alexander Spencer 

John Thompson 

John M. Thurston 

1803 Joseph C. Field 
John Jewett 
John Martin 
Thomas Mitchell 
Philip Spenoer, Jr. 
Theodorus R. Van Wyck 
James Winchell 

1804 Joseph E. HafF 
John Martin 
Thomas Mitchell 
Zaimon Sanford 
Wiliam Taber 
Benajah Thompson 
Theo. R. Van Wyck 



1804-'05 Job Crawford 
Isaac Hunting 
John Patterson 
tCbraham H. Schenck 
Isaac Sherwood 
John Van Benthuysen 
John M. Thurston 

1806 Barnabas Carver 
Joseph C. Field 
Benjamin Herrick 

Abraham H. Schenck 
Jno. Van Benthuysen 
William D. Williams 
Veniah Wooley 

1807 John Haight 
Aaron Hazen 
Theron*Rudd 
John Storm 

TobiaS L. Stoutenburgh 
Martin E. Winchel 
Veniah Wooley 

1808 Albro Akin 
Devoue Bailey 
George Casey 
Cyrenus Crosby 
John Haight 

Tobias L. Stoutenburgh 
Martin E. Winchel 
1808-'09 Samuel A. Barker 
George Bloom 
Derick A. Brinckerhoff 
Ebenezer Haight 
Benajah Thompson 
Jesse. Thompson, 

1810 David Brooks 
Lemuel Clift 
Koert Dubois 
Ebenezer Haight 
Alexander Neely 
Isaac Van Wyck 

1811 Samuel A. Barker 
Lemuel Clift 
Koert Dubois 
Alexander Neely 
Shadrach Sherman 
Isaac Van Wyck 



74 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1813 Joseph Arnold 
Cyrus Benjamin 
Isaac Bryan 
Henry Dodge 
John Warren 
Robert Weeks 

1812-'13 Joseph Arnold 
John Beadle 
Cyrus Benjamin 
Isaac Bryan 
Henry Dodge 
John Warren 

1814 William A. Duer 
James Emott 
Samuel Mott 
Joseph Potter 
Jesse Thompson 

1814-'15 John Beadle 
Joel Benton 
William A. Duer 
James Emott 
James Grant 

1816 William A. Duer 

Zachariah HofPman 
Thomas J. Oakley 
Isaac Smith 
John B. Van Wyck 

1816-'17 Joel Benton 

WUliam A. Duer 
James Emott 
Nathaniel Pendleton 
Abiel Sherman 

1818 Benjamin Haxton 
Thomas J. Oakley 
Andrew Pray 
Jehiel Sackett 
John W. Wheeler 

1819 John Beadle 
James Ketchum 
Thomas J. Oakley 
Jesse Thompson 
Dayid Tomilinson 

1830 Abraham Bockee 

Jacob Doughty 
Matthew Mesier 
Thomas J. Oakley 



John W. Wheeler 

1830-'21 Albro Akin 

Benjamin H. Conklin 
Coert Dubois 
Israel Harris 
Joseph I. Jackson 

1833 John Cox 

Daniel Northrup 
Philo Buggies 
Benjamin Sherman 
George Vandenburgh 

1833 Wheeler Gilbert 
Prince Hoag 

Peter R. Livingston 
Samuel M. Thurston 

1834 John Klapp 
Alfred S. Pell 
James Tallmadge 
Gilbert Thome 

1835 Eli Angevine 

John Armstrong, Jr. 
Enos Hopkins 
Gilbert Thome 

1836 Isaac R. Adriance 
Daniel D. Akin 
Martin Lawrence 
Thomas Tabor 

1837 Egbert Cary 
Jacob C. Elmendorf 
Samuel B. Halsey 
Henry A. Livingston 

1838 Taber Belding 
Francis A. Livingston 
George W. Slocum 
Nathan P. Tallmadge 

1839 Elijah Baker, Jr. 
Stoddard Judd 
Tobias Teller 
Stephen D. Van Wyck 

1830 James Hughson 
George P. Oakley 
Jacob Van Ness 
Philo M. Winchell 

1831 Joel Benton 
Samuel B. Halsey' 
William Hooker 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



75 



]832 



1833 



1834 



1835 



1836 



1837 



1838 



1839 



1840 



1841 



1843 



1844 



184S 



John E. Townsend 




Robert Coffin 




Eli Hamblin 


1846 


Michael S. Martin 




Israel Shadbolt 




Daniel D. Akin 


1847 


Joel Brown 




Henry Conklin 




George LambSrt 


1848 1st 


Theo. V. W. Anthony 


2d 


Wm. H. Bostwick 


3d 


Henry Conklin 


1849 list 


James Mabbett 


3d 


Theodore V. W. Anthony 


3d 


David BarneJs, Jr. 


1850 1st 


Stoddard Jndd 


2d 


Stephen Thorn 


3d 


Abijah Benedict 


1851 1st 


Cornelius H. Cornell 


3d 


WiUiam Eno 


3d 


Stoddard Judd 


1852 1st 


Taber Belding 


3d 


John R. Myer 


3d 


David Sheldon 


1853 1st 


Cornelius Dubois 


2d 


Freeborn Garretson 


3d 


Jacob Sisson 


1854 1st 


Henry Conklin 


3d 


Jacob Sisson 


3d 


Daniel Toffey 


1855 1st 


Amos Bryan 


3d 


Henry Conklin 


3d 


Daniel Toffey 


1856 1st 


Jonathan Akin 


3d 


Edmund Elmendorf 


3d 


John Thompson 


1857 1st 


Peter K. Dubois 


3d 


John M. Ketchara 


3d 


Richard C. Van Wyck 


1858 1st 


Gilbert Bentley 


3d 


John Elseffer 


1859 1st 


John M. Ketcham 


2d 


Alexander H. Coffin 


1860 1st 


John K. Mead 


2d 


Ambrose L. Pinney 


1861 1st 


Epenetus Crosby 


2d 



Freeborn Garretson 
Walter Sherman 
Elnathan Haxton 
George T. Pierce 
Daniel Sherwood 
Epenetus Crosby 
Walter Sherman 
Aves I. Vanderbilt 
Edgar Vincent 
David Collins, Jr. 
James Hammond 
Edgar Vincent 
Wesley Butts 
James Hammond 
Charles Robinson 
Minor^C. Story 
Stephen Haight 
Charleis Robinson 
Howland R. Sherman 
William H. FeDer 
John S. Emans 
John M. Keese 
Augustus Martin 
John S. Emans 
James H. Weeks 
Augustus Martin 
Peter P. Montfoort 
George W. Sterling 
Wm. H. Bostwick 
Albert Emans 
Joseph E. Allen 
Ambrose Wager 
John H. Ketcham 
Daniel O. Ward 
Jacob B. Carpenter 
John H. Ketcham 
Franklin Dudley 
Cornelius N. Campbell 
Albert Emans 
Ambrose Wager 
James Mackin 
Samuel J. Farnum 
Abiah W. Palmer 
Richard J. Garretson 
John B. Dutcher 
Samuel J. Farnum 



76 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1862 1st 
3d 

1863 1st 
3d 

1864 1st 
3d 

1865 1st 
3d 

1866 1st 
3d 

1867 Ist 
3d 

1868 1st 
2d 

1869 1st 
3d 

1870 1st 
3d 

1871 1st 
2d 

1872 1st 
2d 

1873 1st 
2d 

1874 1st 
3d 

1875 1st 
3d 

1876 1st 
2d 

1877 1st 
2d 

1878 1st 
2d 

1879 1st 
2d 

1880 1st 
3d 

1881 1st 
3d 

1882 1st 
3d 

1883 1st 

3d 

1884 Isl; 



John B. Dutcher 


1885 1st 


Edmund Green 


2d 


Luther S. Dutcher 


1886 1st 


Joseph C. Doughty- 


2d 


James Howard 


1887 1st 


John N. Cramer 


2d 


James Howard 


1888 1st 


Mark D. Wilber 


2d 


Abiah W. Palmer 


1889 1st 


Mark D. Wilber 


3d 


Joshua Smith 


1890 1st 


George C. Gibbs 


3d 


Augustus A. Brush-. 


1891 1st 


Alfred T. Ackert. 


3d 


David R. Gould 


1893 1st 


Wm. W. Hegeman 


3d 


James A. Seward 


1893 1st 


David H. Mulford 


3d 


Jam^s A. Seward 


1894 list 


David H. Mulford 


2d 


Edward M. Goring 


1895 1st 


Harvey G.. Eastman 


2d 


James Mackin 


1896 1st 


Jacob B. Carpenter 


2d 


James Mackin 


1897 1st 


Harvey G. Eastman 


3d 


James Mackin 


1898 1st 


Benjamin S. Broas 


2d 


Thomas Hammond 


1899 1st 


De Witt Webb 


2d 


Thomas 'Hammond 


1900 1st 


De Witt Webb 


3d 


Obed Wheeler 


1901 1st 


Peter Hulme 


3d 


Obed Wheeler 


1902 1st 


Cornelius Pitcher 


2d 


Isaac S. Carpenter 


1903 1st 


Cornelius Pitcher 


2d 


Isaac S. Carpenter 


1904 Ist 


James E. Dutcher 


3d 


Alfred Bonney 


1905 1st 


John O'Brien 


2d 


Storm Emans 


1906 1st 


Edgar A. Briggs 


2d 


James Kent, Jr. 


1907 1st 


Edward B. Osborne 


2d 



Joseph H. Storm 
Edward B. Osborne 
Joseph H. Storm 
John I. Piatt 
Willard H. Mase 
John I. Piatt 
Willard H. Maise 
John I. Piatt 
WiUard H. Mase 
Johnston L. De Peyster 
Willard H. Mase 
Johnston L. De Peyster 
Willard H. Mase 
Edward B. Osborne 
Obed Wheeler 
John A. Vandewater 
E. H. Thompson 
John A. Vandewater 
E. H. Thompson 
Augustus B. Gray 
E. H. Thompson 
Augustus B. Gray 
John A. Hanna 
Augustus B. Gray 
John A. Hanna 
Augustus B. Gray 
John A. Hanna 
William A. Tripp 
John T. Smith 
William A. Tripp 
John T. Smith 
William A. Tripp 
John T. Smith 
Francis G. Landon 
John T. Smith 
Francis G. Landon 
John T. Smith 
Francis G. Landon 
John T. Smith 
Robert W. Chanler 
John T. Smith 
Augustus B. Gray 
Myron Smith 
Augustus B. Gray 
Myron Smith 
Fred. Northrup 




C5 ^^COx^^^^-'^^^^^^i^le.^.-.^^ . 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



77 



19081st : 


Myroft Smith 


1909 1st 


Myron Smith 


3d 


Fred. Northrup 


2d 


Everett H. Travis 




COUNTY 


OFFICERS. 


Judges. 




1813 


Philo Ruggles 


1716 


Leonard Lewis 


1815 


Derrick B. Stockholm 


1739 


Jacob Terboss 


1819 


John Brush 


1749 


Martinus Hoffman 


1831 


Ebenezer Nye 


17SS 


Jacobus Terboss 


1838 


James Hooker 


1769 


Beverly Robinson 


1840 


Robert Wilkinson 


1778 


Bphraim Paine 


1844 


Virgil D. Bonesteel 


1781 


Zephaniah Flatt 


1847 


John P. H. Tallman 


1795 


David Brooks 


1855 


Edgar Thorn 


1807 


John Johnstone 


1860 


Peter Dorland 


1817 


James Emott 


1866 


Milton A. Fowler 


1823 


Maturin Livingston 


1873 


Pet^ Dorland 


1838 


Daniel C. Ver Planck 


1878 


Collins Sheldon 


1830 


Edmund H. Pendleton 


1884 


Horace D. Hufcut 


1840 


Joseph I. Jackson 


1890 


Cyrenus P. Dorland 


1845 


Seward Barculo 


1896 


Cyrenus P. Dorland 


1846 


Abraham Bockee 


1903 


Willet E. Hoysradt 


1846 


John Rowleyi 


1908 


Charles A. Hopkins 


1847 


John Rowley 


DiSTHICT 


Attobhets. 


1851 


lEgbert Q. Eldridge 


1796 


Jacob Radcliff 


1855 


Homer A. Nelson 


1801 


Smith Thompson 


1859 


Homer A. Nelson 


1810 


Randall S. Street 


1863 


Charles Wheaton^ 


1813 


Randall S^ Street 


1866 


Allard Anthony 


1815 


George Bloom 


1873 


Henry M. Taylor 


1818 


George Bloom 


1878 


B. Piatt Carpenter 


1819 


Philo Ruggles 


1884 


Daniel W. Guernsey 


1821 


Francis A. Livingston 


1890 


Daniel W. Gue'rnsey 


1836 


Stephen Cleveland 


1896 


Samuel K. Phillips 


1836 


George A. Schufeldt 


1903 


Samuel K. Phillips 


1843 


E. M. Swift 


1908 


Frank Hasbrouck 


1845 


William Eno 


StibrogAtes. 


1847 


Joseph T. Lee 


1778 


Gilbert Livingston 


1849 


James Eraott, Jr. a 


1785 


Anthony Hoffman 


1849 


Thomas C. CampbeU 


1787 


■Gilbert Livingston 


1855 


Silas WodeU 


1804 


James Tallmadge, Jr. 


1858 


B. Piatt Carpenter 


1810 


James J. Oakley 


1860 


Allard Anthony* 


1811 


George Bloom 


1865 


Allard Anthony 



1. OfiBce made' elective in 1846. 

2. Appointed vice Nelson resigned. 

3. Appointed vice Lee deceased. 

4. Appointed vice Carpenter resigned, elected in 1861. 



78 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1868 


William I. Thorn 


1822 


1871 


Tristram CofiSn 


1825 


1874 


James L. Williams 


1828 


1877 


William R. Woodin 


1831 


1880 


William R. Woodin 


1834 


isas 


John Harkett 


1837 


1886 


John Hackett 


1840 


1889 


Martin Heermance 


1843 


1892 


Horace D. Hufcut 


1846 


1895 


George Wood 


1849 


1898 


George Wood 


1852 


1901 


William R. Lee 


1855 


1904 


William R. Lee 


1858 


1907 


John E. Mact 


1861 


SSEHIFFS. 




1864 


1721 


J. Van de Voert 


1867 


1731 


William Squire 


1870 


1737 


James Wilson 


1873 


1743 


Henry FiUdn 


1876 


1748 


William Barnes 


1877 


1749 


Isaac Brinckerhoff 


1880 


1754 


Clear Everit 


1883 


1761 


James G. Livingston 


1886 


1769 


Henry Rosecrans, Jr. 


1889 


1772 


Philip J. Livingston 


1892 


1777 


Melancton Smith 


1895 


1781 


Lewis Dubois 


1898 


1785 


Harmon Hoffman 


1901 


1789 


John De Witt 


1904 


1793 


John Van Benthuysen 


1907 


1794 


John De Witt 


Couirrsr 


1797 


WiUiam Radcliff 


1715 


1801 


Robert Williams 


1721 


1805 


Joseph Thorn 


1742 


1807 


John Van Benthuysen 


1777 


1808 


Joseph C. Field 


1789 


1810 


John Van Benthuysen 


1804 


1811 


Joseph C. Field 


1807 


1812 


D. A. Brinckerhoff 


1809 


1813 


John Radcliff 


1810 


1817 


William Griffin 


1811 


1819 


Gilbert Ketchum 


1813 


1819 


R. C. Van Wyck 


1815 


1821 


William Griffin 


1815 



William Griffin 
John A. Wood 
Obadiah Titus 
Abraham Myers 
Thomas N. Perry 
S. D. Van Wyck 
Thomas N. Perry 
Alonzo H. Mory 
David N. Seaman 
Alonzo H. Mory 
Henry Rikert 
Moses C. Sands 
James Hammond 
Judah Swift 
George Lamoree 
Richard Kenworthy 
Cornelius Pitcher 
John G. Halstead 
David Warneri 
James E. Dutcher 
Sylvester H. Mase 
James E. Dutcher 
Charles W. Belding 
J. W. Van TasseU 
William H. Bartlett 
J. S. Pearce 
Myron Smith 
Allan H. Hoffman 
James H. Kipp 
Robert W. Chanler 
Clerks. 
Richard Sackett 
Henry Vanderburgh 
Henry Livingston 
Henry Livingston 
Robert H. Livingston 
Gilbert Livingston 
David Brooks 
Philip Spencer, Jr. 
David Brooks 
Philip Spencer, Jr. 
David Brooks 
Philip Spencer, Jr. 
Jacob Van Ness 



1. Appointed March 7, vice Halstead, deceased. 



DUTCHESS COUNTY CIVIL LIST. 



79 



1819 John Van Benthuysen 

1820 John Johnston 
1831 Jacob Van Ness 
1833 Jacob Van Nessi 
1836 Clapp Raymond 
1829 Henry S. Traver 
1838 Daniel W. Beadle 
1841 Robert Mitchell 
1847 Joseph T. Adriance 
1853 George H. Tompkins 
1859 Wilson B. Sheldon 
1865 Edgar Vincent 

1871 John W. Vincent 

1874 Andrew C. Warren 

1877 William A. Fanning 

1880 Wilson B. Sheldon 

1883 William A. Fanning 

1886 Edward B. Osborne 

1889 Theodore A. Hoffman 

1892 Storm Emans 

1895 Theodore A. Hoffman 

1898 Theodore A. Hoffman 

1901 Frederick Bostwick 

1904 Frederick Bostwick 

1907 John M. Ham 



COUKTY TaEASTTBEBS. 

1738 John Tappen 

1745 Henry Livingston 

1771 Robert Hoffman 

1795 William Emotta 

1848 Albert Van Kleeck 

1851 Leonard B. Sackett 

1854 James H. Seaman 

1860 John F. HuU 

1863 Joseph C. Harris 

1866 Joseph C. Harris 

1869 Walter S. Fonda 

1872 Walter S. Fonda 

1875 Frederick W. Davis 

1878 Seneca V. Halloway 

1881 Seneca V. Halloway 

1882 Georgfe W. Chases 

1883 George W. Chase 
1886 George W. Chase 
1889 Isaac W. Sherrill 
1892 Isaac W. Sherrill 
1896 William Haubennestel 
1898 William Haubennestel 
1901 William Haubennestel 
1904 William Haubennestel 
1907 Charles H. Slocum. 



1. Office made elective. 

2. Served until 1811, from whicli year tbe records are missing until 1848, the office 
becoming elective under the Constitution of 1846. 

3. Appointed January 19, 1882^ vice Halloway, who failed to qualify ; elected Novem- 
ber, 1882, for full term. 



80 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER Vni. 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



AS early as 1715, according to the military records in Colonial 
Archives (Vol. LX, page 78) in the possession of the State 
Library, Dutchess County, with a total population of less 
than five hundred, had a military force of sixty-three men, as follows: 

Dutchess County 1715 Novemb 21 

A List of the Military Fooiises V'l 

Capt Barend Z Van Kleeck 
Lt Johannes Ter Boss 
Ens Jacobes Van den Bogard 
Sar'ts Johannes Van Kleek 

pieter Lasseng 
Corp'r Harmon Ryndert 

John Schoute 



.pieter Van Kleek 
Lowrens Van Kleek 
Myndert VandenBogrt 
John I Van den Bogert 
fransois Van den Bogert 
John De Graef 
goose Van Wagene 
frans La Roy 
Hendrick oostrom 
Roelef oosterom 
Pieter fielee 
Jonas Slodt 
Hendrick pels 
Jacob Fit soor 
Isaac Fit soor 
Damen Falmetier 
Magiel palmetier 
Pieler palmetier 
Willem Lasseng 



Jacob Schoute 
Timon Schouten 
Andries Schouten 
Johannes Bos 
Jacobes Bos 
Johannes Buys 
Abraham Buys 
Johannes Hussie 
John Montras 
Hendrick Buys 
Thomas Shadwick 
Lowrens Oosterhout 
Evert Van Wagene 
Matias Slecht -J 
Hendrick Kyp 
Isaac Kyp 
pieter Ostrander 
William Ostrander 
William Trophage 



peeck Dewitt 
Jacob Kool 
adam Bresie 

Corneleus Knickerbacker 
Jacob Hooghteling 
Evert Aersen 
Hendrick Vandeburg 
Isaac Lasseng 
William Schudz 
Aert Masten 
frans De Langen 
pieter Du Boy 
Roger Britt 
Isaac Hendrickse 
John Brion 
Jurean Springsteen 
Jacobes Harckse 
Joseph Crieger 




Judge Henky Beekmak. Col. Henby Beekman, Jr. 

Gen. Richard Montgomery. Chancellor Livingston. 
Edward Livingston Gen. Morgan Lewis. 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



81 



In the Archives for the year 1737 (Vol. LXXII, page 35) appear 
the names of the oiScers for each of the eight Companies! from this 
county, and the number of enlisted men, but the names of the latter 
are not of record. 

In the same Volume (page 146) appear the names of the regi- 
mental officers arranged according to Precincts, but the names of the 
privates in these regiments are also missing. 

Further reference to the records (Vol. LXXXI, pages 74 and 94) 
furnish a complete enrollment of the men under command of Captain 
Peter Van Denburgh, in 1755, contained in the muster rolls of July 
11th and August 4th. 

A List of the Militie Ofpicees &c &c : of Dutchess County Viz 

TO 21 Dece'r 1737 
Henry Beekman, CoUo 
Bar"! Vancleek x Lu't Coll 
Gilb't Livingston, Major 
Elias Van Bnntshote, x Capt 
1 Lowrens "Van Cleek, Lut 
Baltiis Van Cleek, Ins 

This Comp'y Cons't of 60 Mn 



Evert Van Wagen, x Capt 

Jacob Kipp, Lut 

Gerrit Van Wagen, Ins'n 

Henry Heermans, Capt 

Larance Knickerbacker, x Lut 

John Van Benthuyse, Ins 

Frances De Lang, Capt 

John Montross, Lut 

Frances Brit, Ins'n 

Lowrens Oosterhout, x Capt 

James Van Etten, Lut 

Wouter Westfaal, remov'd x Ins'n 

Frances La Roy, Capt 
Micheel Van Cleek, Lut 
Abraham Swartwout, Ins'n 
James Hussey Dece'd x Capt 
Hendrick Ter Bos, Lut 
Lowrans Lossey, Ins'n 
Jacob Van Campen, Capt 
Jacob De Witt, Lut 
John Oosterhout, Ins'il 



Do. 



49 



Do. 



Do. 



.100 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



63 



70 



64 



51 



82 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

These with this x marke will not sairve any longer and are dead or 
removed — By the best information I could get this being a true State 

Henkt Beekman. 

List op the Militaey Oeficees or Dutchess Cottnty, 17S9. 

Gilb't Livingston, Lut Coll, In the room of Lu't Coll, Bar't: Van Cleck, who 
declins 

Elias Van Buntschote, Maj'r, In the Room of Gilb't Livingston. 

1st Compa' of the Regiment of Beekman Precinct 

Johannes Dolsen, Lut. In the Room of John Montross under Capt Frans De 
Lange. In Beekman Precinct George Elsworth Ensign. 

Rynebeek 2d Compa' of the Regiment. 

Gisbert Westfale Ens. In the Room of Wouter Westfale who is moeved under 
Capt Lowrens Osterhowt. In Rhynbeek Preoeinct. 

All Remain as they are in Rhynbeek Preceinct. 

Abraham Swartwout, Lieut't in the Roomie of Meigle Van Cleck Dece'd, under 
Capt Frans La Roy. In Poghkeepsie Preceinct Symon Frere, Insign under Do. 

All Remaine as they are — In Beekman Preceinct 

6th Compa' of Regiment 
LowernS Van Cleek, Captain, in the Room of Elias Buntschote pret'd to be Maj'r. 

In Poghkeepsie Preceinct > 

Baltes Van Cleck, Lut Barent Luis, Ensign. 

7th (Co) of Regiment 

Jacob kip Captain In the Rome of Evert Van Wagen who dedins by Reason 
of his adge. 

In Rynbeck Preceinct 

Gerit Van Wagen Lu't't Aart Van Wagen Ens'n 

8th & 9th Companys, by this distinguished 

Hendrick Terbos In the Roome of James Hussey Dece'd 
In Rombout Preceinct 

Lowerens Loosey, Lut't John Brinckerhof Ens'n 

Frances Brit, Capt. Robert Brit, Lut Tunis Buntschote, Ens 
In Crom Elbow Preceinct. A New Company 

Isaac Tietsoort, Capt Henry ffilkins, Lut, Astyn Creed, Ens'n 

Martinus Hoof man Adjutant for the Reg't of Dutchess County. 

This last Dat'd 1st Nov'r the rest the 24th 1739. 

Mtistee Roll Captain Peteb. Van Denburgh's Company. 

July 11th, 1755. 
A List of a Company of Foot Raised in Dutchess County under the 
Command of 

Peter Van Denburgh Captain 
• Joshua Champlin iirst Lieuten't 

Zebulon Mead Second Lieu't 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



83 



Jacob Weaver 

Simeon Bowlen 

Eliphalet Stevens 

Johan Hendrick Specer 

Stephen HuU 

Lewis Bennet 

Amos Bennet 

Joseph Parish 

Jonathan PoUey 

Stephen Mead 

William Mills 

James Carrel 

Thomas Ingerson 

John Clemens 

John Wieler 

John Wood 

John Franklin,, Jun'r 

Simeon Oosterhout 

Increase Win • 

James Morey 

John Lewis 

Nathaniel Dunham, Jun'r 

Michael Walter 

William Steenbergh 

Joseph Steel 

Greorge Bondy 



PRIVATE SIEK 

Edward Hall 
John Ryan 

Ebenesar Merreck, Jun'r 
Ezra Kenny 
Daniel Davison 
Ebenezer Owen 
Samuel Reed 
Joseph Reed, 
Nathaniel Chapwell 
Jacob Brill 

Simeon Terbos — Clerk 
James Green — Serjeant 
Jacob Sutton 
William Johnston 
James Weeks 
Daniel Aldrich 
Timothy Larkin 
Michael Brown 
Ichabod Stockwell 
Elijah Harvey 
William Moore 
Michel McDannel 
Edward Dunfy 
John Roberts 
Daniel Lane 



Silas Bobbet 
Elijah Curry 
John Gellit 
Richard Nicholson 
Peter Caswell 
John HefFy, Jun'r 
Fletcher Smith 
John Crooke 
John Herrick 
Elkanah Cook 
Jeffery Nees 
Philip Whelply 
Robert Cook 
Jeremiah Binckham 
Francis Sawwood 
James Finly 
Samuel Johnson 
Thomas Champlin 
John Mass 
Jeames Dowle 
Roelif Sherrer 
Johannes Coenraetkerl 
Benjamin Utter 
Patrick Quin 
Jedediah Wells 
Nathaniel Rennie 



Henry Lewis 

Att a Muster of a Company at Poghkeepsie in Dutchess County 
on Friday the Eleventh day of July One Thousand Seven Hundred 
and Fifty Five, Raised by Capt. Peter Vanderburgh in Dutchess 
County Wee Mathew Dubois and Louwerins Van Kleek Two of his 
Majesties Judges of the Court of Comon Pleas for said County and 
Nicholas De Lavergne and Bartholomew Noxon Two of his Majesties 
Justices of the peace for said County Doe Certifie that the Men whose 
names are above written amounting to Seventy Eight Affective men, 
appeared at said Muster in our presence, who are all Inlisted' in the 
Company to be the said Vanderburgh as Captain thereof, as by the 
Certificates taken before and produced by severall Justices of the 
peace for County may appear In Testimony whereof we have hereunto 
set our Hands the day & year above written. 

Matthew Duboys 
LouwEEENs Van Kleeck 
Nicholas De Laveegne 
Baetho. Noxon 



84 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



List op Each Opficee and Sotjldtek Inlisted in Cap't Petek Van- 

DENBUEGH COMPANY EKOM JuLY 11 TO JtTI-Y 31 InCLUSEE 1755. 



Capt. 
Lieuts. 

Corprils 



ils ) 



Peter Vanderburgh^ 
Joshua Champlin 
Zebulon Mead 
Peter Casley 
S. Ebenezer Merrick 
Daniel Lane 



f Jacob Brill 

! James Green 
Sargants ^ j^^^^^^^ p„Uey 

i John Lewis 
Drummor, Silas Mather 



James Tinley 

timothy Larkin 

James Weaks 

James Dowdel 

WiUiam Gonson 

Jeremiah bringham 

John moss 

Jeremiah Wells 

Daniel holdredg 

JefFiy Nase 

Joseph Reed 

Ebanezar owin 

Mikel Walter 

Halimass' Stealbark 

Elisha Haruey 

WiUiam Moore 

Stephen meed 

Kain McKinney 

Mikel Brown 

Flitcher Smith 

Hazakiah Kinney 

Richard Balis 

Nathaniel Rappel 
Deserded July 35 Day 
1755 and Carried of 
all his Cloaths 

Elkany Cook 



John herrick 

John Ryne 

John Gillit 

Eliga Currey 

James Carrel 

Stephen Hull 

Patrick Quin 

John Wheeler 

John Wood 

Wait Weeks 

John Franklin 

Simon Ousterhouse 

Increse Winn 

Philip Welsee 

Thomas Ingerson 

John Clemmans 

Joseph Steal 

George Bunday 

Thomas Champlin 

Simon Terbush 

Samuel Read 

Fransis Sawwood 

John Andrews (carpenter) 

Edward Dunfee 

Mike McDaniel 

John Roberts 

Thomas Green 



Ichabod Stockwell 
John Hendrick (spicer) 
Joseph Parrish 
William Mills 
James mory 
Henry Lewis 
Nathaniel Dunham 
Jacob Weauour 
Simeon broughling 
Elifelet Stephens 
Amos Bennett 
John maburey 
Nathaniel Tinney 
Chisher Wandle 
John Ha£Fey 
Roulf Sherred 
Johanis Coonrot Karel 
John Thompson 
Jonathan Linsey 
Richard Nichoson 
Robert Cook 
Ben j amine Tidd 
Nathaniel Lane 
Daniel Dauison 
John Smith 
Silas Bobbet 



1. Captain Tanderturgh died AuguBt 21, 1755. 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



85 



MusTEE Roll of a Company of Peovincials in ye Pay of ye Peov- 

iNCE OF New Yoek foe Dutchess County Commanded 

BY Joseph Ceane Esa'E (1758)^ 

Captain 
Joseph Crane, Esq'r 

Lieutenants 
Richard Ray 
Philip Paddock 

Non Commission'd Officers 
Benjamen Higgins 



John Cannon 
Simon Calkins 
Jonathan Vickry 

John McCrerey 
Eleazer Baker 
Stephen Fenton 
Eliphalet Whefeler 
John Bennett 
Phineas Woodward 
John Frankland 
Samuel Cogswell 
James Pingry 
Thomas Inckly 
James Lovelace 
Charles Barsleys 
Andrew Cowley 
Michal Tenry 
George Clasen 
David Hodges 
George Dickenson 
Caleb HiU 
Gilbert Clap 
David Vickry 
Eneos Nicholson 
Asa Cummins 
Joshua Barnum 
Jacob Ellis 
Bennoraia Graj 
Daniel Townsend 
David Sturdyvent* 



Corporals 
John House 
Joseph Parish 
Nathaniel Green 

Drum 
Nathaniel Wescoat 



PBIVATES 

William Allen 
WiUiam Earl* 
Rossel Frankland 
Mathew Standish* 
Abner Edie 
Zachariah Huntington 
Edward Popple 
Stephen Hull 
John Martin 
Samuel Blackman' 
Simon Scouten" 
John Willm Loudenburgh 
Samuel Brewster* 
Cornielus Fuller 
Joseph Barlow* 
Noah Jelett 
Joseph HoUester 
Joseph Philips 
Amos Allen 
Moses Allen 
Daniel Allen 
Jeddiah Carley 
Samuel Boynton 
John Ashton , 
Daniel Atwood 
Matthew fuller 
Ruben Rapeljea 



Bethual Baker 
John Gray 
William Calkins* 
Stephen March 
Ebenezer Gage 
Enoch Seers 
Rowland Rosall 
Azariah Parish 
Daniel Cash 
Abel Sherwood 
Thomas Cole 
Jezediah Frost 
John Perry 
John Franklin 
Jacob Leonard 
Henry Gray 
Thomas Evans* 
Benjamen Harringtoa 
Benjamen Shaw 
Isaac Harrington* 
John Barber 
John D. Pew 
Conrad Sarenbergh* 
Philip Pear 
Andrew Silvernail* 
Reuben Crosby* 



In the above Company of Provincials the birthplace given In the records Is Great 
Britain or Ireland, excepting the names followed by an asterisk (•) which Indicates native 
of Dutchess County. 

1. Colonial Archives Vol. LXXXV. p. 132. 



86 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



MxJSTEE Roll of the Men Rais'd in ye County of Dutchess and 
Pass'd foe Capt Peter Hareis's Company May ye 1 : 1760 



Captain Peter Harris 



Joseph Power 
Isaac Conclin 



Lieut'ts 



Bartho'lo Hoogeboom 
Marcus Snyder 
Thimoty Hewmans 
Tobias Steenbergh 
Capt Peter Harris 
Peter Cole 
John Buys 
John Tompkins 
Samuel Matthews 
Asa Perkins 
Natha'U Washburn 
Myndert V.D. Bogert 
Isaac Parmetier 
Richard Memyon 
-John Van Denbogert 
Dannlel Moore 
Isaac German 
Elisah Ballard 
Moses Prindle 
John House 
Samuel Benedict 
Amos Turner 
Jeremiah Steanburgh 
Jeremiah Wood 
Benjamin PhUlips 
William Buys 
Henry Buys 
Peter Ostrander 
Joseph Lott 
John Wording 
John Stone 
Isaac Beazel 
Benjamin North 
Christopher Smith 
Solomon Seaman 



FBIVATES 



William Pangborn 
Jacob Ladew 
Nucomb Smith 
A'braham Vredinborgh 
John Murry 
Leonard Hunold 
Jacob Shever 
Robert Cane 
Martin Simon 
Major Pawling 
Stephen Crons 
Garritt Van Ness 
Jacob Mare 
Peter Freden Burgh 
Anthoney Turtr 
Benj: Freden Burgh 
Daniel Welts 
George EUiout 
John Ferguson 
WUliam Tompkins 
WiUhelmus Steenbergh 
Israel Chllson 
Henry Rundel Indian 
Zacharias Snyder 
John Lassen 
Martin bush 
Peter Johnson 
Gedion Turner 
Abra'm Swartwout 
Isaac Burnet 
William Corkeren 
John Dandey 
James Webb 
Abraham Burrows 
James Allsworth 
Elisiah Powel 



Timity Harris 

Samuel Hoges 

Abraham Van Amborgh 

Darmon Bartley 

John Benndigen 

George Nease 

Joseph Hegman 

John ' Hickey 

Tunis Cole 

Peter Simson 

Jacob Jones 

Isaac Wanson 

John Graham 

John Lake 

WiUiam Conaly 

John Lake Jur 

Peter Wasfall 

Comb Wood 

Andrew Myers 

John Vredingbourgh 

Cyrenivs Newcomb 

Fransis Mathitt 

Peter Van Nallen 

Peack DeWitt 

Peter Cammell 

Al'abartis Sickner 

James Hobs 

Peter Lowdlwick 

John Ostrander 

Jacob Boice 

William Shilly 

Mattaves Freden Burgh 

Peter Weaver 

Jacobus Keep 

Fielx Layster 



The above Contains one Captain two Lieutts : & one hundred & four 
privates Musterd by me Barthow : Le Roux Muster Mastr of Dutchess 
County. 





^J^tim^, 




COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



87 



Capt John Van Ness His Mustek Roll, May 1760 



Capt John Vi 


in Ness Samuel 
Simeon 


Whelpley ) ^ . , 
Barber } ^leuts. 




PIIIVATES 

Oliver Ecker'^ 




Simeon Barber Lieut 


John Sharp 


Moses Barber 


Samuel Wheeler 


Isaack Betherton 


Roswell Nettleton 


Philip Johnson 


Jacob Miller 


Leonard Farguson 


Teznis Cover 


Benjamin Streater 


John Daly 


Peter Buckle 


Abraham Johnson 


John Sharp Junr 


Elisha Blin 


Nicholas Luyk Junr 


John Joshling 


Samuel Richards 


Nicholas Cramer 


Daniel Fenny 


William Willeby 


Jacob Cline 


MikeU Bnrk 


James Hurd 


Henry Kiefer 


John Gray 


Caleb Reynolds 


Isaac Cole Jun'r 


Eli Runnels 


Charles McCarty 


^Nicholas Huygh 


John Richardson 


Michael Stilwel 


Michael Lush 


David Sturdiwint 


Jacob Miller 


Jacobus Ostrander 


Isaack Betherton Jun 


Benjamin Brownel 


Adam Ostrander 


John Paddock 


Enos Ferguson 


Philip Tuff 


Jacob Spaner Bergh 


Henny Joshling 


Benedick Frits 


Johannes Lones 


William Ferris 


Elija Buttles 


Jseph Cooe 


Solomon Kinery 


William Powell 


Robert Willess 


Ebenezer AUwater 


Domeny Digers 


John Williams 


John Wilman 


Miles Grissil 


Adam Wolferron 


Silvanus Willibus 


Hendrick Ostrander 


John Morris 


Samuel Moore 


Adam Slouter 



The above Contains one Captain two Lieut'ts and sixty five privates 
Mustered by me Bartho'w Le Roux Muster Mast'r of Dutchess County. 

A Muster Roll of the Men Rais'd in the County or Dutchess 

AND Pass'd Muster eob Capt Rich'd Rea's Company 

May ye 1 : 1760 



Captain Richard (Rea) 



John Cannon 
Samuel Terry 



Lieutenants 



Oliver Fox 
Jeramiah Parmer 
Tilton Eastman 
James Richards 
Joshua Hill 
Capt. Rich'd Rea 



Samuel Terry Lieut't 
Solomon Cole 
Joseph Flee 
Natha'U Earl 
Thimoty Pierce 
Benjamin Franklen 



George Bundy 
Joseph Odel 
Benjamin Beamus 
Daniel Allen 
Thomas Wilcoks 
Joshua Loveless 



88 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Stephen Hull 
Ebenezar Balie 
David Cash 
Asa Cummings 
Jesse Fairchild 
Austin Wright 
Benjam'n Higgens 
Natha'Il Green 
Lamuel Hopkins 
David Vlckrey 
Joseph Robins 
Cumfort Loudinton 
Obadiah Chace 
James Lovelace 
Ephaiiam Jones 
Isaac Wllcocks 
Caleb Worden 
John Sunderling 
Simon Covel 
Samuel Spalding 
Elamuel Fuller 
John Dean 
James Shaw 
Elijah Hamlen 
Stephen Fenton 
Natha'U HoUester 



Plagley Sprague 
Mahn Daggett 
John Barber Junr 
Ebenezer Robertson 
William Day 
John Canndn Lieut't 
William Eastman 
Samuel Dalie 
Isaac Ter Busch Lieut't 
Joseph Beavans 
Josiah Hall 
James Covee 
Benjamin Bennett 
Daniel Parks 
Samuel CoKwell 
Ephraim Darling 
Ichabud Parmiter 
Zeth Covel 
Wmiam Stephens 
Phineas Woodward 
James McNeal 
Joseph Ashcraft 
Abr'm Hartwell 
Theodoras Crosbie 
George Guage 
John Frost 



Richard Murch 
John Roberts 
Abner Doughty 
Thomas Merrick 
Benjamin Hopkins 
James Cowen 
Asa Loudinton 
Isaac Craw 
Jacob Pepper 
Abner Goodspeed 
John House 
John Bennet 
Jacob Burges 
Samuel Fox 
Gideon Hollester 
Zephaniah Little 
Jeradiah Davis 
Jonathan Lawrence 
John Hlames 
James Ravel je 
Lazures Ellis 
Andrew Atwood 
Samuel Nelson 
John Nelson 
Samuel Dimmuck 
William Roe 



The above Contains one Captain two Lieut'ts and Ninety three pri- 
vates mustered by me Bartho'w LeRoux Muster Master for Dutchess. 



Muster Roll of Men Rais'd in the County op Dutchess and Pass'd 
FOB Capt. Jacobus Swabtwout's Company May ye 1st 1760 



Capt Jacobus Swartwout 



Nicho's Emanuel Gabriel I 



Shadrack Baker 
John Schouten 
Henry Wright 
Joshua Barker 
Anthony CofiSn 
Henry Gray 
Daniel Nettleton 
William Prichett 
Amos \llen 
William Clark 



Isaac T'r Bush 

PEIVATE3 



f 



Lieut'ts 



Samuel Clark 
Benjamin Cummins 
Hans Jere Weatman 
Oliver Cromwell 
Solomon Schouten 
William Green 
Wm. Woodford 
Robt. Shearer 
James Plckket 
Stephen Bedford 



Philip Smith 
Thomas Frost 
Zebulon Hosier 
Ezekel Gee 
John Conet 
Benjamin Hedger 
Nath'U Brock 
Edward Rose 
Henry V. Heynen 
Gedion Fitshoudt 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 



89 



Ruben Mentor Junr 
Ebenezar Burliegh 
John Jordan 
Adam Miller 
William Ingram 
Joseph Mesner 
WiUiam Branderkin 
William Lent 
Capt. Jacobus Swart- 

wout 
John Weys Indian 
Comelus Willsie 
William MeMunnser 
Jacob Penner 
Esekiah Brown 
John Holms 
Jerediah Grare 
Benjamin Dailef 
John Thurston 
John Smawling 
John Johnson 
Simeon Schouten 
Jacob Schouten 



George Hicks 
Joseph Hornett 
James Bennit 
Thos. Coffin 
Joseph Mclntoch 
James Draper 
Ebeneazer Cummins 
John Adam Wert 
James brooks 
Ephariam Bartley 
Haramanus House 
Henry Wiltsie 
Evert Valker 
Mingo Lango 
Thomas Meridet 
Peter Storm 
William Camble 
Patrick Mitchel 
Azariah Parish 
Daniel Mead 
Lewis Mead 
David Richards 
William More 
Joseph Tucker 



James Doudle 
Danel Calagohun 
John Bradshaw 
Herculus Stanley- 
Benjamin Darling Jun 
Dennis Christie 
Hans Jere Hoftgood 
Thomas Carskaden 
Benjamin Post 
John Ames 
Lieut't Gabriel Eman- 
uel & 
Nicholas Myer 
David Carlie 
Bzecial Spicer 
B»rnabus Chapman 
Mathew Strait 
John Lougy 
Ga;shem Jones 
Jefferey Nearce 
Timity Barke 
Elkenney Cooke 
James Grees 



The above Contains one Captain two Lieut'ts and Ninety Eight 
privates Mustered by me 

Bartho'w Le Roux 
Muster Mast'r for Dutchess County 



A Mttstee RoLii OF THE Men Raised and Pass'd in the County of 

Dutchess for Captain Isaac Tee Bush Company, 

21st June 1761 



Isaac Ter Bush Captain 



Tunis Corsa 1 

Samuel Whelpley f Lieutenants 



Nehemiah Smith 
Edward Coffin 
Abraham Eynman 
Andries Schouten 
Robert Shearer 
Henry Wright 
Jonas Parks 



Christopher Stevens 
Phenias Woodard 
Joseph Langdon 
Isaac Craw 
Matthew Wineter 
William Fergison 
Benjamin Hedger 



Joseph Sutten 
David Young 
Francis Miller 
Robert Cain 
Nicholas Wager 
James Mansfield 
James Louden 



90 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



William Lant 
Elijah Dowee 
Thomas Knap 
Samuel Richards 
James Dowdle 
Daniel Hogan 
Ebebneizer Allien 
Andrew Ross 
William Watson 
Adam Miller 
Hugh Gamble 
Benjamin Cahoon 
Thorn's Green 
Peter Osterout 
John Kennedy 
Jeremiah Ness 
John McKenney 
Peter Avery 
Volentine Earnest 



George Scutt 
Moses Gee 
Robert Wier 
William Delaway 
John Schouten 
John Langdon 
William Cummings 
William Barken 
David Hammans 
David Smith 
Elijah Crosby 
Henry Webber 
Abraham Walker 
Jacob Van Tassel 
Christopher Stevens 
De Owen Le Flower 
Matthew Felix 
Peter Ostrander 
David Cash 
Daniel Sheepherd 



EUis Vinson 
Daniel Willcocks 
Martin Dowee 
Elisha Pain 
George Anderson 
John Jackson 
Anthony Sheniew 
Loudawick Creeles 
Myer Earn 
Jonathan Woodard 
Andrew Myers 
Daniel Callahon 
Abraham Johnson 
Peter Miller 
Joseph Worden 
John Burke 
Laurance Schael 
Gabriel Menter 
Robert Menter 



The above being one Captain two Lieutenants and Seventy nine men 
where Mustered and approved off for Capt Isaac Ter Bush's Company 
in the County of Dutchess 

Geo'e: Brewerton jun'r Coll. 

While the militia of Dutchess were called on to render services dur- 
ing the Colonial Period, the county was not the scene of active military 
operations. During the French and English war (1744 to 1748) the 
colonists of these respective nations were involved in these hostilities. 
A letter from Col. Beekman to Colonial Governor George Clinton was 
laid before the Council May SO, 1746, relative to the raising of men 
in Dutchess. The Governor was advised by that body to engage two 
hundred men from this county and to recommend the Assembly to pro- 
vide ammunition pay and subsistence for them. Nothing more than a 
petty warfare, however, followed the arrangements for the reduction 
of Canada. The war was terminated by the treaty of Aix la Chapelle 
in 1748, and the disbandment of the provincial forces followed in Sep- 
tember of that year. 

But peace was of short continuance, a final struggle between France 
and England for colonial supremacy in America was inevitable. In 
this conflict, begun in 1755, and known as the French and Indian war. 



COLONIAL MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS. 91 

the military forces of Dutchess were again called into requisition, and 
continued in the service until the final overthrow of the power of 
France in Canada in 1760. 

The forts at Oswego were surrendered to a French force under Gen. 
Montcahn, August 14, 1756, and September 6th of the same year, 
Gov. Hardy directed the Colonels of the militia of Dutchess and Ulster 
counties to repair immediately with their regiments to Albany, and 
thence to co-operate with Lord Loudon at Lake George. This cam- 
paign served as a training school for many who were destined to take 
a prominent part in the struggle then impending for colonial inde- 
pendence. 

The so-called "Anti-Rent War," of 1766 which distressed the in- 
habitants of Dutchess and other counties in the Hudson Valley, and 
necessitated the presence of the British troops ^28th Regiment) at 
Poughkeepsie and Pawling in July of that year, may be appropriately 
introduced in this chapter. 

The source of this insurrection was the granting of large tracts of 
land at the beginning of the century to favored persons, so that actual 
settlers could not become owners but only tenants. Popular discon- 
tent was emphasized in the armed refusal of settlers to pay the rents 
exacted. 

William Pendergast, who hved about a mile south of the village of 
Pawling, on the farm now occupied by William H. Arnold, was the 
leader of the insurgents in this county. The assemblying of his fol- 
lowers on Quaker HiU was so formidable that the grenadiers at Pough- 
keepsie waited for reinforcements of two hundred troopers and two 
field pieces from New York before proceeding against him. After a 
skirmish Prendergast surrendered, and with several others, was brought 
a prisoner to Poughkeepsie to be tried for high treason. So great 
was local excitement that to forestall an attempt to rescue, he was 
speedily removed to New York. Two companies of the regiment re- 
mained in Poughkeepsie "to guard the prison and prevent further 
commotions until the prisoners are tried." 

Prendergast was returned to Poughkeepsie for trial which occurred 
the first fortnight in August. Although ably assisted in his defense 
by his wife (nee Mehitabel Wing) treason was proved, and the prisoner 
was convicted and sentenced to be hanged in six weeks. Then the ef- 
forts of his valiant wife became more determined. She obtained an 



92 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

audience with Gov. Moore, and returned about the first of September 
with a reprieve. Her arrival was timely, for a company of fifty 
mounted men had ridden across the county to rescue her husband from 
jail. She convinced them of the folly of their contemplated act, and 
turned to the task of procuring a pardon from the King. In a letter 
dated October 11, 1766, from Governor Moore to the Earl of Shel- 
burne, the pardon of Prendergast is recommended, and George HI 
granted it in December of the same year. 

Prendergast finally acquired title to his farm, as is shown by a deed 
now in possession of Thomas J. Arnold, bearing date of 1771, by which 
the land was conveyed to him by the heirs of Frederick Philipse. He 
later sold this property to Humphrey Slocum and removed to the 
western part of the State. His son James settled, with other Prender- 
gasts, near Chautauqua Lake, and became the founder of Jamestown, 
where his family, now extinct there, presented a library to the city. 




DANIEL VAX DE BOGART. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 93 



CHAPTER IX. 
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 

THE War of American Independence was an event of vast imo- 
ment, affecting the destines of all nations. The question de- 
cided by the conflict was this: Whether the English colonies 
in America, becoming sovereign, should govern t hemselves or be ruled 
as dependencies of a European Monarchy. The decisTon was rendered 
in favor of separation and independence. 

The immediate cause of the Revolution was the passage by Parlia- 
ment of a number of acts destructive of colonial liberty. England de- 
manded that the people of the Colonies should be taxed to defray, in 
part at least, the expenses of the French and Indian War, which had 
been concluded by the signing of the Treaty of Paris February 16, 
1763. To this end a tariff was imposed on teas imported by the Col- 
onists. This was followed in March of 1765 by the odious Stamp Act, 
which required, after the first day of November of the same year, that 
every note, bond, deed, mortgage, lease, license and legal document of 
whatever sort used in the colonies, be executed on paper bearing an 
English stamp. This paper, furnished by the British government, 
cost from three pence to six pounds according to the nature of the doc- 
ument. Every colonial pamphlet, almanac and newspaper was required 
to be printed on paper of the same sort for which the value of the 
stamps ranged from a half-penny to four pence. The news of this 
act was received in America with indignation, and the day it went into 
effect ten boxes of the stamped paper were seized by the people of New 
York and openly destroyed. The act was repealed March 18, 1766, 
and in June 1767 an act was passed imposing a duty on glass, paper, 
painters colors and teas, imported into the colonies. Various other acts 
of Parliament affecting more particularly the people of Massachus- 
setts, aggravated the antagonism toward the Mother country, and in 
the Colonial Congress assembled at Philadelphia September 1774, it 
was unanimously agreed to sustain Massachusetts in her conflict with 



94 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

a wicked ministry. The people of New York, however, were eminently 
conservative and hopeful of a peaceful solution of the pending con- 
troversy, though not less earnest in their convictions. That the in- 
habitants of Dutchess inclined toward a peaceful adjustment of colonial 
grievances is shown by the following extracts from resolutions adopted 
at a meeting, held in Poughkeepsie August 10th, 1774: "That letters 
of instruction be directed to the Members of the General Assembly for 
the County of Dutchess, desiring that at the next meeting of the Gen- 
eral Assembly for the Province of New York, they will lay before that 
honourable House the dangerous consequences flowing from several 
late Acts of the British Parliament imposing duties and taxes on the 
British Colonies in America, for the sole purpose of raising a revenue, 
and that they use their influence in the said House, and with the several 
branches of the Legislature, to lay before his Majesty an humble 
Petition and Remonstrance, setting forth the state of our several griev- 
ances, and praying his Royal interposition for a repeal of the said 
Acts." 

"That they ought, and are willing to bear and pay such part and 
proportion of the national expenses as their circumstances will admit 
of." 

"That like sentiments, adopted by the Legislature of other Colonies, 
will have a tendency to conciliate the affections of the Mother country 
and the colonies, upon which their mutual happiness, we conceive, 
principally depends." 

In March 1775, the "Committee of Sixty," composed of the inhabi- 
tants of the city and county of New York invited a meeting 'of dele- 
gates from the counties of the Province, to serve in Provincial Conven- 
tion to be held in New York City, April 20, 1775, for the purpose of 
choosing delegates to represent the colony in the Continental Congress. 

Dutchess County was represented in its deliberations by Egbert 
Benson, Morris Graham and Robert R. Livingston. The following 
delegates were appointed to represent the Province of New York in 
the Congress at Philadelphia May 10th, 1775 : John Alsop, Simon Boe- 
rum, George Chnton, James Duane, William Floyd, John Jay, Francis 
Lewis, Philip Livingston, Robert R. Livingston, Col. Lewis Morris, 
Col. Philip Schuyler, and Henry Wisner . 

The Convention adjourned April 22nd, and the day following New 
York learned of the battle of Lexington. The people of this province 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR, 95 

were then thoroughly aroused. The "Committee of Sixty" was in- 
creased to a "Committee of One Hundred," and April 29, 1775, "the 
freeman, freeholders and inhabitants of the city and county of New 
York," met and formulated "Articles of Association" sometimes called 
the "Revolutionary Pledge." A call was issued for a new Provincial 
Convention or Congress and in volume I of the Calendar of Revolution- 
ary Papers in the Secretary of State's Office appears the following, 
relative to Dutchess County : 

"At a county meeting in consequence of notifications for that pur- 
pose on the 16th of May, Dirck BrinckerhofF, Anthony Hoffman, Zep- 
haniah Piatt, Richard Montgomery, Ephraim Paine, Gilbert Living- 
ston and Jonathan Landon Esqurs., and Messrs. Gysbert Schenck, 
Melancthon Smith and Nathaniel Sackett were by a majority of voices 
Elected Deputies for the term of Six months to represent the county 
of Dutchess in the Provincial convention to be held at the city of New 
York on the 22nd instant." 

One of the first acts of the Provincial Congress, to which the above 
delegates were elected, was the endorsement of the "Articles of Asso- 
ciation" and copies of the documents were placed in the hands of com- 
mittees to circulate through the counties for signatures. The pri- 
mary purpose of this "Pledge" was to bring the people up to the point 
of associated effort, and had no direct reference to an appeal to arms 
and separation from the English government. The "Pledge" itself 
reads : 

"Persuaded that the salvation of the rights and liberties of America 
depend, under God, on the firm union of its inhabitants in a vigorous 
prosecution of the measures necessary for its safety, and convinced of 
the necessity of preventing anarchy and confusion which attend a dis- 
solution of the powers of government. We, the Freeman, Freeholders, 
and Inhabitants of Dutchess, being greatly alarmed at the avowed de- 
sign of the Ministry to raise a revenue in America, and shocked by the 
bloody scene now acting in Massachusetts Bay, do in the most solemn 
manner resolve never to become slaves, and do associate, under all the 
ties of religion, honor, and love to our country, to adopt and endeavor 
to carry into execution whatsoever measures may be recommended by 
the Continental Congress, or resolved upon by our Provincial Con- 
vention, for the purpose of preserving our constitution and of opposing 
the several arbitrary acts of the British Parliament, until a reconcilia- 



96 



UNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



tion beween Great Britain and America, on constitutional principles 
(which we most ardently desire) can be obtained, and that we will in all 
things follow the advice of our General Committee respecting the pur- 
poses aforesaid, the preservation of peace and good order and the 
safety of individuals and property." 

In Dutchess County there were 1820 signers, and 964 persons who 
refused to sign. Some qualified their signatures by certain restric- 
tions. Lists were recorded of those who signed and of those who re- 
fused to sign, and are preserved in the American Archives. They show 
a radical difference in the views even of members of the same family, 
and in some of the Precincts, almost an equal division in numbers. For 
convenient reference the lists of signers and non-signers are now intro- 
duced, arranged alphabetically: 

AMENIA PRECINCT. 
The signers to the "Articles of Association," June and July, 177S. 



Adams, Elisha 
Adams, Abraham 
Adams, Williams 
Adams, Abraham, Jr. 
Adams, Jonas 
Adams, Joseph 
AUen, James 
Allerton, Jonathan 
Alsworth, William 
Ailey, Thomas 
Armstrong, Solomon 
Atherton, Corns 
Atwater, Levi 
Atwater, John 

Backus, Joseph 
Barnet, John, Jr. 
Barnet, James 
Barker, James 
Barker, William 
Barnes, Henry 
Barnes, Jonah 
Barry, John 
Barry, Henry 
Barlow, Nathan 
BaAow, Moses 



Bartow, John 
Beadle, James 
Beard, Elibu, Jr. 
Bennet, John 
Benedict, Samuel 
Benedict, John 
Besse, Ellas 
Besse, Ephraim 
Betts, James 
Blaksly, Daniel 
Blust, William 
Bosse, Ebenezer 
Boyd, John 
Brace, Jared 
Brack, Jonathan 
Bramball, Edmund 
Brown, Benjamin 
Brown, David, 
Brown, Moses 
Brown, Zedekiah 
Brunson, John 
Bruster, David 
Brunson, John, Jr. 
Brush, Lemuel 
Brush, Richard 
Brush, William 



Bryan, Ezra 
Buck, Israel 
Buck, Zadock 
Buel, Grover, Jr. 
Bull, Grover 
Burton, Isaac, Jr. 
Burton, Isaac 
Burton, Eli 
Burton, Judah 

Carter, Ebenezer 
Cariow, Elisha 
Castle, Daniel 
Castle, Gideon 
Chamberlain, William 
Chamberlain, John 
Chamberlain, Colbe 
Chapman, James 
Charts, Ledyard J. 
Child, Increase 
Cleaveland Josiah 
Cleaveland, Ezra 
Cline, John 
Cook, Simeon 
Cook, Simeon, Jr. 
Cook, Jacob 




TU^i^ ^LLCnyyi^eA^ fkh^d.i% 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



97 



Cook, Nathaniel 
Cole, Barnabas 
Collin, David 
Collins, John 
Connor, John 
Cornwell, Thomas 
Cornwell, William 
Cornwell, Samuel 
Coy, John 
Crofoot, Benjamin 
Crosby, Enoch 
Crippin, Jabez 
Crippen, Benjamin 
Curry, John 

Daily, Elijah 
Davis, Squire 
Davison, Daniel 
Dakin, Caleb 
Darrow, Isaac 
DeLavergne, Joseph 
DeLavergne, Lewis 
DeLametter, John 
DeLamater, Isaac 
Delamater, Martin 
Delane, Benjamin 
Delano, Stephen 
Denton, John 
Denton, Benjamin, Jr. 
Denton, Joel 
Denny, John, Jr. 
Dickson, Gabriel 
Dickson, James 
Dickinson, Versal 
Dodge, Samuel 
Doty, Joseph 
Doty, Reuben 
Doty, David 
Doty, Reuben 
Douglass, John 
Drake, John 
Dunham, Nehemiah 
Dunham, Samuel 
Dunham, Seth 

Elliot, Jacob 



Elow.th, James, Jr. 

Farr, Archibald 
Farr, John 
Finch, William 
Fish, Jonathan 
Ford, William 
Ford, John 
Ford, James 
Ford, Ephraim 
Fort, Asa 
Foster, Nathaniel 
Fouler, Benjamin 
Fowler, Joseph 
Freeman, John 
Freeman, Robert 
Freehart, Robert 
Freeman, Elijah 
French, Abraham 

Ganong, Thomas 
Gamsey, Daniel 
Gates, Nathan 
Gates, Gerardus 
Gates, Nathaniel 
Gillet, Abner 
Gillet, David 
Gillet, Gardner 
Gillet, Moses 
Gillet, Joseph 
GQlet, Barnabas 
Gilson, Eleazer 
Gray, Samuel 
Gray, Jeduthau 
Grey, Joseph 
Green, Timothy 

Handley, Sylvester 
Hammond, Jason 
Hall, William 
Harris, Moses, Jr. 
Harvey, Obed 
Harvey, Obed, Jr. 
Harvey, Daniel 
Hebbard, James 
Hebbard, Abel 



Hebard, Robert 
Hellsy, Simson 
Herrick, Rufus 
Herrick, Samuel 
Herrick, Nathan 
Herrick, Benjamin 
Herrick, Stephen 
Herrick, Stephen, Jr. 
Hinns, Ebenezer 
Hinns, Elijah 
Holmes, Elijah 
Holmes, Benjamin 
Holmes, Ichabod 
Holmes, Abner 
Holmes, John 
Holmes, Samuel 
Hollifer, Elisha 
Hollister, Benjamin 
Hopkins, Noah 
Hopkins, Roswell 
Howard, John 
Himt, William 
Hunter, Jonathan 
Hewson, Alexander 

Jarvls, Samuel 
Johnson, Robert 
Johnson, Samuel 
Johnson, Ezekiel 
Johnson, Paul 
Johns, Benjamin 
Jones, John 
Jones, Eben 
Judson, Samuel 

Kelly, Seth 
Ketcham, Joel 
King, Samuel, Jr. 
King, William 
King, Samuel 
Kinne, Jesse 
Klyn, Peter 
Knapp, Zadoc 
Knapp, William 

Lamb, Isaac 



98 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Lamb, Thiel 
LaTiabe, Richard 
Larrabe, Ebenezer 
Latimore, Elisha 
Latimer, Ebenezer 
Lathrop, Walter 
Lawrence, Thomas 
Levitli Lot 
Lloyd, John 
Lockwood, Theoph 
Losd, Joshua 

McCoIlough, William 
McNeil, John 

Marks, Isaac 
Marsh, Josiah 
Marsh, Silas 
Mathews, Obadiah 
May, Daniel 
Mayhew, Levi 
Maxam, Benjamin 
Mead, Job 
Mead, King 
Mead, John 
Mead, Isaiah 
Mead, John 
Mead, James 
Mears, John 
Merchant, John 
Minns, Stephen 
Mitchell, William 
Morse, Peter 
Morey, Thomas 
Mordack, John 
Morton, Eleazer 
Mott, Abiah 
Monlton, William 
Mygatt, Thomas 

Nye, Sylvannus 

Osborne, John 
Osbum, Isaac 
Orton, Levi 



Paine, Ichabod 
Paine, Barnabas, Jr. 
Paine, Ichabod, Jr. 
Paine, Abraham 
Paine, Elihu 
Paine, Brinton 
Paine, Barnabas 
Payne, David 
Palmer, James 
Palmer, Samuel 
Palmer, Nathan 
Parks, Isaac 
Park, Ebenezer 
Patrick, Robert 
Penoyer, Joseph 
Penoyer, Amos 
Perlee, Edward 
Pike, Jonathan 
Pinney, Nathaniel 
Porter, Elijah 
Power, Joest 
Power, Jacob 
Purdy, Moumouth 
Putney, Thorn 

Randle, David 
Reed, Ezra 
Reed, Elijah 
Reed, James 
Reed, C^roham 
Reed, Simeon 
Reed, EliaMm, Jr. 
Reynolds, Stephen 
Reynolds, William 
Reynolds, Jacob 
Roe, Silas 
Roe, Elijah 
Rogers, Jehea 
Rogers, Ichabod, Jr. 
Row, Nicholas 
Rowe, James B. 
Rudd, Zebulon 
Rudd, Barzillai 
Rundel, Jared 
Rundel, David 



Sackett, Ezekiel 
Sackett, Jolui 
Sackett, John, Jr. 
Sage, Benjamin 
Sage, Daniel • 
Seymour, John 
Shabalier, Abner 
Shavilier, Elias 
Shavelean, Solomon 
Sherwood, Parrock 
Sherwood, Asahel 
Shepherd, Samuel, Jr. 
Shepherd, Daniel 
Shepherd, Jonathan 
Sheppherd, Israel 
Shirtliff, Lemuel 
Slason, Bower 
Slavebean, Peter 
Slocum, Abraham 
Smith, Joseph 
Smith, Elijah 
Smith, Jesse, Jr. 
Smith, Thomas 
Smith, Elijah 
Smith, Piatt 
Smith, James, Jr. 
Sniter, Samuel 
Southworth, Samuel 
Somburgh, George 
Sornburgh, Frederick 
Spalding, Elnathan 
Spuer, Nathan 
Spuer, Jacob 
Stevens, Mathew 
Stephens, Andrew 
Stephens, Elkanah 
St. Johns, Ezra 
Swift, Nathaniel 
Swift, Samuel 
Scott, John 

Talcut, Joshua 
Thayer, John 
Thompson, Samuel 
Thompson, Sam'l 
Thomas, Thomas 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



99 



Thomas, Beriah 
Thurston, Ezra 
Thurston, John 
Thurston, Joel 
Tilson, Timothy 
Torner, John 
Trusde!, David 
Trowbridge, Seelye 
Tubbs, Adin 
Tyler, Shulel 

Vendeusen, Mathew 
Vaun, Benjamin 

Wanning, Thed 



Ways, Ebenezer 
Waters, Samuel 
Waters, David 
Washburn, Joel 
Warren, Stephen 
Webster, Daniel 
Webb, Josiah 
West, Samuel 
Welch, Thomas 
Wilk, Job 
Willeman, Weight 
Wilson, Reuben 
Wilson, Robert 
Wilson, Justus 
Wiltsie, Laurence 



Wilsey, William 
Winegar, Conrad 
Winegar, Garrett 
Winegar, Henry 
Winegar, Asahel 
Willett, GUbert 
Wood, BUjah 
Wood, Robert 
Wheeler, Seth 
Wheeler, Solomon 
Wheeler Noah 
Wyants, William, Jr. 

Young, William 



AMENIA PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 



Barlow, Nathan 
Benson, Joseph 
Benson, John 
Briggs, Ellis 
Bump, Edward 

Dorman, Jacob 
Dunham, John 
Dunham, Samuel, Sr. 

Finch, Albert 

Gates, John 



Gates, Stephen 
Green, Joseph 

Hamilton, Richard 
Heart, Samuel 

Mays, Elisha 
Marchant, Abell 

Reed, Silas 
Roberts, William 
Row, Garret 



Sackett, Richard 
Seeton, Rufus 
Swift, Judah 
Swift, Seth 

Washburn, Daniel 
Williams, Joseph 
Winegar, Samuel 
Winegar, Henry 
WWtcomb, Simon 
Woodworth, Dier 



RoswELi, Hopkins, Chairman. 

Silas Marsh, 

Samuel King, Assistants. 



BEEKMAN PRECINCT. 

The signers to the "Articles of Association," July, 1775. 

Abbet, David Amey, Nuklus Barber, William 

Acker, Johannes v' Andrews, John Beam, John 

Adriance, Albert Arnold, John Beckwith, Matthew 

Alger, William B. Gently, William, Jr. 

Alger, Jonathan Baker, Thomas Bently, William 

Alley, EUas Bailey, Henry Bently, Taber 



100 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Bently, John 
Bentiy, Tillinghest 
Birdsell, Henry 
Birdsell, Benjamin 
Bockus, Addom 
Bouler, Joseph 
Brewer, William 
Brown, Zephaniah 
Brown, David 
Brill, David 
Bull, Peter 
Bush, Judiath J. 
Bullock, Thomas 
Burcfa, Joshua 

Calton, Isaac 
Carman, Andrew 
Carman, Joseph 
Carman, Joshua 
Carman, Joshua, Jr. 
Cartwright, Peter 
Cary, Ebenezer 
Cary, Nathaniel 
Carr, Joseph 
Carr, Joseph 
Champlin, Joshua 
Champlin, Elisha 
Champlin, William 
Champlies, Joshua, Jr. 
Clark, William 
Clark, Thomas 
Clements, Tobias 
Cash, David 
Cash, Sylvanus 
Cockrane, Andrew 
Conger, John 
Coon, Mathew 
Cooper, Obadiah, Jr. 
Compter, John 
Cornell, Henry 
Cornell, Martin 
Cornell, Thomas 
Comwell, Samuel 
Crandel, Samuel 
Crandell, Amos 
Greedy, James M. 



Cronkkill, George 

Dakin, Woos 
Delong, Johannes 
Denne, Joseph 
Denne, Abraham 
Dennis, Jonathan 
Dennis, Isaac 
Doxie, Thomas 

Eagles, John 
Eastwood, James 
Edget, Joel 
Eldredge, Casy, Jr. 
Edwards, Salmay 
Esmond, Jacob 
Everett, Clear 
Ewery, Samuel 

Fish, Daniel 
Fish, John 
Fish, Pardon 
Flagler, Zachariah 
Force, Timothy 
Force, Solomon 
Force, Benjamin 
Forgason, Benjamin 
Forgason, Elijah 
Forgason, Elijah, Jr. 
Forgoson, Stephen 
Forguson, John 

/Gardner, Samuel 
' Green, Job 

Hall, Gideon 
HaU, WiUiam 
Hall, Benjamin 
Halloway, Joseph 
Harris, Peter 
Harris, Peter 
Harris, Myndert 
Heayelton, Charles 
Hegeman, John 
Hicks, John 
Hm, John 



Hopins, John 
Howard, Edward 
Hubbard, Ezekiel 
Huling, Walton 
HuUng, John 
Humphrey, William 
Humphrey, Wm., Jr. 
Humfrey, James 
Hutchins, Jacob, Jr. 
Hyatt, Abraham 

IngersoU, Josiah 

Jenkens, Judiah 
Jenkins, John 
Jenkins, Jonathan 
Jenkins, Jonathan, Jr„ 
Johnson, Stephen 

KeUey, WiUiam 
Kelley, John 
Kimmee, Digmus 
Koons, Nicholas 

Lamb, John 
Lain, Jacob 
Lawless, Joseph, Jr. 
Lain, Johannes 
Lawrence, Daniel 
Leavens, Peter 
Lester, Nehemiah 
Lewis, Samuel 
Ley, Thomas 
Losse, Francis 
Losse, George 
Losse, John 
Lossing, Johannes 



McClus, Peter 
McDowell, William 
McLees, James 
McNeal, William 

Markes, Aholyab 
Maynard, Cornelius 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



101 



Mackrill, Richard 
Melony, John 
Miller, Jacob 
M'CoUom, James 
Mill, Garret 
Moon, John 
Mowry, Joshua 
Mowery, Stephen 
Mosher, Abraham 

Nethaway, Thomas 
Newton, Charles 
Noxon, Benjamin 
Noxon, Peter 

Oakley, Jesse 
Oats, John 

Parker, Abel 
Parkes, "Whiten 
Parks, Jonathan 
Pamer, David 
Pearsall, Henry 
Piatt, Charles 
Pleas, Morris 
Potter, Nicholas 

Randall, Amos 
Reinsoner, John 
Reynolds, Joseph 
Reynolds, GrifBn 
Reynolds, Arnold 
Rogers, Ezekiel 
Rogers, Hezekiah 
Ross, Zebnlon 
Rogers, Nathaniel 
Rouse, Jacob 
Rush, Benjamin J. 



Adams, Edward 
Akerbry, John 
Atherton, Jonathan 

Ball, John 



Rush, Isaac J. 

Shear, Henry 
Shear, Peter 
Shear, Peter, Jr. 
Simpson, Abel 
Smith, Henry 
Smith, Ezekiel 
Smith, Nathaniel 
Smith, William 
Smith, Maurice 
Smith, John 
Smith, Seth 
Shear, Lewis 
Shear, WiUiam 
Shearman, Job 
Sol, Ebenezer 
Sol, Nathaniel 
Spargue, Seth 
Spencer, Benjamin 
Spencer, Jabez 
Spencer, Thomas 
Spencer, William 
Stevenson, Nathaniel 
Stafford, Rowland 
Storm Peter 
Storm, David 
Storm, David, Jr. 
Sweet, Benoni 
Sweet, John 
Sweet, Samuel 
Sweet, David 
Sweet, Theophilus 
Sweet, John, Jr. 
Sweet, Lodrick 
Sweet, George 
Sweet, Nathaniel 



Tabor, William 
Tanner, Job 
Tanner, James 
Taylor, Joseph 
Thorn, Gershom 
Tomson, Samuel 
Totten, GUbert 
Townsend, Stephen 
Townsend, Caleb 
Tredwell, Edward 
Tripp, Nial 

Uhl, Daniel 

Vail, Isaac 

Vail, Israel 

Van Wyck, Cornelius 

Vincent, Philip 

Vinton, John 

Vosburgh, James 

Wait, Christopher 
Weaver, John 
Weaver, Edward 
West, F. 
West, Jonathan 
Wells, James 
Whikmon, Henry 
Whitman, Samuel 
Wicks, Nathaniel 
Wiltse, James 
WUtse, France 
Wightman, John 
Wooley, John 

Yerrington, Isaac 
Youmans, Elial 
Young, Samuel 



BEEKMAN PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 

Beadle, Daniel Brundage, Thomas 



Booker, William 
Bowman, Ichabod 
Brill, Jacob 
Brown, John 



BuU, Josiah, Jr. 
Burtice, James 
Burtis, Garret 
Burnit, John 



102 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Buyce, Peter, Lieut. 
Buyce, Peter, Jr. 
Buyce, Abraham 
Byce, Abraham, Jr. 

Chatterton, Peter 
Cole, Myndert 
Collins, Hey, Lieut. 
Cornell, Richard 
Cornell, Richardus 
Crandle, Samuel 
Crandle, Samuel, Jr. 

Davis, Charles 
Dayton, Comberry 
Dearstine, John 
Dean, Stephen 
Deeyo, Peter 
Delong, Francis 
Delong, Arey. 
Dope, Peter 

Easterly, Martine 
Emory, Rowland 
Emory, Rowland 
Emigh, Yerry, Captain 
Emigh, Lawrence 
Emigh Philip 
Emigh, Nicholas (ison of 

of Philip) 
Emigh, Hendrick 
Emigh, Peter 

Ferris, Daniel 
Ferguson, Jacob 
Flagler, Philip 
Fish, Preserved, 
Fullmore, Jasper 

Gaslin. James 
Gidley, Henry 
Giles, William 
Gifford, William, Jr. 
Gifford, WilDam 
Golder, John 

• 
Harris, William 



Harris, Joseph, Capt. 
Hasver, Jacob 
Haxstum, Jeremiah 
Hegeman, Cornelius 
Heliker, Richard 
Hoag, Nathan 
Hogoboom, Peter 
Horton, Ephraim 
Hunt, Steph., Ensign 
Hutchings, Thomas 
Hyatt, Nathan 

Johnson, Peter 

Kedney, Peter 
Kenyon, Benjamin 
Ketcham, Abijah 
Klyn, Hendrick 

Lake, Crapo 
Langdon, Thomas 
Lasey, Aaron 
Levins, Peter St. 
Leuderbeck, Jeremiah 
Lockwood, Stephen 
Lossing, Yerry 
Losee, Laurence 
Losee, Joseph 

McDonald, John 

Miller, Philip 
Miller, Johannes 
Moon, Robert 
Morey, Roger 
Mosher, Nicholas 
Moyer, Christopher 



Noxon, James 
Noxon, Barthol, Jr, 



Overhaiser, Causper 
Overaker, Martine 

Paley, Peter 
Palmer, Elias 
Pettet, James 



Pine, Amos 

Richmond, Sylvester 
Rossell, Peter 

Shear, Johannes 
Shearman, Michal 
Shapher, Frederick 
Simson, Peter 
Skidmore, Andrew 
Sleeves, William 
Smith, Samuel 
Smith, John 
Stover, "Valentine 
Striker, James 
Stringham, Samuel 

Thomas, Charles 
Thorn, Gilbert 
Thorn, Jesse 
Thorn, Robert 
Thorn, Jonathan 
Tripp, Richard 
Tripp, Richard, Jr. 
Tripp, Israel 
Tripp, Smighting 
Titus, James 
Titus, Israel 

Valentine, Mathias 
Valey, Byndert 
Veal, Isaac 
Veily, Baultis 
Veily, Barnt, Ensign 
Vincent, Charles 
Vincent, Richard 
Vincent, Michael, Capt. 



Waterman, Oliver 
Way, Daniel 
Whipple, Samuel 
Wilkenson, John 
Woolf, Michel 
Woolf, William 
Wood, Bartholomew 
Worden, Ebenezer 
DiRCE G. BEiis'CKEttHorp, Chairman. 




THE DUTCH CHURCH, FISHKILL VILLAGE. 
Erected in 1731. Provincial Convention met liere in 
1776. Militarj' Prison during the Revolution. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



103 



NORTHEAST PRECINCT. 



The signers 

Atwater, Stephen 
Atwater, Benjamin 
Atwater, James 
Atwood, Nathan 
Ashley, Alden 
Avery, Edward 
Avery, John 

Baker, Daniel 
Bartel, John 
Beach, Ebenezer 
Bishop, Ebenezer 
Bishop, Asa 
Bostwick, John 
Brown, John 
Brownell, Jeremiah 
Bulkley, David 
Bullock, Asa 
Bull, John 
Burnett, John 
Buttolph, John 

Calkin, Elijah 
Calkin, David 
Calkin, Moses 
Calkin, Seth 
Carter, Jared 
Carpenter, John 
Campbell, Christian 
Casey, John 
Case, Seth, Jr. 
Case, Ichabod 
Case, Seth 
Clapp, Gilbert 
Close, Jonathan 
Coan, Ebenezer 
Colpland, John 
Colvin, John 
Colver, Elisha 
Conger, Samuel 
Conger, Benjamin 
Cornall, Jesse 
Covel, James 



to the "Articles of Association," July, 1776. 

Flnke, Wilhelm 
Foster, Joseph 
Foster, Vinant 
Fuller, Cornelius 
Fulton, John 



Covey, Benjamin 
Crandell, Samuel 
Crandle, John 
Crandell, Joseph 
Crandell, John 
Crandell, Samuel, Jr. 
Crandell, Samuel 
Crandel, Benjamin 
Crary, Joseph 
Craw, Ebenezer, Jr. 
Crosby, Thomas 
Crosby, ThomaiSi Sr. 
Crosby, Benjamin 
Cuthbert, Benjamin 

Dakin, Simon 
Dakin, Joshua 
Darling, Aaron 
Delamater, Cornelius 
Delis, Claudius 
Denton, Samuel 
Denton, Richard 
Dolph, Jonathan 
Dolph, Moses 
Dusenberry, Gabriel 

Edsed, Edward 
Edget, Stephen 
Edget, George, Jr. 
Egelston, Samuel R. 
Eggelston, Benjamin 
Egelston, Samuel 
Enery, Robert 
Estes, Richard 

Far, John 
Ferris, Jesse 
Ferguson, Orra 
Field, Michaelmas 
Fish, Moses 
Fish, Seth 
Fish, David 
Finch, Caleb 



Gifford, Jeremiah 
Gifford, Simeon 
Gray, Richard 
Graham, Morris 
Graham, Augustine 
Graham, Charles 
Grenell, Jonathan 

Hartwell, Abraham 
Hartwell, Ebenezer 
Harvey, David 
Hamblin, Joshua 
Hamblin, Joshua, Jr. 
Hagen, William 
Hayes, John 
Hawley, Luther 
Hawley, Josiah 
Hamblin, David 
Head, George 
Head, John 
Hedding, James 
Hedding, Marcus 
Hibbard, John 
Hill, Thomas 
Hitt, James 
Hoff, John 
Holmes, Sheubel 
Holmes, John 
Hommel, Petrus 
Horton, Peleg 
Housdell, John 
How, Libbens 
How, Charles 
Husted, John 

Jackson, Abner 
Jackson, Joseph 



104 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Jofanston, Archabel 
Jones, EphTaim, Jr. 

Ketchum, Hezekiah 
Ketchuin, Joseph 
Ketchum, Joseph, Jr. 
King, Ebenezer 
Knapp, Thomas 
Knickerbacker, Benj. 
Knickerbacker, John 
Knickerbacker, Benj., Jr. 
Knickerbacker, James 
Knickerbacker, Lawrence 
Knickerbacker, Peter 
Knickerbacker, Peter, Jr. 

Lamb, Isaac 
Lake, Elijah 
Latton, John 
Lawrence, David 
Lawrence, Jonathan 
Lawrence, Uriah 
Lesh, Jacob 
Lennon, John 
Leggat, Joseph 
Lewis, Jonathan 
Link, John 
Love, David 
Lothrop, Nathaniel 
Lot, Philip 
Louinbery, Nathan 
Louisber}'', Epanetus 

May, John 
Mansfield, "William 
Mapes, Jonathan 
Mead, Titus 
Mead, Jonathan 
Mead, Nathaniel 
Mead, Elisha 
Mead, Jahiel 
Merritt, Ebenezer 
Merritt, Thomas 
Merritt, Stephen 
Melham, John 
Miller, Samuel 



Morehouse, George 
Mott, Samuel 
Myer, Simeon J. 
More, Samuel 

McDaniel, Cornelius 
McMuUin, Alexander 

Neely, Samuel 
Nehr, Carel 
Newcomb, James 
Norton, Caleb 
Norton, Winthrop 

Orr, David 
Orr, John 
Orr, Hugh 
Orr, Matthew 
Orr, Robert 
Orr, William 
Ostrim, Barnard 
Owenell, Asahel 

Palmer, Joseph, Jr. 
Palmer, Daniel 
Palmetor, John 
Parks, Daniel 
Parks, William 
Peck, Joseph 
Perry, Seth 
Perry, Benjamin 
Perry, Josiah 
Perry, William H. C. 
Piatt, Eliphalep 
Porter, John 

Quick, Andrew 

Rawlee, Levi 
Ralston, Janus 
Randall, Joseph 
Rea, William 
Rea, Hugh 
Reed, Lemuel 
Reynolds, Joseph, Jr. 
Reynolds, Caleb 



Rice, Phineas, Jr. 
Rice, Phineas 
RUe, Ezekiel 
Robins, David 
Robins, William 
Robins, John 
Robinson, Wheaton 
Robertson, George 
Rouse, John 
Rouse, Casper 
Rogers, Isaac 
Rogers, Joseph 
Row, Samuel 
Row, Samuel L. 
Row, Bastain 
Row, John 
Row, Michael, Jr. 

Salisbury, Gideon 
Sarlsbuiy, Joseph 
Schermerhorn, John 
Schneyder, George 
Seeton, Reuel 
Seeton, Willard 
Seton, John 
Sherburne, Henry 
Shaw, Jeremiah 
Sharer, John 
Sliter, Godwin 
Smith, Samuel 
Smith, Isaac 
Smith, Peter 
Smith, Peter, Jr. 
Smith, William 
Smith, Philip 
Smith, William, Jr. 
Smith, Jonathan 
Simmonsi J. 
Simmons, Smith 
Sinunons, Ensley 
Snider, Adam 
Soaper, Timothy 
Soule, Daniel 
Soule, Benjamin 
Southard, Benjamin 
Spencer, Philip 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



105 



St. John, David 
Stickle, Andrus 
Stuart, John 
Stalker, Levi 
Stalker, Joseph 
Stalker, Comfort 
Stickles, Frederick 
Stephens, James 
Stewart, William 
Stuart, James 
Stevens, Adam 

Ter Bush, Benj'n 
Thompson, Israel 
Tovrasend, Thomas 
Trowbridge, Absalom 
Truesdall, Charles 
Truesdel, Stephen 



Vandusen, Peter 
Vanery, Anthoe 
Van Luven, Peter 
Viller, Cornelius 

Wadleigh, Theophilus 
Wells, Cornelius 
Weaver, Jacob 
Winans, Ira 
WUtse, Motsie 
Wilkes, John 
Wiltsie, John 
Winchell, James 
Winchell, Lemuel 
WincheU, James, Jr. 
Wilcox, Abner 
WUcox, Josiah 
Williams, John 



Williams, Lemuel 
Wood, Isaac 
Woodward, Caleb 
Wager, James 
WeUdien, Benoni 
Wilson, James 
Wilson, James, Jr. 
Wilson, John 
WUson, Robert 
Wilson, Daniel 
Winans, Isaac 
Winans, William 

Young, Isaac 
Young, Ebenezer 
Young, James 



NORTHEAST PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 



Allen, Isaac 
Allen, Peter 
Austin, Oliver 
Aveiy, Amos 
Amos, Nemiah 

Backer, John 
Bassoin, Peter 
Bathridk, Jonathan 
Bathrick, WiUiam 
Bearry, John 
Bill, Casper 
Bous, John 
Bous, Peter 
Brown, Asa 
Brimstool, Jacob 
Brjan, James 
Buttolph, Daniel 

Clark, Cornelius 
Clum, Philip 
Clum, William 
Colbox, Andrew 



CoUson, Andrew 
Colony, Michael 
Couse, Hontise 
Couse, Jacob 
Couse, Peter 
CrandeU, Laban 
Ciilver, Elisha 

Destin, Frederick 
Davis, Elisha 
Davis, William 
Deuell, Jonathan 
Doucher, Jacob 
Drum, Jacob 
Drum, John, Jr. 
Drum, John 

Eastis, Philip 
Eavery, Richard 
Embury, Robert 
Emet, Valentine 

Feeler, Leenes 
Fendik, Dirck 



Ferguson, Elijah 
Ferguson, Jeremiah 
Fillips, John 
Frothingham, George 

Gray, Thomas 
Green, William 
GifFord, Obadiah 
Gri£Sn, Jonathan 

Hapeman, John 
H^rtuf, John 
Hawley, John 
Herrick, John G. 
Holsop, Gerret 
Honk, Andrus 
Hoffman, Hendrick 
Hom, Frederick 
Honk, John 
Houghtaling, John 
Houghtaling, Isaac 
Houghtaling, Jacob 
Hover, Jacob 



106 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Keefer, Hendrick 
Kiefer, Yerre 
Kilmer, Simeon, St. 
Knapp, Peter 
Kresser, Marts 
Krister, John 

Lindsey, Darby- 
Link, John 
Loucks, Jacob 
Loiike, Jacob 

Mead, Daniel 
Melious, Jacob, Jr. 
Melious, William 
Melham, Coonrod 
Merrifield, WUliam 
Miner, George 
Mills, WiUiam 
Mott, Joseph 
Mortain, Greorge 
Miltmore, Jacob 

McAlpine, John 
McAlpine, Daniel 
McAlpine, Walter 
McConnely, Daniel 
Mcintosh, Lockland 
Mcintosh, Alexander 
Mcintosh, William 
McQueen, 



Niles, Nathaniel 
North, Daniel 
North, Robert 

Ostrander, Abraham 

Philips, Zachariah 
Pitcher, Adam 
Pitcher, Peter 
Pitcher, John 
Pulver, Andrus 
Pulver, John 
Pulver, Wandel 

Rector, WiUiam 
■Row, Motice 
Row, Michel, Sr. 
Row, Hendrick 
Row, John P. 
Row, John 
Row, Nicholas 
Row, Jacob 
Row, Hendrick Yost 

Scouten, Abraham 
Shaw, Aaron 
Shauer, Honeyfelt 
Sheridan, John 
Shaver, Jacob 
Silvemail, Nicholas 
Simmons, Michael 
Smith, John 



Smith, Tice 
Smith, Michel 
Smith, Nicholas 
Smith, Hontice 
Smith, Hontice, Jr. 
Smith, Leonard 
Snyder, Philip 
Stickle, John 
Stickle, Frederick 

Teal, Christopher 
Tiets, Henry 
Tiets, Zachariah 

Vanbramer, Jacob 
Van Kamp, John 
Vanleuvan, Benjamin 
Vanleuven, Isaac 

Weaver, John 
Weaver, Harvey 
Weaver, Peter 
Weaver,) Wanant 
White, John 
Wilbur, Benjamin 
Wilsey, Tice 
WUde, John 
Wildci Richard 
Winter, Matthew 

Younkhaus, Hendrick 



Charles Gbaham, 

HeKBY SHEBBmtlTE, 

George Morehouse, 
WiLUAM Stewart, 
J. SiHUOira, 
Nathaxiel Meau, 
Joseph Ketchum, 
Uriah Lawrence, 
Peter Kniceerbacker, 
JoHAirms Reiveitberoer, 
Daxiel Wilson, 
Hugh Orr, 



> Committee. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



107 



POUGHKEEPSIE PRECINCT. 
The signers to the "Articles of Association," June and July, 177S. 



Ackerman, Geleyn 
Adams, Ephraim 
Anneley, William 
Ashford, Nathaniel 

Bailey, John, Jr. 
Baily, John, Jr. 
Banlay, Abraham 
Bartley, Simon 
Bartly, Isaiah 
Beckwith, Silvanus 
Benschoten, Jacob V. 
Berner, Hans 
Billings, Andrew 
Bliss, Henry 
Boyce, Gideon 
Bout, Thomas 
Briener, John 
Brooks, George 
Brisby, James 
Brisleen, James 
Burnett, Matthew 
Burnett, Thomas 
Burnett, William 
Bush, Hendrick 
Bush, Martin 
Bush, Christian 
Burwell, Zachariah 

Carmen, Caleb 
Carmen, Caleb, Jr. 
Chaucer, Alex. 
Cooper, Ezekiah 
Cooper, Ezekiel 
Conner, Dorthir, Jr. 
Conlding, Matthew 
Conkling, John 
Conklin, Nathaniel 
Corey, Samuel 
Cooke, Samuel 

Davis, Richard 



Davis, John 
Denburgh, Richard, V. 
Denburgh, Jacob V. 
Dodge, Samuel 
Dodge, Henry 
Dubois, Lewis 
Dubois, John 
Dubois, Nathaniel 
Dubois, Jeremiah 
Dubois, Matthew 
Dubois, Joel 
Duteher, David 

Elderkin, James 
ElUs, Henry 
Everitt, Richard 

Ferden, Abraham 
Ferris, Jacob 
Ferris, Omar 
Forman, William 
Fort, Abraham 
Fort, Joharmus 
Freer, John 
Freer, Jacobus 
Freer, Jacobus, Jr. 
Freer, Simon 
Freer, Elias 

Greatwaks, Sylvanus 
Grigs, Alexander 

Haire, Alexander 
Hannes, Tunis 
Hegeman, Henry 
Hemsted, Nathaniel 
Hendrickson, Stephen 
Hill, John C. 
Hoefman, Carel 
Hoff, Henry 
Hoffman, Robert 
Holmes, Thomas 
Horn, Peter 



Howell, Lemuel 

Jacockes, Thomas 
Jaycock, Francis 
Jaycock, Benjamin 
Johnson, Jonathan 
Johnson, John 
Jones, William 

KeUey, William 
Kelley, Jones 
Kidney, Johannes 
Kingsland, John C. 
Kip, Henry 
Kip, Benoni 
Kornine, Isaac Jr. 

Lansing, Peter, Andes 
Lawson, William D. 
Lawson, William Jr. 
Leroy, Simon 
Leroy, Simon, Jr. 
Lewis, James 
Lewis, Barent 
Livingston, Henry, Jr. 
Livingston, James 
Livingston, Henry 
Lossing, Peter 
Lossing, Simon W. 
Lossing, Lariline, Jr. 
Low, Peter 
Low, Peter, Jr. 
Low, Jacob 
Luckey, James 
Luckey, Samuel 

Maxfield, John 
Mott, John 
Moss, Joshua 
Mullin, Peter 

Noa, Robert 
Noble, Cornelius 



108 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



North, Robert 

Pells, Hendrick 
Pells, Hendrick, Jr. 
Pilgrit, John 
Pitt, Abraham 
Piatt, Zephaniah 
Ploegh, Wilhelmus 
Poole, Isaac 
Poole, Thomas 

Reed, Aaron 
Reed, John 
Read, £11 
Read, James 
Ringland, John C. 
Roach, Wmiam 
Roades, Jacobus 
Robinson, John 
Romyne, John 
Rowse, Thomas 

Sands, George 
Saunders, John 

Sawckes, William 
/Schenck, John, Jr. 
^chenck, Paul 
Schryrer, Jacob 
Seabury, John 
Seabury, John, Jr. 
Shanhan, George 
Sharp, Mathias 
Smith, Samuel 



Shedeker, Richard 
Storm, Ck)rus 
Swartwout, Johannes 
Swartwout, Bamadus 
Swartwout, Minnard 
Swartwout, John 
Swartwout, Abraham 
Symmonds, Edward 
Sypher, Lodovick 

Tappan, Peter 
Tappen, Tennis 
Tappen, John 
Terry, William 
Ter Bush, John 
Townsend, John 
Tray, Nathan 
Travis, Thomas 

Van Bunschten, E. V. 
Van Bunschoten, J. 
Van Bunschoten, E. 
Van Blercome, Henry 
Van Denbogart, M. 
Van Denbogart, PI. 
Van Den Bogart, Jac. 
Van Denburgh, S. 
Van Dewater, Peter 
Van Keuren, M. 
Van Keuren, Abraham 
Van Keureij, Mat., Jr. 
Van Kleeck, Myndert 
Van Kleeck, Jac. 
Van Kleeck, John 



Van Kleeck, Law 
Van Kleeck, Pieter 
Van Kleeck, P. B. 
Van Kleeck, L. J. 
Van Kleeck, J. L. 
Van Kleeck, John T. 
Van Kleeck, Leonard 
Van Vliet, Gerrit 
Van Voorhees, S. 
Van VUet, Frederick 
Van Vliet, Peter 
Valleau, Peter F. 
Vielie, Cornelius 
Van Wagenen, Garrit 

Waddel, Hobert 
Waterman, John 
Wattles, Andrew 
Warner, Richard 
Westervelt, Casperos 
Westervelt, C. R. 
Westervelt, C. B. 
Weeks, Andrew 
WaterveU, Albo 
Westervelt, Enyamen 
Westervelt, Cornelius 
WUlsie, Henry 
Willsie, John 
WUsey, William 
Winchester, Azariah 
Winens, James 

Yerry, Michael 



POUGHKEEPSIE PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 



Ame, George 

Babcock, Nathaniel 
Badger, Ebinezer 
Baldwin, George 
Baldwin, Isaac 
Baldwin^ Isaac, Jr. 
Barnes, Henry 



Barnes, William 
Beyex, Henry 
Bogart, John V. D. 
Boman, John 
Byndirs, Myndert 

Chaddirdon, Joseph 
Chiirehell, Robert 



Coopman, John 
Crannell, B. 
Crud, Axistin 

De Graff, John 
Douglass, James 
Dubois, Jeremiah 
Dubois, Peter 




JOHN I. PLATT. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR, 



109 



Emons, Eli 
Emons, John 
Emmott, William 

Ferdon, John 
Ferdon, Jacob 
Ferdon, Esguire 
Ferdon, Zachary 
Frair, Abraham 
Frair, Abraham, Jr. 
Frair, Simon, Jr. 
Freer, Thomas 

Hull, Samuel 
Himt, John 

Kelly, James 
Kidney, Jacobus 
Kidney, Myndert 
Kidney, Robert 
Kipp, Matthew 

Laroy, Peter 
Lassing, Isaac J. 



Lassing, William 
Lasting, James 
Lewis, Felix 
Lewis, Melancthon 
Low, John 
Low, WUliam 

Meddlarj Arie 
Miller, Hendrick 
Miller, John 
Morey, Jonathan 

Noxen, B. 
Noxon, Simon 

Olmstead, Aaron 

Palmitear, Francis 
Palmitear, John 
Pelts, Evert 
Pelts, Francis 
Pelts, Michel 
Pinckney, Ezekiel 
Pinckney, John 



Pinkney, Thomas 
Pinckney, Samuel 
Polmatier, Jacob 

Read, Eli 
Rutsen, Michael J. 

Steenburgh, Flenmiing 

Thompson, Elias 

Van Deburgh, John 
Van Deburgh, H. J, 
Van Deburgh, Peter 
Van Denburgh, H. 
Van Denburgh, H.,Jr, 
Van Kleeck, Baltus 
•Van Kleeck, Peter P. 
Veal, Nehemiah 

Wellding, Michael 
Williamson, Tunis 
Wood, James 

Yelverton, Gail 



RHINEBECK PRECINCT. 
The signers to the "Articles of Association," June and July, 1775. 



Adams, James 

Backer, Zacharias 
Backer, Petrus 
Backer, Jonnes 
Backer, Christeaun 
Balist, John 
Bates, Uriah 
Beam, William 
Beekman, Henry 
Bemiger, William 
Berniger, Conrad 
Bemiger, Isaac, Jr. 
Berniger, Jacob 
Bender, John 
Berrger, Herrick 
Benson, Egbert 
Banks, John 



Benner, Frederick 
Benner, Johannes 
Benner, Henrich 
Benner, Johannes 
Benner, Jacob 
Binestal, Nicholas 
Binestal, Philip, Jr. 
Blair, John 
Bogardus, Benjamin 
Bouastcal, Philip 
Bovardee, Everardus 
Bowan, Andrew 
Brown, Peter 
Bull, George 
Bull, Henry 
Bunscoten, S. V. 
Burger, Martines 
Burgess, Henry, Jr. 



Campbell, Alexander 
Carney, William 
Chember, Joshua 
Coel, Simon, Jr. 
Cole, Peter 
Cole, John 
Cole, Isaac 
Cole, Abraham 
Cooper, Ananias 
Cowles, John 

Deninarh, Christ 
Dennes, John 
Demond, Cornelius 
De Witt, Peter 
Dillman, William 
Douglass, James 
Duncan, Herman 



no 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Blemendorph, Jacob 
Elmendorpfa, Jan 
Elmendorph, Corn^ 
ElmendoTuh, Samuel 
Ellsworth, Joseph 
Ensell, Lodowick 
Everett, James 

Fero, Christian 
Fisher, Jacob 
Fitch, Christopher 
Fradenburgfa, V. 
Freligh, Henry, Jr. 
Folant, Jacob 
Fuller, Philip 

Garrison, John 
Gay, Godfrey 
Gisselbergh, Henry 
Green, Samuel 
Gruber, Paul 
Greves, Thomas 

Haass, John 
Haberlan, Casper 
Haines, Samuel 
Hannule, Johannes 
Harrison, William 
Hebart, Joseph 
Hendrick, Godfrey 
Hermanse, Jacoc 
Hermanse, Andrias 
Hermanse, Peter 
Hermanse, Nicholas 
Hermanse, Jacob 
Hermanse, John 
Hermanse, Plulip 
Hermanse, Evart 
Hermanse, John 
Hermans, Reyer 
Heermanse, Helmes 
Hinneon, Elias 
Hoffman, Herman 
Hoffman, Zacharias 
Hoffman, Zacharias, Jr. 
Hoffman, Nicholas 



Hoffman, Peter 
Hoffman, Martine 
Hogan, Patt 
Huffman, John 
Humphry, Thomas 

Jones, Levi 

Kierstead, Hans 
Kipp, Isaac 
Kipp, Jacob J. 
Kip, Jacob 
Kip, Jacob A. 
Kip, Jacobus 
Kip, R. J. 
Kip, Abraham 
Klum, William 
Klum, Henry, Jr. 
Klum, John 
Knickerbocker, H. I. 
Kod, Simon 

Lawrence, Joseph 
Ledervyck, Peter 
L«scher, Coenradt 
Lewis, John 
Lewis, Thomas 
Lewis, Jacob 
Lewis, James 
Litmer, Henry 
Livey, Hendrick 
Livingston, P. G. 

McClure, William 
McFort, John 

Mardin, Goetlieb 
Mardin, Hendrick 
Martin, David 
Mares, John 
Mares, Isaac 
Maul, Jacob 
Meyer, Jeab 
Miller, Hendrick 
Miller, Christeaun 
Miller, Johannes 



MUler, Cornelius 
Michel, Andres 
Mitchell, John 
MUlham, Simon 
Millham, Jacob 
Millham, Laurence 
Mulford, Lemuel 
Mulford, David 
Mohr, Christian 
More, Jacob, Jr. 
Moore, John 
Moore, Philip J. 
Moul, Frederick 
Moul, Jacob Sen. 
Moon, Henderick 

Neer, Zach 

Ogden, Daniel 
Osterhoudt, C. 
Osterhoudt, Benjamin 
Ostrander, James 

Pawling, John 
Pitcher, William 
Pitcher, William, Jr. 
Pitcher, Wilhelmus 
Pitcher, Petrus 
Powell, Solomon 
Powell, William 

Radcliff, Peter 
Radcliff, William 
Reystorf, George 
Richter, Johannes 
Rogers, Joseph 
Rogers, John 
Root, Zacharias 
Rydders, Everhart 

Sater, John 
Schermerhorn, Reyer 
Schermerhorn, Jacob 
Schermerhorn, C. 
Schermerhorn, John 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



Ill 



Schneyd, Christoff 
Schatzel, Michael 
Schultzs, William 
Schoot, Simon, Jr. 
Schoot, William, Jr. 
Scoot, Peter 
Scoot, Jonathan 
Scott, Abraham 
Scriver, Jacob N. 
Scutt, Johannes 
Sears, Stephen 
Sharp, George 
Sheldon, George 
Sheffel, Michael 
Shop, Henry 
Shopf, Peter 
Shiiltz, Jacob 
Sickner, Albartus 
Sickner, Jacob 
Sickner, Jacob, Jr. 
Simon, Andrew 
Skepmus, William 
Slaats, Philip 
Smith, Wilhelmus 
Smith, Johannes 
Sole, Simon C. 
Staats, John 



Staats, Peter 
Stetling, George 
Stickle, Nicholas 
Stickle, Nicholas, Jr. 
Swart, Cornelius 

TeU, John 
Teter, Hendrick 
Ten Broeck, Petrus 
Thomas, Jacob 
Traver, Peter 
Tremper, Jacob 
Tremper, John 
Troophage, William 
Tuttle, WiUiam 
Turck, Johannes 

Van Fradenburgh, P. 
Van Keuron, Johns 
Van Keuron, Tobias 
Van Nauker, Peter 
Van Ness, John 
Van Ness, David 
Van Steenburgh, B. 
Van Vredenburgh, B. 
Van Vredenburgh, W. 
Vhoevanburgb, R. 
Vosburgh, Evart 



Vosburg, Jeab 

Waldron, WiUiam 
Wagenen, Barent V. 
Weaver, John, Jr. 
Weir, Frederick 
Wenneberger, C. 
Westfall, Abraham 
Wood, Johannes P. V. 
Walwork, Isaac 
Waterman, Henry, Jr. 
Waterman, Jeab 
Wagner, Evert V. 
Wagener, Art. V. 
Waldom, William 
Waldorn, Stoffle 
Waldorph, H., Jr. 
Weaver, Christopher 
Westfall, Simon 
Westfall, Peter, Jr. 
Whitbeck, Harmen 
Wheeler, Edward 
Whiteman, Zacharias 
White, John, Jr. 
Williams, John 

Younck, Joseph 



RHINEBECK PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 



Allemten, John 
AUemten, John F. 
Anderson, George 
Asher, Adam 
Asher, John 

Bander, John, Jr. 
Banmias, Coenradt 
Bargh, Christian 
Bargh, Christian, Jr. 
Barker, Johannes 
Barker, Martner 
Barker, Laurence 
Bennet, George 



Boutcher, Tunis 
Boutcher, Casper 
Bruce, Michael 
Bruce, Christian 
Brown, John 
Briant, Thomas 
Burgh, Adam 
Burger, Stephanus 
Bunchoten, Egbert 
Bunchoten, Harmanus 

CarneU, John 
Chafer, Jacob 
Cole, Jacob 



Cole, John J. . 
Cram, Petrus 
Cramer, Zacharias 
Cramer, Johannes 

Dedrick, Gerrit 
Dederlck, Christian 
Dericks, John 
Doom, Zacharias 
Doughty, Timothy 

Ecker, Adam 
Ecker, Peter 
Ecker, Johannes 



112 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Ecker, Adam, Juiy 
Ecker, Hendk. Jr. 
Elen, Jacob 
Elkenbergh, Peter 
Elshaver, Lodowick 
Evans, Jacob 

Fero, Petnis 
Fradenburgh, Peter 
Fraver, Johannes 
Freligh, Peter 
Freligh, Stephanus 
Freligh, Peter 
Frusam, Peter 
Fuller, Corns., Jr. 
Fuller, William 
Fynhout, Cornelius 

Hallick, Zebulon 
Hallock, John 
Heermans, Hendrick 
Hendericks, Joseph, Jr. 
Holmes, John 
Hoffman, Juery 
Hoffman, Nicholas 

Kelder, Jacob 
Kattyman, John 
Kip, Jacobus, Jr. 
Kip, Jacob S. 
Kip, Jacobus 
Kip, John 
Kip, John B. 
Kip, Abraham 
Kip, Peter 
Kipp, Arent 
Kiselbargh, Jacob 

Lament, George 
Landen, Hugh 
Leister, Mordecai 
Lewis, Gradus 
Lewis, Henry 
Livingston, Phil. S. 
Loune, Philip 
Loune, Bashan 



Loune, Anderis 
Loune, Jacob 
town, David 
Lown, Johannes, Jr. 
Lown, Jacob 
Luych, Andris 

Mackay, William 
Marguet, John 
Marguet, George 
Meyer, Hendrick 
Miller, Jacob 
Miller, John G. 

Neer, Jose 
Nehis, Francis 
Nehis, Charles 
Nehis, Francis, Jr. 
Nile, Peter 

Pawling, Henry 
Pelts, Hendrick 
Pihek, Philip 
Pinek, John 
Pinek, Philip, Jr. 
Polver, Conradt 
Presses, Peter 
Prongh, Peter 
Prough, Powlis 
Puis, Michael 
Puis, David 
Puis, Christuffal 
Puis, Daniel 
Puis, George 
Puis, Michael 

Richart, Henry 
Richart, Dowie 
Richart, PhUip 
Richart, Johannes 
Righpenbergh, John 
Righpenbergh, Petrus 
Ring, Christopher 
Ring, George 
Ring, Johannes 
Ring, David 



Rysdorf, Johannes 
Rysdorf, Petrus 
Rysdorf, Laurence 

Sager, Johannes 
Schryver, Peter, Esq. 
Schryver, Hendk. A. 
Schryver, Marthen 
Schryver, Marthynes 
Schryver, John 
Schryver, David 
Schever, Joest 
Schever, Frederick 
Schever, Henry 
Scriver, Peter 
Seeman, Jeremiah, Jr. 
Seeman, Michael 
Seeman, Abraham 
Seeman, Jacob 
Seeman, John 
Seeman, Jacob, Jr. 
Seeman, David, Jr. 
Shook, Hendrick 
Shook, Christian 
Shook, Cobus 
Shook, George 
Shomaker, Jacob 
Shaver, David 
Shever, Adam 
Shults, Christian 
Shults, John 
Shufelt, Jury A. 
Shewfelt, Laurence 
Sickner, John 
Shewfelt, Petrus 
Shewfelt, Adam 
Slays, Frederick 
Smith, Jacob 
Streght, Lodowick 
Stover, George 
Strant, Anthony 
Stienburgh, Benj., Jr. 
Steenburgh, John V. 

Ted, Martha 
Teel, Laurence, Jr. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



113 



Tennis, John 
Threecarter, Martin 
Tibbie, Adam 
Tibbie, Jacob 
Tile, John 
Traver, Philip 
Traver, Bastian 
Traver, Peter 
Traver, John 
Traver, John 
Traver, Peter H. 
Traver, John H. 
Traver, Frederick 
Traver, Jacob 

Van Alen, Peter 
Van Benthysen, B. 
Van Benthuysen, P. Sr. 
Van Benthuysen, J. 



Van Benschoten, T. 
Van Benschoten, E. 
Van E'sten, Jacob 
Van Esten, Johan, Jr. 
Van Etter, Matthew 
Van Eter, Cobus 
Van Etter, Isaac 
Van Etten, Benjamin 
Van Etten, Jacobus B. 
Van Etten, Jacobus 
Van Etten, Jacobus J, 
Van Etten, Abraham 
Van Etten, Benj., Jrj 
Van Etten, John 
Van Etten, Jacob 
Van Wagoner, Johan , 
Van Wagoner, Barent 
Vradenburgh, B. V. 
Vradenburgh, Jacobus 



Vradenburgh, Jacs., Jr. 

Wallace, William 
Wallace, Henry 
Waldron, William 
Wagor, Bashan 
Wagor, Powlis 
Wederwaks, Henry 
Wederwacks, Abraham 
Wels, John J. 
Wels, Benjamin 
Westfall, Benjamin 
Westfall, Peter 
Witterwax, Bastian 

Yager, Jacob 

Zipperley, Hans 

Egbert Bexsox, Chairman. 



ROMBOUT PRECINCT. 
The signers to the "Articles of Association," June and July, 1775. 



Ackerman, John 
Adriance, Isaac 
Adriance, Ham J. 
Adriance, John 
Adriance, George 
Adriance, Cornelius 
Akerly, Moses 
Anning, James 
Anning, Daniel 
Appleye, Coewradd 
Ardem, William 
Atwater, Benjamin 
Avery, Richard 

Barnes, James 
Barry, John 
Barber, Moses 
Balding, Jacob 
Bedell, Moses 
Bedell, Jease 
Belding, Joseph 



Bailey, Nathan 
Baker, Jesse 
Baker, William 
Bailey, Nathan, Jr. 
Baker, John 
Barker, William 
Bates, Stephen 
Backer, Jacob 
BedeU, Jeremiah 
Bennitt, John 
Bennitt, David 
Bell, Henry 
Bishop, Joshua 
Bise, Simon 
Boss, Zachariah 
Beourem, Hendrick 
Bogert, Adriance 
Boss, Johannes 
Bogart, Peter 
Bogardus, John 
Bogardus, Peter, Jr. 



Bennaway, Garret 
Bloom, George 
Bloodgood, John 
Brower, Nicholas, Jr. 
Brewer, Charles 
Brower, Adolphus 
Brower, Jacob 
Brinckerhoff, Johannes 
Briggs, Caleb 
Brinckerhoff, Dirck 
Brett, Theo. 
Brinckerhoff, John 
Branckerhoff, D. G. 
Brinckerhoff, Abm. 
Brinckerhoff, J. A. 
Brinckerhoff, J. G. 
Brinckerhoff, George 
Brinckerhoff, Stephen 
Brinckerhoff, Jacob 
Brinckerhoff, G. J. 
Brinckerhoff, Corns. 



114 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Brower, David 
Brower, Cornelius 
Brown, Aaron 
Brown, James 
Brett, Robert 
Brown, Aaron, Jr. 
Brock, William 
Brocks, William, Jr, 
Bush, John, Jr. 
Bump, George 
Bump, Thomas 
Bump, Thomas, Jr. 
Bump, George 
Buys, Henry 
Buys, Jacob, Jr. 
Burhanse, Henry 
Bloom, George 
Bums, Nathan 

Cauniff, Johannes 
Canfield, Daniel 
Carley, Albert 
Carpenter, Henry 
Cease, Abraham 
Churchill, Edward 
Chase, Seth 
Climip, Peter 
Clump, Peter, Jr. 
Clark, Ebenezer 
Cospman, Jacob 
ComweU, Clement 
Cornell, Caleb 
Cornell, Jesse 
Conklin, Lawrence 
Conklin, Elias 
Conner, Hugh 
Cooper, James 
Cooper, John 
Cooper, John, Jr. 
Cooper, Obadiah 
Cooper, Myndert 
Coopeo, O. W. 
Cooper, O. J. 
Cooper, Myndert, Jr. 
Co£Bn, John 
Comfort, Richard 



Cole, Jacob 
Cole, Isaac 
Culver, James 
Culver, Dennis 
Culver, James, Jr. 
Culbert, John 
Cushman, WiUiam 
Cronckheit, Abraham 

Dates, Adam 
Darlon, John 
Davison, James 
Davis, John 
David, Daniel 
Du Bois, Jacob, Jr. 
Du Bois, Tunis 
Deets, Peter 
Depung, Peter 
Devoe, John 
De Graef, Jacobus 
De Groff, Jacobus 
De Groff, Jacobus, Jr. 
De GrofF, Moses 
De Grout, John 
De Foreest, Abm. 
De Witt, Johanns, Jr. 
De Witt, Abraham 
Dewitt, Johanns 
D'oxey, Stephen 
Du Bois, Elesa 
Du Bois, Tunis, Jr. 
Duncan, James 
Dutcher, David 
Dutcher, Barent 
Duryee, Abraham 

Earls, WiUiam 
Ellsworth, George 
Elsworth, Charles 
Emans, Jacobus 
Emmitt, Elihu 

Fairchild, Nathaniel 
Fitzmonns, Peter 
Fowler, Joseph 
Fowler, Austin 



Fowler, Austin, Jr. 
Fowler, William 

Gabriel, N. E. 
Gershom, Martine 
Godwin, Henry 
Golph, Moses 
Gosline, Samuel 
Gray, John, Jr. 
Gray, Abraham 
Graham, Dimcan 
Green, James 
Green, James, Jr. 
GriflSn, Jacob 
GrifFen, Joseph 
Griffin, Richard 
Griffin, Cornelius 
Griffin, William , 
Griffin, Joshua 
Griffin, John 
Griffin, Isaac 
Gulnack, Caustine 

Halstead, Josiah 
Hardenburgh, Hendk. 
Hardenburgh, Dirck 
Hardenburgh, Garret 
Haines, Henry 
Haight, Jonathan 
Haskin, William 
Hegeman, Isaac 
Hegeman, Francis 
Hegerman, Dirck 
Heyer, Walter 
HefF, Lawrence 
Hevan, Godfrey 
Hicks, Joshua 
Hill, Andrew 
Higby, Hemming 
Horton, Jacob 
Horton, Joseph 
Horton, Peter 
Horton, Mathias 
Howard, James 
Horton, David 
Holmes, WiUiam 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



115 



Holmes, Isaac 
Hoffman, Jurrie 
Hoffman, Michael 
Houghteling, J. 
Hogelandt, William 
Hogland, Dei-iah 
Hogeboom, Barthol 
Hulst, Peter 
Hutchins, John 
Hutchins, Isaac 
Hutchins, Jacob 

Innes, James 

Jackson, Richard 
Jewell, John 
Jewell, Isaac 
Jewell, Isaac, Jr. 
Jewell, John, Jr. 
Jewell, Richard 
Jewdl, George 
Johnson, Daniel 
Johnson, Peter, Jr. 
Johnson, John 
Johnson, Thomas 
Jones, Jeremiah 

Killboume, James 
King, Richard 
King, Jacob 
KnifBn, Israel 
Kniffln, Daniel 
Kniffin, Jnoathan 
Kip, John 

Langdon, John 
Langdon, Jonathan 
Lane, William 
Lane, William, Jr. 
Lane, Jacob 
Lane, Gilbert 
Ladn, Abraham 
Laughin, Hugh 
Lawrence, A. J. 
Lawrence, John 
Lawrence, Lawrence 



Lee, Joseph 
Lent, Abraham A. 
Lent, Peter 
Leroy, Francis 
Leroy, John 
Leroy, John, Jr. 
Leroy, Simon 
Lewis, Thomas 
Leyster, John 
Losee, Abm. L. 
Losee, John L. 
Lounsberry, Nathan 
Lyons, David 

Mabie, Tobias 
Marten, Henry 
Martin, Jeremiah, Jr. 
Main, Sabure 
May, Francis, Jr. 
Mayer, John 
Maynema, John 
Mead, Ezra 
Mead, Jeremiah 
Meyer, Peter 
Miller, James 
Miller, James, Jr. 
Moody, Walter, Jr. 
Morris, Harvey M. 
Morrell, Abraham 
Monfort, Peter 
Monfort, Peter JJ 
Monfort, Deminicus 
Monstress, Peter 
Mount, Timothy 
Moury, David 
Munfort, Elbert 

McBride, John 
McCord, Joseph 
McCutchin, Robert 
McKeeby, Edward 
McSheeby, Dennis 

Nan Voorhis, Jerome 
Nettlaton, Amos 
Niffer, Jacob 



Nichkilson, Robert 
Noorstrant, Peter 
Noorstrant, John 

Ostrander, Corns 
Ostrander, Thomas 
Ostrom, John 
Ostrom, Andrew 
Osboi-ne, Cornelius 
Osborne, Stephen 
Osborne, Richard 
Osburn, James 
Odgen, Joseph 
Outwater, Peter 
Outwater, Daniel 

farks, John 
Parker, Joseph 
Patterson, Alijah 
Pellet, David 
Pelts, Henry 
Pendy, Stephen 
Piatt, Eliphelat 
Pine, Philip 
Pine, Silvinus 
Pine, Silvinus, Jr. 
Philip, John 
Phillips, Ralf 
Phillips, John, Jr. 
Pinkney, Thomas 
Pudney, Thome 
Pudney, Francis 
Pudney, John 
PuUick, John 
Purdy, Jesse 
Polmetier, Peter 
PiiUick, John, Jr. 

Ranny, Jeremia 
Raun, Christopher 
Rathbun, Andrew 
Renvells, Andrew 
Reyner, Daniel 
Reynolds, James 
Reynolds, James, Jr. 
Roberts, Samuel 



116 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Robinson, Peter 
Rosekrans, Frederick 
Rosekrans, James 
Rosekrans, Henry 
Rosekrans, Benjamin 
RoseKrans, John 
RoseKrans, John, Jr. 
Roe, Benjamin 
Rosekrans, H., Jr. 
Rogers, Robert 
Rogers, Flatt 
Runnels, John 
Rmmels, John, Jr. 
Rynden, James 
Rynden, Herman 

Saikryder, Timothy 
Saikryder, Moses 
Saikryder, Solomon 
■Schenck, Abraham 
Schenck, Martin 
Schendc, Roelef 
Schoonhore, Peter 
Scenck, Daniel 
■Schenck, Henry 
Schultz, Christopher, Jr. 
Schnltz, Christopher 
Schultz, Abraham 
Scouten, John 
Scouten, J. (son of Jerry) 
Scouten, William, Jr. 
Scouten, Simon S. 
Scutt, Frederick 
Sebring, Cornelius 
-Sebring, Isaac 
■Sebring, Cornelius, Jr. 
Sherburne, Henry 
Shaw, Daniel 
Shaw, Moses 
Shear, Abraham 
Sharrie, Johannes 
Simonton, Thomas 
Shute, Aaron 
■Sleght, Abraham 
ISleghV John H. 
Sleght, Jacobus 



Smith, Joshua 
Smith, Samson 
Smith, John 
Smith, Cornelius 
Smith, Isaac 
Smith, Martin 
Snyder, Peter 
Snider, Isaac 
Somes, Nathan 
Somes, Samuel 
Soaper, Timothy 
Somerdike, William 
Southard, Isaac 
Southard, Jonas 
Southard, John 
Southard, Zebulon 
Stanton, William 
Stienbergh, Peter 
Storm, Isaac 
Storm, Thomas 
Storm, Gores 
Storm, Garret 
Swartwout, Jacob 
Swartwout, Samuel 
Swartwout, John 
Swartwout, Jacob 
Swartwout, William, Jr. 
Swartwout, Cornelius 
Swartwout, Dalf 
Swartwout, James 
Swartwout, Jacs. 
Snediker, James 
Swart, Evart T. 
Skeet, Tunis 

Tappen, John 
Talmagee, Jonathan 
Talman, Timothy 
Ter Boos, Luke 
Ter Boss, Daniel 
Ter Boss, Isaac 
Ter Boss, Abraham 
Ter Bush, John 
Ter Bush, Peter 
Ter Bush, Isaac H. 
Ter Bush, Simon 



Ter Bush, John, Jr. 
Ter Bush, C. 
Terum, Albert 
Terry, Jonathan 
Teatsort, William 
Thaiker, Stephen 
Thurston, James 
Tirhum, John 
Tirhum, Daniel 
Tisdale, William 
Tood, Robert 
Tooten, Joseph 
Todd, Samuel 
Turner, Alexander 

Van Amburgh, Abm. 
Van Amburgh, A. H. 
Van Benschoten, L. E. 
Van Benschoten, M. 
Van Benschoten, J. 
Van Benschoten, P. 
Van Benschoten, T. 
Van Bunschoten, J. 
Van Bunschoten, E. E. 
Van Deursen, Peter 
Van Dewater, Peter 
Van Dewater, Francis 
Van Dewater, James 
Van Devort, P., Jr. 
Van Devoort, Jacob 
Vandevoort, John 
Van Kleek, B. J. 
Van Kleek, Peter, Jr. 
Van Kleek, Baltus 
Van Kleek, Barent 
Van Kleek, Sevaris 
Van Keuren, Charreik 
Van Voorhis, J., Jr. 
Van Voorhis, Henry 
Van Voorhis, Jacob 
Van Voorhis, Stephen 
Van Voorhis, Zach., Jr. 
Van Voorhis, Daniel 
Van Tyne, Abram 
Van Voorhees, Z. 
Van Voorhis, Abm. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



117 



Van Voorhls, J., Jr. 
Van TjTie, Abm. 
Van Wyck, Theods. 
Van Wyck, Richard 
Van Wyck, William 
Van Wyck, T., Jr. 
Van Wyck, T., Jr. 
Van Wyck, Abram 
Van Wyck, Isaac 
Van Tyne, WiUiam 
Van Werkeren, George 
Van Wackere, Abm. 
Van Hyning, Andrew 
Van Tasel, Jacob 
Van Sulen, John 
Ver Velon, Gideon 
Var Velen, Jeremiah 



Ver Valin, John 
Vanelin, Moses 
Verrie, Cornelius 
Vlaikren, Merinus 
Vermillie, John 
Veal, Isaac 

Ward, William 
Ward, Daniel 
Walters, John 
Watts, John 
Way, Gideon 
Way, Thomas 
Way, Francis 
Weeks, James 
Westervelt, Abm. 
Westervelt, Jost. 



Wiltse, Johannes 
Wiltse, Martin 
Wiltse, Cornelius 
Wiltsey, Henry T. 
Wilsen, Teunis 
Wildee, James 
Wilde, Isaiah 
Winslow, William 
Wright, John 
Wright, Daniel G., Jr. 
Wright, William 
Wright, Thomas 
Wright, Daniel 

Yeumans, Thomas 
yurkse, John 



ROMBOUT PRECINCT. 
A list of the persons who refused to sign. 



Capt. Heganan'g Co, 
Baker, William 
Burhans, Peter 
Cailen, Henry 
Cock, Michas 
Cole, Daniel 
Crandle, John 
Medagh, Jas. 
Middagh, Jores 
Monfoort, Albert 
Rogers, William 
Snider, John J. 
Tarpanning, John 
Terwilger, Urean 
Van Kleek, Barent A. 

Capt. 8. Brinkerhoofs Co. 
Baker, Jessey, Jr. 
Baker, Thomas 
Boss, Peter 
Brown, Silas 
Carman, Thomas 
Cure, William 
Devoe, Johannis 



Doty, Benjamin 
Ellis, Benjamin 
Ferinton, Joseph 
Goodfellow, William 
Gray, Zebulon 
Haasbroock, Daniel 
Halsted, Joseph 
Hoisted, John, Lieut. 
Kranchite, Tunis 
Lee, Jonathan 
Losee, Semeon 
Main, Ezekel 
Martin, Thomas 
Merritt, Joseph 
Miller, John 
Morss, Joseph 
Morss, Philip 
Peck, Oliver 
PeUit, Ebenezer 
Robison, Joseph 
Roe, David 
Roens, Philips 
Smith, Joseph 
Snyder, Benjamin 



Stolker, Stephen 
Storm, Johannes 
Odle, Joshua 
Ogden, Richard 
Winter, Christopher 
Winter, Levi 
Winter, Joseph 
Wright, Isaac 
Wright, Jacob 
Yeats, Richard 

Ca^t. Southard's Co. 
Adams, Neliah 
Bogardus, Robert 
Britt, Francis R. 
Brogardus, Peter 
Cooper, Jeremiah 
Covert, John 
Gibson, Thomas 
Green, Jeremiah 
Green, Joseph 
Halsted, Jonas 
Miller, Thomas 
Mills, Henry 
Mills, Increase 



118 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Mills, Robert 
Mills, Samuel 
Munger, Benjamin 
Nostrand Gerret 
FhUps, Abraham 
Philps, Henry 
Philps, Jacobus 
Philps, Peter 
Poyer, Thomas 
Purdy, Jesse 
Rider, Jacob 
Shoaf, Philip 
Southard, Daniel 
Southard, Gilbert 
Southard, Thomas 
Southard, Richard 
Southard, Richard, Jr. 
Sprage, Thomas 
Van Voorhees, EUas 
Vealey, Isaac 
Voorhees, Johannes 

Ca^t. John BedWi Co. 
Aulgelt, John 
Bailey, Sutten 
Bedele, John, Capt. 
Bounds, Gessom 
Brown, Samuel 
Buis, Matthew 
Burroughs, Joseph 
Carey, John, Jr. 
Carey, Joseph 
Carey, John, Sr. 
Caunef, John 
Craft, Thomas 
Cure, Matthews 
Cure, Samuel 
Daily, Lawrence 
Dubois, Peter 
Gerox, Benjamin 
Gerroson, Reuben 
Gerrison, Abraham 
Gildersleeve, Nathaniel 
Giou, Isaac 
Goslin, William 
Hasbrouck, Benjamin 
Hasbrook, F., Lieut. 



Hett, Jeremiah 
Kichim, Samuel 
Laduex, Nathaniel 
Laine, Joseph 
Lating, Ambrose 
LangdoD, John S. 
Larduex, Oliver 
I^core, Isaac 
Linabeck, John 
Light, Henry 
Lisk, Benjamin 
Lisk, John 
Mabee, Simeon 
Maley, Abraham 
Nefuss, Abraham 
Nefuss, George 
Peck, John 
Post, Joseph 
Purdy, Abraham 
Purdy, Enoch 
Rowland, Marvin 
Schutt, John, Lieut. 
Schutt, Jacobus J 
Schouten, Andrew J. 
Schouten, John J. 
Scouten, Ephraim 
Sloot, John 
Storm, Peter 
Storm, Nicholas 
Swartwout, Johannes 
Swartwout, Thomas 
Thomkins, Gabriel 
Travis, Abraham 
Van Hyning, Abraham 
Van Nostrand, George 
Van Vlaren, M. J. 
Venson, Charles 
Way, James F. 
Weekes, Stephen 
Winn, William 
Winn, Joseph 
Wood, Joseph 
Wood, Isaac 
Wood, John 
Wood, Thomas 
Wood, John J. 



Washboum, Isaac 
Young, Abraham 

Capt. Matthias Lyster't 
Co. 

Barnes, Gilbert 
Bancker, Stephen 
Besship, Joshua 
/Brogardus, Francis 
Buchout, John 
Burch, Andrew 
Carnell, John 
Churchill, John 
Cook, John 
Dubois, Johannes 
Dubois, Jacob J. 
Duryee, Stephen 
Duryee, Abraham 
Haboun, John 
Harremens, Will H. 
Herremans, A., Lieut. 
Herremans, Andr., Jr. 
Herremans, John 
Hicks, James 
Hoff, Peter 
Hogeland, Abraham 
Hudson, John 
Huff, John 
Huson, Walter 
Keniff, John 
Lent, Abraham 
Livingston, Samuel 
Lyster, Matthias, Capt. 
Lyster, Dirck 
Lyster, Cornelius 
Lyster, Gerret 
Manfort, Adrian 
Manfort, John 
Monfoort, Albert 
Morgan, James 
Nostrand, Cornelius 
Ses, John 
Somes, Timothy 
Strong, Gilbert 
Strong, Undrel 
Tichout, Gideon 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



119 



Thorne, John 
Thome, Stephen 
Theale, Joseph 
Vanbrare, Thomas 
Vanderbilt, A., Ensign 
Van Cramer, Peter 
Van Sickler, Cornel 
Van Vleck, Hendrick 

Capt. Horton'g Co. 
Aulgett, Adam 
Brevoort, John 
Brush, Joseph 
Clapp, Benjamin 
Clapp, John 
Clapp, Thomas 
Delany, Peter 
Depue, Peter 
Depue, Abraham 
Duly, Joshua 
Hoff, Paule 



Hougen, Edward 
Huff, Abraham 
Jewill, Jacob 
Juell, William 
Lent, Isaac 
Lewis, Jacob 
McCrade, Chas. 
Snedeker, John 
Van Vlaeron 
Vermilyer, David 
Vermilyer, Gerradus 
Weel, John 
Wilddey, John 
Wiltsee, John 

Capt. Griffin's Ce. 

Ackerly, Benjamin 
Anderson, Joseph 
Bloom, Benjamin 
Bishop, Caleb 



Churchill, John 
Covenhoven, Adrian 
Dubois, Peter 
Griffin, Thomas 
Jay, John 
Miller, Philip 
Nostrand, George 
Obriant, Matthew 
Philps, Henry C. 
Purdy, Joshua 
Schouten, Andrew 
Thurston, Benjamin 
Thurston, Joseph 
Underwood, Henry 
Van Tessel, Henry, Jr. 
Verplanck, Philip 
Ward, Daniel 
Ward, James 
Ward, Jacob 
Woods, Solomon 



"FishkiU, August 23, 177S. 
Sir; Enclosed is the return of the persons who have signed the Association, 
and of those who have refused. In the latter you find many erasures, occasioned 
by their signing afterwards. This affair has been delayed thus long on account of 
pursuing lenient measures. 
I am by the order of the Committee, your most obedient servant, 

DiBCK G. Beinckerhoff, Chairman." 

The list of non-signers in Rombout Precinct is composed solely of 
members of military companies in the service of the Crown of England, 
and their signatures to the "Revolutionary Pledge" would have been 
a treasonable offence. 



120 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 

Continental Line. 

THE first Provincial Congress of New York met May 22, 1775, 
in New York City, to devise measures for the general safety, 
and to authorize the recruiting of men. County Committees 
of Safety were formed and their duties were numerous and important. 
The following gentlemen composed the Dutchess Committee: Egbert 
Benson (Chairman), John Collen, Samuel Dodge, Elnathan Gregory, 
Jacob Grifiin, Herman Hoffman, Frederick Jay, Nathan Pearce, James 
Weeks. Precinct Committees were also formed, and one of their first 
duties was to visit the Tories in the county, and request in a friendly 
manner that they surrender their firearms for the use of the Con- 
tinental forces, at a reasonable price. In case of refusal the firearms 
were taken forcibly. A considerable number of guns were thus ob- 
tained, a total of 431 being delivered to the State by the Committee 
of Rombout Precinct alone, in 1776-'77. 

The Provincial authorities of New York in 1775, authorized the 
organization of four regiments, known as the Continental Line, to 
serve for six months, and thus designated: First New York, Second 
Albany, Third Ulster, Fourth Dutchess. The regiments were com- 
manded respectively by Alexander McDougal, Goose Van Schaick, 
James Clinton, and James Holmes. Zephaniah Piatt, Gilbert Liv- 
ingston and Melancthon Smith constituted the Military Committee for 
Dutchess county, and received the warrants for raising men for the 
Fourth or Dutchess regiment, which, when organized, June 30th, 
1775, had the following field and company officers: 

James Holmes, Col. (from Westchester dounty) ; Philip Court- 
landt, Lieut. Col.; Barnabas Tuthill, Major; Benjamin Chapman, 
Quarter-Master.^ 

1. C<4. Holmes and Major Tuthill became diaaatisfled with the arrangement In the 
rank of field officers of the four regiments and resigned. Col. Holmes joined the Tories. 
He was succeeded in command of the Fourth by Henry B. Livingston. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 121 

Captains — Henry B. Livingston, Jonathan Piatt, Rufus Herrick, 
Daniel Mills, Ambrose Horton, Nathaniel Woodward, John R. Liv- 
ingston, Henry G. Livingston, Jacobus WynKoop, Joseph Benedict, 
Jr. 

First Lieutenants — Jacob Thomas, David Daw, Charles Graham, 
Elijah Hunter, David Palmer, Abraham Ricker, Leonard Ten Broeck, 
Samuel Van Vechten, Anthony Welch. 

The organizations composing the Continental Line were under pay 
of the Continental Congress, and in the service as the regular army 
and liable to duty in any part of the country, while the militia as such 
could not be taken outside of the States in which they resided. Wash- 
ington learned very early in the war that the militia was not a force 
which could be relied upon — ^that there must be a regularly consti- 
tuted army. For the making of an army no better material was ever 
found than the men drawn from the Militia of Dutchess. The follow- 
ing officers and privates composed the Fourth Regiment (Dutchess) 
of the Line, at various times during the whole period of the war: 

Colonel James Holmes Quarter-Master James Barrett 

Colonel Henry B. Livingston Quarter-Master Nememiah Carpenter 

Lieut. Col. Pierre Regnier Quarter-Master Gelston 

Lieut. Col. Frederick Weissenfels Quarter-Master Job Mulford 

Lieut. Col. Frederick Wiessenfels Quarter-Master Peter Vonk 

Major John Davis Paymaster John Franks 

Major Benjamin Ledyard Chaplain John P. Testard 

Major Joseph McCracken Surgeon Caleb Sweet 

Adjutant Peter Sacket Surgeon John Francis Vache 

Adjutant Samuel Tallmadge Surgeon John F. Vasher 

Adjutant John Tuthill Surgeon John Francis Vasher 

Captains — Joseph Benedict, John Davis, Henry Dodge, Edward Dunscome, Peter 
Elsworth, Theodorus Fowler, Silas Gray, Eufus Herrick, Ambrose Horton, William 
Jackson, Benjamin Marvin, Daniel Mills, Nathaniel Norton, David Palmer, Jona- 
than Pearsee, Jonathan Perry, Jonathan Piatt, Reeve, Daniel Roe, James 

Rosekrans, Samuel Sacket, Israel Smith, Nathan Strong, Nathaniel Strong, Jona- 
than Titus, Benjamin Walker, Nathaniel Woodard. 

LiEUTEiTAifTs — ^William B. Alger, James Barrett, Cornelius Becker, Ben- 
jamin, Leonard Bleecker, Gould Boughten, Henry Brewster, Brush, Man- 
ning Bull, Peter Bunshoten, Edward Conklin, Sylvanus Conkling, William Crane, David 
Dan, Daniel E. Deniston, Daniel Denniston, Henry Dodge, James Dow, Peter Elsworth, 
Peter C. Elsworth, William Theodosious Fowler, Joseph Frilick, Charles Graham, 
William Havens, Thomas Hunt, Elijah Himter, Abraham Hyatt, 'John Lawrence, 
Thomas Lee, John Lloyd, William Matthewman, Miles Oakley, Isaac Paddock, 



122 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Samuel Tredwell Pell, AbTaham Riker, Isaac A. Rosa, 



Sayer, George Smith, 



Isaac Springer, Gilbert Strang, Jacob Thomas, Jesse Thompson, Daniel Topping, 
William Troop, Robert Troup, Azariah Tuthill, John Van Antwerp, Peter Van 

Bunschoten, Rudolph Van Hoevenbargh, Isaac Vanwart, Roswell Wilcocks, 

Yoimgh. 

EusiSifs — John Barr, Caleb Bruister, Simon Cregier, Simon Crygier, Samuel 
Dodge, Joseph Froilick, Stephen Griffin, Joseph Morrill, John Punderson, Samuel 
Talmadge, Ephraim Woodruff. 



Acker, Henry •^ 
Acker, Jacob / 
Ackerson, C. 
Adams, Daniel 
Adams, Ebenezer 
Adams, James 
Adams, Jesse 
Adams, Major 
Adorns, Samuel 
Adurns, Thomas 
AUen, Samuel 
Allison, Richard 
Allport, John 
Alport, John 
Amberman, Cornelius 
Ambler, Benjamin 
Ambler, Stephen 
Ammerman, Cornelius 
Anderson, James 
Andress, Joseph 
Anson, James 
Anthony, Simon 
Antone, John 
Armstrong, Jonathan 
Ashford, Nathaniel 
Ashley, William 
Aston, Benoni 
Atkins, Robert 
Atwater, John 
Austin, Holmes 
Austin, Lockwood 
Avery, Nehemiah 
Avout, Philip 
Aymes, Francis 
Backus, Jacob 
Bailey, Elias 



ENLISTED MEN. 

Baker, Anthony 
Baker, Benjamin 
Baker, Elijah 
Baker, Henry 
Baker, John 
Baker, Joshua 
Baker, Pierce 
Balding, Jehial 
Balding, Nathaniel 
Baley, Jonathan 
Baley, Leonard 
Ball, Samuel 
Banker, Jacob 
Banker, William 
Baptist, John 
Barber, Reuben 
Baremore, Edward 
Barkens, William 
Barker, Jonathan 
Barlow, Nathan 
Bamhart, David 
Barnhart, Jeremiah 
Barns, Glean 
Barns, John 
Barns, Peter 
Barrows, James 
Barry, Charles 
Barlley, Andrew 
Barto, John 
Bartoe, Morris 
Basely, Cornelius 
Bassett, William 
Biayless, Richard 
Bayley, Daniel 
Beaty, Hugh 
Bebee, Benorger 



Becker, Peter 
Beckwith, Silas 
Beebe, Bonarges 
Beedle, WiUiam 
Beel, Matthew 
Bellamy, Silas 
Benedict, Ambrose 
Benjamin, David 
Benjamin, Stephen 
Bennadict, Benjamin 
Bennadict, Nathan 
Bennadict, Peter 
Bennet, James 
Bennet, William 
Bennett, Jacob 
Bennett, Timothy 
Benschoten, Elias 
Bentley, William 
Begordus, Peter 
-^Berrnard, Samuel 
Berry, Charles 
Berry, Jabez 
Berry, James 
Berry, John 
Bertley, Andrew 
Betson, Thomas 
Betts, Nehemiah 
Bingham, Abisha 
Bishop, Ebenezer 
Black, David 
Black, Richard 
Black, William 
Blank, Jasper 
Blaze, Christopher 
Blendberry, Elijah 
Blonck, J. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



123 



Blonk, Jesper 
Bockus, Jacob 
Bodley, Andrew 
Bogardus, Henry 
Bogg, John 
Bogurdus, Nung 
Boice, James 
Boiles, James 
Boncher, William 
Bond, John 
Bonker, William 
Houghton, Moses 
Boughton, Simeon 
Bourne, William 
B'outen Samuel 
Bouton, Joseph 
Bouton, Joseph, Jr. 
Bower 

Bowers, Isaac 
Bowers, James 
Bowman, Bacchus 
Bowne, Rodman 
Boyles, James 
Bradt, John 
Brady, John 
Bragame, John 
Brainerd, Ruben 
Braney, Lowring 
Brant, John 
Brant, William 
Brewer, Jeremiah 
Brewland, Johiel 
Briggs, Jacob 
Briggs, Jeremiah 
Brock, Robert 
Brooks, Daniel 
Brooks, Jedlah 
Brooks, John 
Brooks, Robert 
Brooks, Thomas 
Brown, David 
Brown, Deliverance 
Brown, Eliphelet 
Brown, Hubbard 
Brown, John 
Brown, Joseph 



Brown, Samuel 
Brown, Stephen 
Brown, William 
Brown, Zephanlah 
Brundage, Nathan 
Brunson, Samuel 
Brush, Selah 
Brush, Simeon F. 
Brustler, Daniell 
Bruton, Arthur 
Bryan, Thomas 
Buchannan, Samuel 
Buckingham, Stephen 
Buckleman, Henry 
Budd, John 
Budin, Francis 
Budine, Francis 
Bump, Joseph 
Sunday, Jeremiah 
Bunker, William 
Burch, Henry 
Burch, Jonathan 
Burd, Jeremiah 
Burdick, EUsha 
Surges, Stephen 
Burgess, Archibold 
Surget, Mlllbury 
Surhans, Fjerrick 
Burhans, John 
Surhans, Thirh 
Surhans, Yerlck 
Surkstaff, David 
Burnet, Ebenezer 
Surnet, Squire 
Bumham, William 
Surnhart, David 
Burns, Edward 
Burr, DanieU 
Burrance, John 
Surrit, William 
Burrows, James 
Surrows, Samuel 
Bush, Simon T- 
Sussing, John 
Bustee, Peter 
Camby, James 



Cammerson, Alexander 
Camp, Asa 
Campbell, Andrew 
Campbell, Jacob 
Campbell, James 
Campbell, John 
Canaday, John 
Canady, James 
Canby, James 
Canfield, Amon 
Canfield, Daniel 
Cankhert, Henry 
Carby, Richard 
CarU 

Carney, Barny 
Carney, William 
Cskny, Thomas 
Captenter, James 
Carr, Anthony 
Carr, James 
Carrey, John 
Carrion, Green 
Case, Ichabod 
Casey, James 
Cashan, William 
Cashln, William 
Cato 

Cato, Tunis 
Gavins, Patrick 
Chapman, Daniel 
Chappel, Benjamin 
Chappel, Benjamin, Jr. 
Charlesworth, John Miles 
Chase, Isaac 
Chatterton, James 
Cherry, John 
Chesley, John 
Chevalier, John 
Chlnander, John 
Chrlstee, J. 
Christen, Peter 
Cisco, Dick 
Clackson, George 
Clark, Barnabas 
Clark, Cornelius 
Clark, David 



124 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Clark, Ephraim 
Clark, James 
Clark, John 
Clark, Joseph, Jr. 
Clark, Peter 
Clarke, Joshua 
Clements, John 
Cliff, Joseph 
Clift, Joseph 
Close, Christopher 
Closs, Peter 
Closser, Christopher 
Coats, Joseph 
Coe, Benjamin 
Cole, Aaron 
Cole, Abraham 
Cole, Barnabas 
Cole, Oliver 
Cole, William 
Coleman, Samuel 
CoUins, Edward 
Collins, John 
Colly, Henry 
Colver, Joseph 
Colvin, James 
Conden, Philip 
Conington, Joseph 
Conkling, Daniel 
Conkling, Edward 
Conkling, Nathan 
Conkling, William 
Conkright, Henry 
Conn, William 
Conner, Joseph 
Connerly, Dennis 
Connoly, James 
Connor, James 
Connor, John 
Connor, Patrick 
Connor, Timothy 
Constable, Garret 
Converse, Samuel 
Cook 

Cook, Alexander 
Cook, Hanas 
Cook, George 



Cook, Moses 
Cook, Nathan 
Cook, Nathaniel 
Cook, Obadiah 
Coon, Jacob 
Coon, Peter 
Cooper, David 
Cooper, John 
Copinger, Walter 
Coppenger, John 
Corkangs, Eli 
Cornell, Caleb 
Cornwall, Caleb 
CornweU, Thomas 
Cortright, Henry 
Corwine, Edward 
Corwine, Gersham 
Cossington, John 
CottreU, Richard 
Couchoover, William 
Couray, Michael 
Cowan, Isaac 
Cox, John 
Cox, Simon 
Cozard, Richard 
Craft, Nathaniel 
Craig, John 
Crane, Josiah 
Crannell, Isaac 
Crawford, John 
Crawford, Thomas 
Cregear, John 
Crissler, John 
Gristle, William 
Cronch, James 
Cronk, Hendrick 
Cronk, Timothy 
Crosby, Enock 
Crosby, Isaac 
Crosby, Thomas 
Grossman, Dan ' 
Cross, John 
Grossman, Daniel 
Growfot, Nehemiah 
Cummers, Jonathan 
Cunningham, Archibald 



Cunningham, Henry 
Cunningham, John 
Cunningham, Shubal 
Curaw, Michael 
Curby, John 
Cure, William 
Curry, Elijah 
Gurry, Michael 
Cursor, Tunis 
Curtis, Naniad 
Curtis, Niard 
Curtis, Solomon 
Gurwin, Edward 
Curwin, Gersham 
Gurwine, Gersham 
Cuzard, Richard 
Daggett, Mahew 
Dale, Richard 
Daley, John 
Dalton, Walter 
Dan, Abijah 
Dan, Jonathan 
Danavan, Peter 
Daniels, John 
Dannolds, John 
David, Isaac 
Davids, William 
Davies, Chapman 
Davies, Joseph 
Davis, Caleb 
Davis, Chapman 
Davis, Henry 
Davis, John 
Davis, Joseph 
Davis, Joshua 
Davis, Patrick 
Davis, Peter 
Davis, Richard 
Davis, Thomas 
Davison, John 
Dawson, John 
Day, Aaron 
Day, Isaac 
Day, Jonathan 
Day, Lewis 
Dalley, John 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



125 



Dayton, Bennet 
Dayton, Samuel 
Dayton, Samuel, Jr. 
D'Bushe, Anthony 
Dean, Abram 
Deaton, Frederick 
Decker, George 
Decker, Jacobus 
Decker, James B. 
Decker, John 
Decker, Jonathan 
Decker, Michael 
Decker, Yerry 
Deen, Isaac 
Deen, John 
Deen, William 
DeFrees, Ebenzer 
DeFrees, Reuben 
Delaney, Dennis 
Demerest, John 
Demerest, Nicholas 
Demorest, John 
Demott, Peter 
Deniereft, Nicholas 
Dennis, Mydert 
Dennison, Thomas 
Denniss, Miner 
Denniston, Thomas 
Denny, Peter 
Depont, Bosteon 
Depue, George 
Derby, Thomas 
De Rusha, Anthony 
Desert, John 
Dew, Francis 
Dick, Henry 
Dick, Thomas 
Dickerson, Abraham 
Dickerson, Benjamin 
Dickerson, David 
Dickerson, Jeduthan 
Dickerson, John 
Dickson, Andrew 
Dickson, Gabriel 
Dickson, Nathan 
Dickson, Richard 



Dickson, William 
Dieson, John 
Dieson, Nathan 
Dimond, Jonathan 
Dodge, Samuel, Jr. 
Dodge, Stephen 
Dole, John M. 
Dollaway, Andrew 
Dolph, Jonathan 
Donnalds, John 
Dose, Richard 
Doty, John 
Dougherty, Mark 
Doughty, Elias 
Doughty, George 
Dowd, Isaac 
Downing, Andrew 
Doxey, Stephen 
Doyle, Hugh 
Doyle, John 
Drake, Benoni 
Drean, Patrick 
Drenning, Hamilton 
Duall, Samuel 
Ducher, Adam 
Duff, Peter 
Duguid, John 
Dunbar, William 
Duncan, Thomas 
Dunk, Henry 
Dunmore, Caesar 
Dunnavan, John 
Dunnavun, Peter 
Dunnivan, John 
Dunscomb, Edward 
Dupont, Bosteon 
Duran, Francis 
Dutcher, Bornt 
Dutcher, John 
Dwire, Simon 
Eaddy, James 
Earl, John 
Easton, Henry 
Eastwood, Benjamin 
Edgit, George 
Edwards, David 



Egberts, John 
Elker, Emmer 
Elliot, John 
Elliot, John, Jr. 
Elliott, Archibald 
EUis, John 
EUison, Isaac 
EUison, Richard 
Ellison, Thomas 
Elsworth, Ezekel 
Elsworth, John 
English, John 
Ennls, Peter 
Ephram, Ebenezer 
Epton, Benjamin 
Erwin, John 
Esmond, Isaiah 
Esmond, James 
Essmond, John 
Evalt, Philip 
Evens, William 
Everit, Francis 
Every, Nehemiah 
Fairly, William 
Fansher, John 
Fardon, Samuel 
Farrier, Thomas 
Fegan, Timothy 
Ferbush, Simon 
Ferdon, A. 
Ferdon, Thomas 
Ferdone, Samuel 
Ferguson, Samuel 
Ferris, John 
Ferris, Jonah 
Ferris, Joseph 
Ferris, Ludowick 
Ferris, Samuel 
Fichett, Abraham 
Filer, Thomas 
Finch, Eliatham 
Finch, Elnathan 
Finch, William 
Finton, Amos 
Fish, Ebner 
Fisher, James 



126 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Fitch, James 
Fitzgerald, Christ" r Mille 
Flemming, Patrick 
Fletcher, Lawrence 
Flinn, John 
Flood, Cilas 
Forbush, Alexander 
Ford, William 
Forgison, Jeremiah 
Forsey, Josh. 
Fosburgh, Peter 
FosdidE, Samuel 
Foster, John 
Foster, Nathaniel 
Foster, Vincent 
Foster, William 
Fountain, Stephen 
Fowler, Philip 
Foy, Edward 
Fralick, John 
Francis, John 
Franke, Michel 
Franke, Peter 
Franks, Michael 
Frasier, Jeremiah 
Frayer, Simon 
Fredenbergh, James 
Freeman, Nathaniel 
Freeman, Robert 
Fross, Stephen 
Frye, Benjamin 
Fuller, Josiah 
Fulre, Thomas 
Furdon, Thomas 
Furman, Samuel 
Galasby, James 
Gantly, Patrick 
Gardner, Jesse 
Gardon, Andrew 
Garrisson, Abraham 
Garrisson, Peter 
Gates, Nathaniel 
Gee,. David 
Gee, Ezekiel 
Gee, John 
Geers, Benjamin 



Gibbons, John 
Gibson, John 
Gibson, Robert 
GUchrist, WiUiam 
Gillaspy, James 
Gillcrist, John 
Gillcrist, William 
Gillet, Joseph 
Glover, Thomas 
Gold, William 
Gdlden, Isaiah 
Golden, Thomas 
Croldsmith, Ezra 
Goldsmith, John 
Croodin, George 
Croodspeed, Hosia 
Goodwin, George 
Gordon, WUliam 
Gorman, Richard 
Gosper, John 
Gosper, Peter 
Graham, Alexander 
Graham, John 
Granger, John 
Graves, Josiah 
Graves, Seldon 
Gray, Benjamin 
Gray, James 
Gray, Samuel 
Greatman, John 
Green, Ebenezer 
Green, James 
Greer, David 
Gregeer, John 
Gregory, Jehiel 
Grey, Robert 
GrifSn, Barney 
Gri£Sn, Benjamin 
Grinnel, Amasa 
Grumman, Ephraim 
Guin, Michael 
Guy, Edward 
Guyre, Luke 
Haight, Jager 
Hains, Joseph 
Hains, Saunders 



Halenbeek, Abraham 
Hall, Isaac 
Hall, James 
Hallet, Jonathan 
Halsey, Abraham 
Halsey, Ethan 
Halsey, Job 
Halsey, Stephen 
Halsey, Thomas 
Hambleton, John 
Hanmion, Shason 
Hammon, Isaac 
Hand, Joseph 
Hanley, James 
Hanmore, Jabez 
Hannah, James 
Hannevan, Rice 
Hanries, William 
Happer, John 
Hardy, David 
Harmancy, John 
Harner, Nicholas 
Harper, William 
Harris, Abijah 
Harris, Cilas 
Harris, David 
Harris, Evans 
Harris, Moses 
Harris, William 
Harris, Zach 
Hartness, Andrew 
Hartnys, Andrew 
Hartshorne, John 
Harvey, David 
Hatt, Frederick 
Haukins, Samuel 
Hawkins, David 
Hawkins, Noah 
Hawkins, Zachariah 
Hawkins, Zopher 
Haynes, Joseph 
Hazard, James 
Heartness, Andrew 
Hedges, Nathan 
Helmer, John 
Henderson, Alexander 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



127 



Hennesey, John 
Henry, David 
Hermance, John 
Hermans, Edward 
Hermanse, Edward 
Herrick, Amos 
Herrick, Samuel 
Herrick, William 
Herrington, John 
Hicks, Jacob 
Higby, Samuel 
Higgins, Moses 
High, Benjamin 
Hike, John 
Hill, Asse 
Hill, Thomas 
Hill, William 
Himes, Joseph 
Hinkley, Thomas 
Hissam, John 
Hitchcock, John 
Hodges, Joseph 
Hoff, Bastian 
Hoff, Henry H. 
Hoff, William 
Hogarty, Bernard 
Hoit, Job 
Hoit, Silvanus 
Holloway, Joseph 
Holly, John 
Holly, Samuel 
Holmes, Asa 
Holmes, Becker 
Holmes, Daniel, Jr. 
Holmes, James 
Holmes, John 
Holmes, Nathan 
Holmes, Thomas 
Homan, John 
Hooker, John 
Hopkins, Eli 
Hopkins, James 
Hopper, John 
Hopper, Samuel 
Horsford, Ithamer 
Horton, David 



Horton, Frederick 
Hosport, Samuel 
House, Jacob 
House, Zachariah 
How, Libeous 
Howe, John 
Howe, Silas 
Howell 

Howell, George 
Howell, Jehiel 
Howell, Seth 
Hoyt, Thomas, Jr. 
Hubbard 
Hubbard, Abel 
Hubbard, John 
Hubbard, Kzekiel 
Huber, Jacob 
Hubert, John 
Hudman, Charles 
Hudson 
Huff, WilUam 
Huffman, John 
Hufman, Gabriel 
Hughes, John 
Hughson, WiUiam 
Humphrey, John 
Humphrey, Samuel 
Hunt, David 
Hunt, Solomon 
Hunt, Theophilus 
Hunter, Benjamin 
Hunter, Ezekiel 
Hunter, Jonathan 
Huson, William 
Hutchings, Gabriel; 
Hyatt, Abraham 
Hymes, Joseph 
Hyser, Henry 
Ice, Daniel 
Impson, Elias 
Impson, Robert 
Indian, Thomas 
Ingalls, Elihu 
Inglish, John 
Israel, Aaron 
Jacklin, Samuel 



Jackson, Thomas 
Jamerson, WilUam 
James, Ebenezer 
James, Richard 
Jane, Jotham 
Jarman, David 
Jarvis, Nathaniel 
Jarvis, Thomas 
Jay, David 
Jay, John 
Jeffries, John 
Jeyne, WiUiam 
Jillet, Joseph 
Jillon, P. 
Johns, Silas 
Johns, Thomas 
Johnson, Davis 
Johnson, Isaac 
Johnson, James 
Johnson, John 
Johnson, Joseph 
Johnson, Samuel 
Johnson, Uriah 
Johnson, William 
Johnston, Benjamin 
Johnston, Samuel 
Jones, David 
Jones, Evans 
Jones, Jacob 
Jones, James 
Jones, John 
Jones, Sguire 
Jones, Thomas 
Joy, Samuel 
June, Stephen 
Kader, Adam 
Kader, John 
Keaffer, WiUiam 
Keder, Stephen 
Keefe, Arthur 
Keefer, William 
Keeler, David 
Keeler,j Ebenezer 
KeUey, Dennis 
KeUey, Isaac 
KeUey, Robert 



128 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Keljy, Maurice 
Kelly, Morris 
KeUy, Robert 
Kennedy, John 
Kenner, Jonathan 
Kenney, Charles 
Kenney, Jese 
Kenny, Charles 
Ketcham, John 
Ketcham,, Samuel 
Keynon, Robert 
Kiff, John 
Kilsey, John 
King, William 
Kinner, Jonathan 
Kinney, Charles 
Kinney, Elijah 
Kuffen„ James 
Ladoo, John 
Ladow, John 
Lamb, Isaac 
Lamb, Joshua 
Lambert, Cornelius 
Lambert, Joseph 
Lane, Jeremiah 
Lansing, John 
Larable, Elias 
Laraby, Elisha 
Lashier, Abraham 
Latham, John 
Lawrence, John 
Lawrence, Uriah 
Lawrence, W. 
Leak, J. 

Leawrance, Richard 
Lee, James 
Lee, Japath 
Lee, Seth 
Lee, William 
Lent, Hendrick 
Lent, Jacob 
Leonard, David 
Leonard, Edward 
Leopard, John 
Lepper, John 
Leveraga, Samuel 



Leverage, William 
Levey, Jacob 
Lewis, Henry 
Lewis, Jabez 
Lewis, Samuel 
Lhommedieu, Mulford 
Light, John 
Light, Lemuel 
LUey, John 
Linch, John 
Lincfa, Laurence 
Lines, Hosea 
Link, Henry 
Lion, Hosea 
Liscomb, Isaac 
Liscomb, Samuel 
Little, William 
Livingston, Dick 
Livingston, Richard 
Lloyd, James 
Loanis, John, 
Lock, John 
Lockwood, Azariah 
Lockwood, Hezekiah 
Lodcwood, Israel 
Lockwood, Jonathan 
Lockwood, Nathan 
Lockwood, Reuben 
Lodovick, Peter 
Loeson, Laurence 
Longworth, Isaac 
Looper, James 
Loper, Abraham 
Love, John 
Love, Waiiam 
Love joy, Andrew 
Lovelis, George 
Lovelis, Jeremiah 
Lownsberry, Nathaniel 
Lowree, William 
Ludliun, Daniel 
Ludlum, John 
Lufberry, Jonathan 
Lupton 
Lusee, E. 
Lusk, Jacob 



Lusk, Michael 
Lusk, William 
Lwinas, Herry 
Mabee, Tobias 
McAlester, William 
Macaulay, Charles 
McCaffety, James 
McCarty, Dennis 
McCauley, Charles 
McCharlesworth, John 
McCIain, John 
McClarien, David 
McCIean, Neal 
McClow, Joseph 
McColister, WiUiam 
McCollem, John 
McCollum^ Malcom 
McColum, John 
McCracken, John 
McCuIlough, Andrew 
McDaniel, John 
McDole, John 
McDoll, John 
McDonald, John 
McDonald, Michael 
McDougall, D. 
McDowal, WiUiam 
McDowel, John 
McElley, John 
McEntach, WiUiam 
McEvers, John 
McFairley, WiUiam 
McFaU, David 
McGUles, Hugh 
McGUori, Fergus 
McGowin, Duncan 
McGready, James 
Mcintosh, WiUiam 
McKee, Michael 
McKiel, Adam 
MackrUl, Richard 
McLain, Hugh 
McMannuss WilMam 
McMicken, Ebenezer 
McNeal, Charles 
McNeil, Charles 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



129 



McNeil, Thomas 
McOlister, Alexander 
McPherson, Lawrence 
McWhorster, John 
Mahane, Patrick 
Mahone, James 
Mahony, Cornelius 
Main, Robert 
Makraback, Dyke 
Maloy, John 
Mapes, John 
Marchant, Able 
Mark, G. 
Marks, Aholiab 
Marling, Deliverance 
Marr, James 
Marray, Warren 
Marsh, Benjamin 
Marshal, Amon 
Marshall, James 
Martin, Archibald 
Martin, James 
Martin, Michael 
Martin, Samuel 
Marvin, Stephen 
Mason, Francis 
Mason, Thomas 
Masson, Francis 
Masters, Jonathan 
Matthews, Henry 
Mattlson, Aaron 
Maxwell, ComeUus 
Mead, David 
Meaker, Daniel 
Medler, Chri'stian 
Medler, Christopher 
Meed, Ezekeel 
Meeker, TJzual 
Meesy, Benjamin 
Merrill, Joseph 
Merrit, Ebenezer 
Merrit, Luke 
Merry, Benjamin 
Metzger, John 
Midler, Christ'r 
MiUer, Benjamin 



Millar, John 
Miller, Frederick 
Miller, George 
Miller, Jesse 
Miler, Jack 
MiUer, John 
MiiUer, Justus 
Miller, Lewis 
Miller, Peleg 
Miller, Peter 
Miller, William 
Miler, Zephaniah 
Milles, Jesse 
Mills, Andrew 
Mills, James 
Mingos, Haronlmus 
Mink, Johannes 
Minks, John 
Mires, John 
Mitchel, Greorge 
Mitchel, Samuel 
Mitchel, William 
Money, WilUam 
Moody, James 
Mooney, William 
Moore, Frederick 
Moore, John 
Moore, Joseph 
Moore, Robert 
Moore, Thomas 
More, Martin 
More, Robert 
More, Thomas 
Moreign, Alex 
Morpeth, William 
Morrel, James 
Morrel, Jesse 
Morrel, John 
Morrell, WiUiam 
Morris, Edward 
Morris, Robert 
Morrison, Dimcan 
Morse, John 
Mosher, John 
Moss, David 
Moulton, Cato 



Moulton, Josiah 
Moulton, WiUIam 
Mount, Thomas 
Mow, James 
Mucklow, Joseph 
Mulford, Samuel 
Mulliner, Moses 
Munday, James 
Munn, Benjamin 
Munroe, Peter 
Murfe, John 
Murn, Muhel 
Murphy, Daniel 
Murphy, James 
Myer, Christ'r G. 
•Myers, David 
Myers, Zach 
Nail, Henry 
Neal, Henry 
Neder, John 
Neelson, W. 
Neilson, Thomas 
Nelson, Thomas 
Neves, W. 
Newman, Abraham 
Newman, Jeremiah 
Newman, Joshua 
Nevraian, N. 
Nichols, James 
Nickols, Isaac 
Nicols, Simon 
Nipper, John 
Nogert, John 
Norstrandt, James 
Norton, Abel 
Norton, Calvin 
Norton, George 
Norton, Sible 
Nostrander, James 
Nostrant, George 
Notingham, Lewiis 
Nucom, Thomas 
O'Brien, James 
O'Brion, Paul 
Ogden, David 
Ogden, John 



130 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Ogden, Jonathan 
Ogilsvie, John 
OgstrandeT, Peter 
O'Kie, A. 
Olden, Daniel 
Onderdunck, Abraham 
O'Neal, Thomas 
Orr, William 
Orsor, Abraham 
Orsor, Edward 
Osbom, Abraham 
Osborne, Henry 
Osburn, D. 
Osterout, Gilbert 
Ostrander, Henry 
Ostrander, James 
Ostrander, Peter 
Owen, Moses 
Owens, Ameziah 
Owens, Elisha 
Owens, Terrence 
Pain, Silas 
Palmer, Amaziah 
Palmer, Isaac 
Palmer, James 
Palmer, Jonathan 
Palmer, Silas 
Palmiteir, John 
Pangbourn, John 
Fangbourn, William 
Pangbum, John 
Pangburn, William 
Pardy, Nathaniel 
Parent, Nathaniel 
Parisoneous, J. 
Park, John 
Park, Robert 
Parker, Ebenezer 
Parker, Joseph 
Parks, John 
Parks, WiUiam 
Parsells, Matthew 
Parshall, James 
Parsong, Charles 
Paterson, Simon 
Paid, Joseph 



Peck, Nathan 
Peirce, Thomas 
Peirson 
Pell, John 
Pembrook, W. 
Pemderson, John 
Pendle, Jonathan 
Pennear, Peter 
Penney, John 
Pennoyer, Jesse 
Penoyer, Israel 
Penton, Amos 
Perkins, Thomas 
Perlee, Edmond 
Perry, David 
Pershall, James 
Persons, John 
Peterson, Simeon 
Pettit, Abraham 
Pettit; Daniel 
Pettit, Samuel 
Phillips, David 
PhUlips, Jonathan 
Pickle, Henry 
Pickle, John Henry 
Pierce, Thomas 
Pierson 

Piggs, Richard 
Pinyard, WiUiam 
Place, Christopher 
Place, James 
Plank, Nicholas 
Plass, Michel 
Plans, Peter 
PUmley, William 
Plosser, Peter 
Plumb, Stephen 
Poimer, Peter 
Polamater, John 
Pollard, Thomas 
Pdlly, Hugh 
Pond, Samuel 
Post 

Post, Samuel 
Potter, George 
Potter, William 



Poular, John 
Powd, Vinson 
Presher, Abraham 
Presher, WUliam 
Preston, Benjamin 
Pride, J. 
Prim, Azariah 
Prime, Peter 
Primm, Peter 
Prior, Abner William 
Futman, William 
Quant, Henry 
Quinded, David 
Quinn, Thomas 
Racket 
Racket, Noah 
Raigins, William 
Raimond, Benjamin 
Rainey, Jeremiah 
Ramis, James 
Randall Nathaniel 
Randle, Moses 
Randle, Seith 
Raney, John 
Ransier, George 
Ray, Charles 
Raymond, James 
Raynor, Ichabod 
Reader, Jacob 
Reed, Gceorge 
Reed, James 
Reed, John 
Reeve, Luther 
Reeves, Israel 
Reives, Nathaniel 
Renny, Jesse 
Reymond, lisaac 
Reynolds, Briggs 
Reynolds, David 
Reynolds, Ebenezer 
Reynolds, Eli 
Reynolds, James 
Reynolds, John 
Rejmolds, Timothy 
Rice, Ezekiel 
Rice, Samuel 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



131 



Rich, Henry 
Richards, David 
Richards, John 
Riggs, Daniel 
Ritchie, Alexander 
Ritchie, Isaac 
Roader, Jacob 
Roads, Jacob 
Roberds, Edmun 
Roberts, Amos 
Roberts, John 
Robertson, James 
Robins, Evans 
Robinson, Andrew 
Robinson, D. 
Robinson, James 
Robinson, Matthias 
Robinson, Peter 
Rockwell, Ebenezer 
Rodgers, Own 
Roe, John 
Roe, Lemon 
Roe, SiUeman 
Roe, Simon 
Rofft, Aaron 
Rogers, John, Sr. 
Rogers, John, Jr. 
Rogers, Owen 
Rogers, William 
Romer, Benjamin 
Romer, Peter 
Roome, Benjamin 
Roomer, Hendrick 
Rose, Andrew 
Rose, Jonathan 
Rosman, Adam 
Rosman, Henry 
Rosman, Philip 
Ross, Aaron 
Ross, Nathaniel 
Ross, Waiiam 
Rossell, Thomas 
Rough, Conrade 
Row, John 
Row, Simon 
Rowland, Philip 



Rowland, Thomas 
Ruland, Jehiel 
Rundle, David 
Runnels, Abijah 
Runnels, Joseph 
Russsell, Jonathan 
Russigue, Abraham 
Russle, W. 
Sage, Allen 
Sagor, John 
St. Lawrence, George 
Salmon 

Salmon, Absalom 
Salyer, Zaccheus 
Sanderson, James 
Sandford, Daniel 
Sandford, John 
Sanford, Daniel 
Sattally, Richard 
Saxton, Gilbert 
Sayrs, Nathaniel 
Scantling, Jeremiah 
Scates, James 
Schofleld, Samuel 
Schofleld, Silas 
Schofleld, Smith 
Schouten, Henry 
Schouten, John 
Schriver, Jacob N. 
Schut, Frederick 
Schui^ James 
Schut, Tennis 
Scott, Alexander 
Scott, Elijah 
Scott, Henry 
Scott, James 
Scott, John 
Scott, "William 
Sloulen, H. 
Scriver, Christian 
Scriver, Henry 
Scutt, William 
Sealey, Joseph 
Seaman, Moses 
Seaton, Rufus 
Seeds, George 



Seers, Joseph 
Seward, John 
Shannon, Robert 
Shatton, David 
Shaw, John 
Shaw, Michael 
Shaw, Peleg 
Shay, M. 
Shea, Philip 
Shear, Lodiwick 
Shelp, Joseph 
Sherkeys, J. 
Sherwood, Micajah 
Shevalier, John 
Sibbio, Thomas 
•Sickler, Coonradt 
Sickler, Mitthias 
Sicknar, Jacob 
Simmons, Caleb 
Simmons, E. 
Simmons, John 
Simmons, Joshua 
Simmons, Samuel 
Sinnott, Patrick 
Sisco, Dick 
Sisco, Philip 
Sitzer, Barrant 
Size, Gilbert V. 
Slason, Stephen 
Slosson, Ambs 
Slutt, A. 
Slutt, M. 
Slutt, W. 
Sly, William 
SmaUy, Timothy 
Smith, Benjamin 
Smith, Caleb 
Smith, David 
Smith, Ebenezer B. 
Smith, Ebner B. 
Smith, Ezekiel 
Smith, Gersham 
Smith, Gideon 
Smith, liSaac 
Smith, James 
Smith, John 



132 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Smith, Joseph 
Smith, Josiah 
Smith, Moses 
Smith, Nathan 
Smith, Nathaniel 
Smith, Obediah 
Smitd, R. 
Smith, Samuel 
Smith, Solomon 
Smith, Thaddeus 
Smith, WiUlam 
Snadiker, Moses 
Snedeker, Moses 
Snowden, John 
Snyder, Peter 
Southerland, James 
Speed, George 
Speed, Henry 
Spicer, Jacob 
Sprage, Alexander 
Spring, Nathaniel 
Springer, Isaac 
Springston, Jacob 
Squire, Jacob 
SquirreU, Jacob 
Stagg, Adam 
Stagg, John 
Stalker, S. 
Standish, Amos 
Stanford, John 
Stanley, Daniel 
Staples, Nathan 
Stebbins, Lewis 
Steen, William 
Steenborgh, Peter 
Steeples, Nathan 
Stephans, Jessee 
Stephens, John 
Stephens, Justice 
Stephens, Thomas 
Stewart, John 
Still, James 
Still, John 
Stitt, iohn 
Stokes, William 
Stone, Asa 



Stone, David 
Storms, Abraham 
Stratten, Samuel 
Streat, H. 
Streat, W. 
Stringham, Henry 
Strong, John 
Strong, William 
Stuard, John 
Sturdifent, Jonathan 
Suckinut, John 
Suffrin, George 
Suitt, William 
Sullivan, James 
Swan, Robert 
Swartwout, Henry 
Swartwout, John 
Swartwout, William 
Sweed, William 
Sweet, Amos 
Sweet, Benoni 
Sweet, George 
Sweet, John 
Sweet, John, Jr. 
Sweet, Nathan 
Sweet, Robert 
Swift, Ambrose 
Talmadge, John 
Talmage, Joseph 
Tappen, Daniel 
Tappen, N. 
Tarrent, Thomas 
Tattenton, Jeptha 
Taylor, Jasper 
Taylor, Joseph 
Taylor, Oliver 
Taylor, William 
Teatter, John 
Teller, J. 
Ter Boss, J. 
Terboss, Simon 
Terbush, C. 
Terbush, Simon 
Terry, Elijah 
Terry James 
Terry, Samuel 



Thaire, J. 
Thomas, G. 
Thomas, John 
Thomas, Richard 
Thompson, Benjamin 
Thompson, EUas 
Thompson, James 
Thompson, John 
Thompson, Richard 
Thompson, WiMiam 
Thomson, Zebulon 
Thorp, Peter 
Tice, John 
Tice, Joseph 
Tieman, Peter 
Tinkler, Henry 
Titus, Isaac 
Titus, James 
Titus, Jonathan 
Tompkins, Edward 
Tompkins, Nathaniel 
Tool, John 
Topping, Daniel 
Town, Jacob 
Townsend, Absolom 
Toy, Samuel 
Traver, Francis 
Traver, Nicholas 
Travess, Jacob 
Travis, Silvanus 
Travis, Robert 
Trewilleger, J. 
Trim, Azariah 
Trowbridge, James 
Tubbs, Stephen 
Tubee, John 
Tucker, John 
Tucker, Joishua 
Tucker, Samuel 
Turn, David 
Tuman, David 
Tuman, Peter 
Tuman, Peter, Jr. 
Turner, Joseph 
Turrel, Jones 
Tuthill, James 



THE REVOLUTIONAHY WAK. 



133 



Tuttle, Moses 

Tyler, Shuble 

Underdunk, T. 

Unter, Josiah 

Upton, Benjamin 

Utley, Ase 

Utter, Joseph 

Utter, William 

"Vail, Thomas 

Vallentlne, Gab'r 

Valts, Coonrod 

Van Allen, J. 

Vanarter, James 

Van Benscoten, Elias 

Vandebogart, John 

Van Debogart, Minard 

Van DeBogart, Myndert 

Vandemark, G 

Vandervort, Jacob 

Vandevour, John 

Vandu'Sen, Peter 

Van Etten, Peter 

Van Gelder, Isaac 

Vanhoosen, Rinier 

Van Hooser, Rynier 

Van Horn, John 

Van Houten, John 

Van Hoven, Ryner 

Vanlene, R. 

Vanline, J. 

Van North, John 

Vancore, Philip 

Van Size, Gilbert 

Van Steenbergh, Peter 

Vantassellj Isaac 

Van tassell, John 

Van Volkenborgh, 
Francis 

Van Wicklen, Fred- 
erick 

Vanworma, Cornelius 

Vanna, Vincent 

Venier, Peter 

Vise, Daniel 

Voh, Peter 

Vonck, Henry 



Vredenburgh, James 
Wade, Elia 
Wait, Christopher 
Walker, Edward 
Walker, Mathew 
Walker, Matthias 
Wall, John 
Wallace, Benjamin 
Wallice, Uriah 
Waner, KiUean 
Ward, Abijah 
Ward, Jadoc 
Ward, Robert 
Ward, Zedock 
Warden, Benard 
Waring, Newman 
Warner, Martin 
Warson, Thomas 
Washburn, Joel 
Waterbury, Ely 
Watkins, William 
Watson, Thomas 
Watson, William 
Wattaker, Edward 
Wattles, William 
Weaver, John 
Webb, Ebenezer 
Webb, Silvanus 
Webster, Joseph 
Weed, Abijah 
Weed, Gilbert 
Weed, John Drew 
Weed, Nathan 
Weed, S. 
Weeks, James 
Weeks, John 
Weeks, Jonathan, Jr. 
Weeks, Macejah 
Weiss, Daniel 
Welch, Elijah 
Welch, Ephraim 
Welch, Henry 
Welch, Isaac 
Welch, James 
Welch, John 
Welch, Joseph 



Welch, Luke 
Welch, Thomas 
Welch, William 
Wells, Calvin 
Wells, Elijah 
Wells, P. 
WeUs, William 
Wentworth, James 
West, Ase 
West, Jacob 
West, Joseph 
West, William 
Westfall, Levi 
Whaley, Samuel 
Whaley, Timothy 
Wheeler, James 
*Wheeler, John 
Wheeler, S. 
Wheeler, Thomas 
Whipple, Nathan 
White, Ephraim 
White, George 
White, Henry 
White, John 
White, Samuel Curran 
White, Stephen 
White, Thomas 
Whitehead, Aaron 
Whitehead, Isaiah 
Whitehead, William 
Whitman, John 
Whitney, Jacob 
Wickham, Stephen 
Wicks, James 
Wicks, Jonathan 
Wiggins, WiUiam 
Wilcout, W. 
Wildley, Edward 
Wiley, Edward 
Wilkinson, Robert 
Wilks, Willis 
Williams, Aaron 
Williams, Abiah 
Williams, Adam 
Williams, Charles 
Williams, David 



134 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Willams, John 
Williams, Peter 
Williamson, James 
Willis, Abraham 
Willis, David 
Willis, W. 
WiUis, J. 
Wilsee, H. 
Wilson, John 
WUson, Michael 
Wilson, Nathaniel 
Wilson, Samuel 
WUson, W. 
WUson, Walter 
WOtice, Joseph 
Winass, Silas 



Winchall, Samuel 
WincheU, James 
Witteker, Edward 
Wood, Jacob 
Wood, John 
Wood, Matthew 
Wood, Nathan 
Wood, Samuel 
Wood, William 
Wood, Zopher 
Woodruff, David 
Woodruff, Jeremiah 
Woodruff, Joshua 
Woodruff, William 
Word, Abijah 
Worden, Darious 



Worden, James 
Wordin, Shubel 
Worpeth, WiUiam 
Wright, John 
Wyer, Jeremiah 
Yarrington, WiUiam 
Yeoman, EUezer 
Youmans, Eleazer 
Youmans, Jonas 
Youmans, Jones 
Young, Isaac 
Young, John 
Young, Thomas 
Yurks, Harmanus 
Zedmond, Bartho'w 



The four regiments composing the Continental Line were brigaded 
under that gallant officer, General Richard Montgomery of Rhine- 
beck, and in September of '75 marched away to Canada with orders 
to secure possession of the Canadian government. After capturing 
St. John and Montreal, Montgomery garrisoned the conquered towns, 
and proceeded with his regiment, now reduced to three hundred men, 
against Quebec. On the march he was reinforced by the troops lead 
by Col. Benedict Arnold. Montgomery assumed command of the 
whole force, which did not exceed nine hundred eifective soldiers. For 
three weeks he besieged the town with his handful of men. Before 
daybreak on the 31st of December, 1776, he determined to stake every- 
thing on an assault. Dividing his little army into four columns, he 
led the first division in an attack on the Lower Town in the neighbor- 
hood of the citadel. A battery lay just before, and it was thought 
the gimners had not discovered the assailants. "Men of New York," 
said the brave Montgomery, "you wiU not fear to follow where your 
General leads ! Forward !" As the Americans rushed forward, the 
battery burst forth with a storm of grape-shot. Montgomery and 
both his aids fell dead. The men, heartbroken at the death of their 
beloved General, staggered a moment, then fell back, and returned to 
Wolfe's Cove, above the city. 

Arnold who attacked the town on the north was also severely 
wounded. Of the men from Dutchess who lost their Hves in this cam- 
paign there is, of course, no record. The worst calamity was the 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 135 

death of General Richard Montgomery. Even in England it was men- 
tioned with sorrow. Born of an illustrious Irish family, he became a 
soldier in his boyhood. He had shared the toils and the triumph of 
Wolfe. To the enthusiasm of a warm and affectionate nature he joined 
the highest order of mihtary talents and the virtues of an exalted 
character. In July, 1773, he married Janet, eldest daughter of Rob- 
ert R. and Margaret (Beekman) Livingston of Rhinebeck. 

Some years after the death of Gen. Montgomery, his widow erected 
a mansion just south of Annandale in the town of Red Hook, and, in 
1818, from a portico of this building she watched the remains of her 
husband, which had been disinterred and borne from Canada under a 
mihtary escort, conveyed by the steamboat Richmond, to the final 
resting place beneath the chancel of St. Paul's Church in New York 
City. 



136 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XI. 
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 

MtrsTEB, R01.1.S. 

ACCORDING to the rolls of the State, Dutchess county had 
seven regiments during the war, which included a regiment 
of "Minute Men," under command of Col. Jacobus Swart- 
wout. Ezekiel Cooper also commanded a company of sixty-six men, 
known as Cooper's Rangers. 

The militia was called out when wanted, kept as long as wanted, and 
the soldiers then sent to their homes. Sometimes a regiment would be 
called out half a dozen times in the course of a year, and for half a 
dozen days at a time, and again it might not be needed in the entire 
year. The regiment of Minute Men and the Sixth Regiment, com- 
manded respectively by Colonels Jacobus Swartwout and Morris Gra- 
ham, took part in the battles of White Plains and Harlem. 

Officers and men seem to have often served in different organiza- 
tions. A change in the arrangement of the miUtia caused many 
transfers of officers of the regiments and in their companies during 
the two years following the original organization in 1775; numerous 
resignations followed. This has led to much confusion in the records. 

The names of the officers and enlisted men of the regiments raised 
in Dutchess as they stand on the pubhshed roll in "New York in the 
Revolution," follows — except the privates in Col. Frear's regiment, of 
which no record can be found. These names were compiled by the 
State from that highest of sources, the original muster and pay-rolls, 
and are the same as have been transcribed and placed in the records 
of the War Department at Washington. The orthography in the 
original manuscript has been adhered to, and a blank line inserted 
where uie letters were undecipherable. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



137 



REGIMENT OF MINUTE MEN, JACOBUS SWARTWOUT, COLONEL. 

Captains — Stephen Duryee, Henry Goodwin, George Lane, Comfort Ludington, 
William Mott, William Perce, Abraham Schenck, Barnardus Swartwont, Israel 
Veal, Cornelius Van Wyck. " ^ ^ 

LiEUTEifANTs — Henry Bailey, John Berry, Nathaniel Butler, William Colkin, Jon- 
athan Crane, Benjamin Elliot, Joseph Garrisqn, Abraham Hiat, Jacob Horton, 
John Langdon, Andrew Lawrence, John Manroe, Henry Mott, Thomas Ostrander,. 
Charles Piatt, Nathaniel Smith, Isaac Townsend, Peter Van Bunschoten, John T. 
Van Kleak. 



Adoms, Jesse 
Adreanse, Thead 
VAkerby, Benjamin 
Allen, Jorge 

Anderson, eth 

Appleyee, Coonraad 
Ashbe, Zebulon 
Askin, WiUiam 
Aslen, Abm. 
Aubley, William 

Babcock, eph 

Bailey, Daniel 
Bailey, Ebenezer 
Bailey, Elias 
Baker, Eleazer 
Baker, Elisha 
Baker, Joshua 
Baker, Francis 
Ball, Elephalet 
Barker, Richard 

Barkins, avid 

Barnes, Henry 
Bamhard 
Barns, Will 
Barse, Zebulen 

Bartley, hall Pels 

Baxter, Thomas 
Bell, Henry 
Bennet, Elihu 
Benny, John 
Bently, Joseph 
Berger, Andrew 
Berry 

Beugus, Thomas 
Billings, John 



EKLISTED MEN. 

Birdall, Jacob 
Bishop, Joshua 
Bishop, Livy 
Boga — —, Peter 
Bokardus, Lewis 
Bolt, Moses 
Bonker, Dolf 

Boyd, mes 

Boyington, Solomon 
Bozworth, Hezekiah 
Bradley, Nathan 
Branah, James 
Brill, Jacob, Jr. 
Brinckerhoff, Hen 
Brisbend, James 
Brock, William 
Brower, Charles 
Brower, Hindrick 
Brower, Lazareth 
Brower, Rodolphus 
Brown, Stephen 
Brumsfleld, James 
Brustead, William 
Bimschout, Elias C. 
Burbanks, Noah 
Burch, David 
Burch, Jeremiah 
' Burch, Silas 
Burdsill, Jacob 
Burges, Thomas 
Burlonon, Feamot 
Burnet, Isaac 
Burnett, Peter 
Byington, Solomon 
Camfield, James 



Carl, Joseph 
Carman 
Carman, John 
Champenois, Daniel 
Champlin 

^hamplin, Joshua, Jr. 
Chapman, Enoch 
Chapman, Samuel 
Chase, Seth 
Christian, Zechariah 
Christie, John 
Clapp, Benjamin 
Clark, Joshua 
Clark, Stephen 
Cole, Andrew 
Colkens, Eli 
Conner, John 
Cornell, Samuel 
Cornwell, Sylvenus 
Corsa, Abrah 
Corsa, Isaac 
Courtright, John 
Craft, Caleb 
Crane, Ira 
Croft, Jacob 
Crowfoot, William 
Crumwell, Aac 
Currer, Elijah 
Curtis, Andrew 
Dart, Hozell 
Davids, John 
Davis, David 
Davison, James 
Davison, John 
Dean, Stephen 



138 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Degrote, John 
Dervoort, Sam L. 
Dimmick, Shubal 
Disbrow, David 
Dodge, Will 
Dollaway, Jerem 
DoUaway, WiUiam 
Downen, Cornelius 
Doxey, Amos 
Draper, John 
Draper, Joseph 
Drew, WiUiam 
Dmiekin, John 
Dutcher, David 
Edams, Joseah 
Ede, Joshua 
Edget, John 
Egelston, James 
Elderkin, James 
Eldige, Jonathan 
Eldridge, Elisha 
Eldridge, Michael 
EUembatz, Eman'l 
Elliott, Abn. 
ElweU, Ezra 
ElweU, Jabes, Jr. 
Emegh, Jeremiah 
Evens, John 
Evens, Thomas 
Fairchild, Nathaniel 
Fetch, Jerry 
Fileow, Enoch 
Fileow, Phineas 
Finch, Ruben 
Force, Timothy 
Forgason, Abram 
Forguson, Samuel 
Foster, David 
Poster, John 
Foster, Thomas 
Fowler, Austin 
Fowler, Isaac 

Frear, raham, Jr. 

Frear, Thomas 
Frost, *rhomas, Jr. 
Frost, William 



Fuller, Isaac 
Fullmore, Jasper 
Garrison, Abraham 
Gedeons, Joseph 
Gee, John 
Gielwack, Michel 
Gifford, Samuel 
GifFord, William 
Goldin, Rob 
GoodfeUow, Wffl 
Griffen, Isaac 
GrifFen, William 
Giigory, Daniel 
Grigory, Josiah 
Halsted, Thomas 
Halsted, WiU 
Harris, Peter 
Harriss, Mendt 
Hawkins, James 
Hawkins, Samuel 
Hayburn, John 
Heacock, John 
Hempstead, Nathaniel 
Henkly, Josiah 
Hervy, Peter 
Heucldy, Isaac 
Hicks, Jacob 
Hicks, Nathaniel 
Higbee, William 
Hill, Antiney 

Hill, ^bert 

Hitchcock, Joseph 
Hoeg, Nathan 
HofF, Abraham 
HojEFman, Charles 
Hopkins, Thacher 
Howe, William 
Howes, Moody 
Hoyt, Michael 
Hubbard, Joseph 
Huff, Gamaliel 
Huling, Walter 
Hunt, Jessee 
Hunt, William 
Hutchings, John 
Hyatt, Steve 



Ingersol, ^pheus 

Jewet, John 
Johnson, James 
Johnson, Sabin 
Jones, Jeremiah 

Jones, ^lias 

Jones, Nathan 
Jordan, John 
Judd, Ebenezer 
Keating, Isaac 
Keelar, Ezra, Jr. 
KeUy, Shubal 
King, Jacob 
King, Richard 
Kipp, Hanry 
Kipp, Matthew 
Kipp, Pater 
Kirkem, Seth 
Koonts, Nicholas, Jr. 
KsnifSn, Amos 
Laine, Jacob 
Lake, Benjamin 
Lamb, Joseph 
Lane 

Latson, James, Jr. 
LaughUn, Hugh 
Lawrance, John 
Lawson, Isaac 
Leggett, Abraham 
Lent, Ab'm 
Lent, Abraham A. 
Lent, James 
Lent, Peter 
Lewis, Thomas 
Lossen, And 
Lossen, Richard 
Lossing, Pater Q. 
Loveless, Joseph 
Ludington, Stephen 
Lyons, James 
McCavey, Edward 
McChucking, Thomas 

McColm, ^mes 

McCreedy, James, Jr. 
McCullough, And 
McCutchen, Rob 




EDWARD M. GORING. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



139 



McGragor, unian 

McLoud, Alexander 

McNeil, ry 

Malties, — ^m'l 
Manrow, Justice 
Maston, Ezekiel 
Mathews, Justice 
Merrick, Done 
Merritt, David 
Miles, John 
Miles, Noah 
Miller, Godfrey 
Miller, John 
Miller, Solomon 
Mitchell, George 
Moe, Isaac 
Morehouse, John 
Morehouse, Samuel 
Morehouse, Stephen 
Morey, Lotrip 
Morfort, Peter 
Morgain, James 
Morgan, Reuben 

Morison, ^bald 

Morse, Phil 
Moure, David 
Murray, James 
Nelson, Paul 
Nichels, Epraim 
Nickerson, Eliphalet 
Nickerson, Mulfort 
Nicolls, Thomas 
Nikeson, Thomas 
Noortshant, Peter 
Noortsrant, George 
Nostrant, Johanes 
Oats, James 
Ockerman, Casparus 
Olmstead, Ebenezer 
Ornes, George 
Osborn, Peter 
Ouslin, Thorn 
Parker, Nathaniel 
Parks, Andrew 
Parks, John 
Parks, John ye 2d 



Parrash, Azariah 
Parrish, Silas 
Peacock, 
Peet, Abraham 

Pelse, hn 

Pelse, oen 

Perce, "William, Jr. 
Persons, Moses 
Philipse, Hen 
Pindle, Jonathan 

Plugh, Ihamus 

Point 

Polhamus, dan 

Polmeteer, Peter 
Pooler, Joseph 
Post, Absolom 
Potter, Gilbert 
Potter, Samuel 
Pudney, Francis 
Purdy, Abraham 
Rainey, John 
Recorde, Wetmore 
Reed, Aaron 

Reed, ohn 

Reynolds, hardson 

Reynolds, Jesse 
Rhynhart, Johanes 
Richards, James 
Robbards, Benjamin 
Roberts, Peter 
Robinson, Andrew 
Robinson, John 
Robinson, Jones 
Robinson, Lewis 
Robison, Andrew 
Roe, Benjamin, Jr. 

Romer, , Jr. 

Romyne as 

Roschrans, Peter 
Runals, David 
RuneUs, James 
Runnels, Jonathan 
Rush, Frederick 
Rynders, James 
Sabin, Elijah 
Saminds. Jacob 



Saris, Nathaniel 
Saunders, John 
Schonover, Peter 
Schonter, Andrew 
Scott, Timothy 
Serherve, John 
Shapprong, Jan 
Shared, William 
Shaw, Daniel 
Shaw, James 
Shear, Henry B. 
Shear, Lodwich 
Sherwood, Nathan 
Shutt, Fradrick 
Shutt, Simes 
Sickle, Fard C. 

• Sickler, George 
Simkins, Daniel 
SJack, ^ile 

»''^iecht, Ab 
SmaUee, James 
Smith, David 
Smith, Eph 
Smith, John 
Smith, John, Jr. 
Smith, Joseph, Jr. 
Smith, Joshua 
Smith, Nemiah 
Smith, Samson 
Smith, William 
Snedeker, James 
Snedeker, John 
Snider, Isaac 

Snyder, ^hn 

Soatpard, Benjamin 
Somes, Nathaniel 
Storm, Jacob 
Strickland, Samuel 
Surrine, Charles 
Swartout, Jacobus C. 
Swartout, Cornelius 
Sweet, John 
Sweet, Robert 

Talmen, ^kim 

Tanner, John 
Taylor, Gamiliel 



140 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Taylor, John 
Ter Boss, Simon 
Terbus, Peter 
Tevinis, John 
Thomas, Daniel 
Thompson, Thomas 

Thorn, horn 

Totten, ^mes 

Townend, Joseph 
Townsend, Daniel 
Townsend, James 
Travis, Abrm. 
Travis, Silvanus 
Tripp, Othenial 
Underwood, Hen 
Utter, Amos 
Van Cleck, Bardard P. 
Van De Burg 
Van Deburgh, Henry I. 
Van De Burgh, Stephen 
Van Der Bogert, Peter 
Van Der Vort, Paul 
Van Devaters, Jacobus 
Van Devaters, James 
Van Stern Bergh, 
Simeon 



Van Tassel, John 
Van Vlerken, Benja- 
min 
Van Wagenar, John 
Varmiliah, John 
Vasdawl, Disak 
Virmilyan, William 
Wagoner, Tobias 
Wait, Christopher 
Ward, Daniel 
Ward, Samuel 
Wareing, Thadeus 
Waron, Tedes 
Way, Giddeon 
Weaver, Edward 
Weaver, Peter 
Weaver, William 
Webb, Henry 
Weddle, Robert 
Weeks, Abraham 
Weeks, Micajah 
Western, John 
Westervelt, Benjamin 
Westervett, Caspau- 

rac C. 
White, Daniel 



Whitney, Josiah 
Wickson, Solomon 
Wilis, Reuben 
Willcocks, Stephen 
WiUcox, Barnabas 
Willis, Thomas 
WilUss, Hen 
Wilsee, Grandus 
Winstead, Charles 

Wood, eph 

Wood, Solomon 
Wood, Timothy 
Woodard, Ephraim 
Woodard, Samuel 
Wooden, John 
Worden, Shuble 
Wester, William 
Wright, Daniel 
Wright, Gabriel, Jr. 
Wright, John 
Wright, Thomas 
Yames, Reuben 
Yeomans, John 
Yeomans, Jonas 
Young, Jacob 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— SECOND REGIMENT. 



Colonel Abraham Brinckerhoff 
Lieutenant Colonel Jacob Griffen 
Major Andrew HiU 
Major Richard Van Wyck 
Adjutant Jacob Brinkerhoff 



Quarter Master William GoseUne 
Quarter Master Uriah Hill 
Quarter Master Isaac Sebring 
Quarter Master Cornelius Van Wyck 



Captais-s — George Brinkerhoff, George G. Brinkerhoff, John G. Brinkerhoff, 
Nicholas Brower, Joseph Horton, Abraham Lent, John Schutt, Thomas Storm, 
Evert W. Swart, James R. Swartwout, John Van Bunschoten, Matthew Van Bun- 
schoten, Isaac Van Wyck. 

Lieutenants — Cornelius Adriance, Robert Brett, John Cooper, Johannes Dewitt, 
Christian Dubois, Stephen Osborne, Benjamin Rosekrans, Jacobus Scautt, Abraham 
Schultz, William Swartwout, Robert Todd, Barent Van Claeck, Isaac Van Cleef, 
Barent Van Kleeck, Abraham Van Wyck, Francis Way, Johannes Wiltsie. 

Ensigns — ^Moses Barber, Jacob Bisse, Lawrence Haff, Charles Hoffman, Abra- 
ham Hageland, Abraham Ladue, Daniel Schenck, Jacob S. Swartwout, Jacobus 
Swartwout, James P. Swartwout. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



141 



Ackarman, John 
Adriance, Cornelius 
Adriance, George 
Adriance, Isaac 
Adriance, John 
Adriance, Ram., Jr. 
Adriance, Rem 
Adriance, Theodorus 
Aldyck, John 
Algatt, WilUam 
Atgelt, John 
Algelt, William 
Altgelt, WiUiam 
Ammerman, Albert 
Annin, Daniel 
Annin, James 
Appelge, Coenrad 
Appilye 

Applee, Coenradt 
Atgelt, John 
Avery, John 
Backer, Jacob 
Bailey, John 
Bailey, Nathan 
BaUey, Sutton 
Baker, James 
Baker, Jesse 
Baker, Peter 
Baker, Thomas 
Baker, William 
Baldwin, Joseph 
Barber, John ^ 
Barber, Moises 
Barber, Stephen 
Barker, John 
Barker, Samuel 
Barkins, David 
Barnard, Thomas 
Barnes, Solomon 
Barnes, William 
Barns, John 
Bates, Stephen 
Bedel, Jesse 
Bedle, Jesse 
Beedle, John 



EITLISTED MEN. 

Bell, Henry 
Bell, John 
Benjamin, Chester 
Bennet, Joseph 
Berkinis, David 
Bernard, Thomas 
Berry, Nicholas 
Berry, Peter 
Bigbey, Christopher 
Bise, Simon 
Biship, Levi 
Bishop, Caleb 
Bishop, Joshua 
Bisse, Jacob 
Bloom, Benjamin 
Bloom, Sylvester 
Bocker, Adolph 
Boerum, Hendrick 
Boerum, Nicholas 
Boerum, William 
Bogardus, Cornelius 
Bogardiis, Francis 
Bogardus, Mathew 
Bogardus, Peter 
Bogardus, Shibboleth 
Bogart, Daniel 
Bogart, Ort 
Bogart, Peter 
Boice, Henry 
Boice, Simon 
Bomp, Joseph 
Boncker, Nathaniel 
Boncker, Stephen 
Bower, Daniel 
Bown, Joseph 
Brandage, James 
Brannah, James 
Brett, Francis B. 
Brett, Rambout 
Brett, Robert 
Brett, Theodorus 
Brewer, Charles 
Briggs, Caleb 
Brinckerho, Abraham J. 
Brinckerhoff, Abraham 



Brinckerhoff, Abra- 
ham I. 

Brinckerhoff, Abra- 
ham J. 

Brinckerhoif, Daniel 

BrinckerhofP, DerickJ. 

Brinckerhoff, Dirck 

BrinckerhofP, Dirck, Jr. 

Brinckerhoff, Dirck T. 

Brinckerhoff, George 

Brinckerhoff, Henry 

Brinckerhoff, Isaac 

Brinckerhoff, Jacob 

Brinckerhoff, John S. 
• Brock, Francis 

Brooks, William 

Brower, Daniel 

Brower, David 

Brower, Garret 

Brower, William 

Brown, Aron 

Brown, Jacob 

Brown, James 

Brown, Samuel 

Brown, Stephen 

Bruck 

Bruer, Wilam 

Brumfield, James 

Brush 

Budd, John 

Bump, Jacob 

Burhans, Peter 

Burlyson, Ferenot 

Burnet, Isaac 

Burroughs, James 

Bush, John 

Bush, Peter 

Bush, Zachariah 

Bussing, Abraham 

Butcher, Robert 

Byce, Henry 

Canfield, Daniel 

Canfield, James 

Canfield, Titus 

Canniff, John 



142 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Canniff, Levi 
Carman, John 
Carman, Thomas 
Carpenter, Henry 
CaT7, John 
Cary, Joseph 
Chatfidd, WUUam 
Chnrchill, Edward 
Churchill, Isaac 
Churchill, Jacob 
Churchill, John 
Churchill, Jonas 
Churchill, Joseph 
Clapp, John 
Clark, Samuel 
Clarke, Matthew 
Cleyland, William 
Cochran, William 
CofSn, John 
Cole, Aaron 
Cole, Jacob 
Cole, Aron 
Comfort, Richard 
Compton, John 
Concklin, Elias 
Concklin, John 
Concklin, Lawrence 
Concklin, Matthew 
Concklin, William 
Connor, James 
Connor, John 
Connover, Benjamin 
Cook, John 
Cook, William 
Coons, Philip 
Cooper, Cornelius 
Cooper, Cornelius, J. 
Cooper, Jacob 
Cooper, John 
Cooper, Minderd 
Cooper, Obadiah 
Cooper, Obadiah I. 
Cooper, Obadiah J. 
CoOpma)!, Jacob 
Coopper, Doct 
Cooper, Obadiah 



Corker, John Rynas 
Cornell, John 
ComweU, Clement 
ComweU, Silvester 
Covenhoven, Adrian 
Covert, John 
Covint, John 
Cowenhoven, Benjamin 
Cowinhoverd, Adrjian 
Craft, Thomas 
Crandel, Abraham 
Crawford, William 
Crinck, Abraham 
Cronck, Abraham 
Cronck, Lawrence 
Cronk, Valam 
Cuer, Nathaniel 
Cuer, Samuel 
Cuer, William 
Culver, Dennis 
Cure, Matthew 
Currie, Archibald 
Currie, John 
Cushman, William 
Dannels, James 
Darlon, Jacobus 
Dates, John 
Datin, Corrinbary 
David, Henry 
Davis, John 
Davison, James 
Dayton, Hezekiah 
Dean, Stephen 
Deboisi Christian 
Deets, John 
Degraff, Moses 
Degraff, Simeon 
Degrutia, Elias 
Delamater, William 
Delaway, Jeremiah 
Demilt, Garret 
Demilt, Isaac 
Demitt, Garret 
Depue, Peter 
Devine, Asher 
Devoort, Samuel 



Dewitt, John 
Dewitt, Peter 
Dickinson, John H. 
Diness, Mynard 
DoUoway, Jeremiah 
Donalds, James 
Doxey, Stephen 
Dubois, Cornelius 
Dubois, Gideon 
Dubois, Jacob 
Dubois, Koert 
Dubois, Peter 
Dubois, Tennis 
Dubois, Thomas 
Duboys, Jacob T. 
Durtwater, Daniel 
Duryce, Abraham, Jrj. 
Duryee, Charles 
Duryer* Abraham 
Dutcher, Barnt 
Dutcher, David 
Dycker, David 
Eldred, William 
Ellis, Henry 
Elsworth, Ahasserus 
Eleworth, Alexander 
Emans, Jacobus 
Enness, James 
Every, John 
Farington, Joseph 
Parrel, Daniel 
Fawlor, Austin 
Ferhone, John 
Ferrington, Joseph 
Fitchout, John 
Flegler, Zachariah 
Flowers, Benjamin 
Flynn, Patrick 
Forbes, John 
Forguson, Samuel 
Fowlar, Joseph 
Garrison, Reuben 
Gault, Matthew 
Gauslin, William 
Gee, Jno. 
Gerow, Benjamin 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



143 



Gerow, Daniel 
GUdersleeve, James 
Gildersleeve, Joseph 
GUdersleeve, Nathaniel 
Giles, WiUiam 
Godfellow, WiUiam 
Golnack, Michael 
Goodfellow, William 
GoTsline, Samuel 
GorsUne, WiUiam 
GosUng, Samuel 
GosUng, WiUiam 
Green, Ezekiel 
Green, Gilbert 
Green, Isaac 
Green, James 
Green, James, Jr. 
Green, Jeremiah 
Green, John 
Green, Joseph 
Green, Joseph, Sr. 
Green, Joseph, Jr. 
Green, Stephen 
GrifiSn, Cornelius 
Griffin, Isaac 
Griffin, Jacob 
Griffin, John 
Griffin, Joseph 
Griffin, Joshua 
Griffin, Peter 
Gue, Isaac 
Gulnack, Jacob 
Gulnecfc, Michael 
Haasner, Jacob 
Hageman, Francis 
Hageman, Jeremiah 
Hageman, Peter 
Haines, John 
Hair, Amos 
Hallett, R. 
Halstead, Thomas 
Halstead, William 
Halsted, Josiah 
Hames, John F. 
Hanly, Matthew 



Hanson, Aurt 

Hanson, John 

Hardenbergh, Dirck 

Hardenbergh, Garret 

Harris, Minderd 

Harsincise, Isaac 

Hart, Michal 

Hasbrook, Jacob 

Haskins, WiUiam 

Hasner, Jacob 

Hawk, John Baron 

Hayburn, John 

Heeremans, Henry 

Heermans, John 

Hegamen, Peter 

HeUker, John 

Hicks, John 

Hicks, Joshua 

Higbee, Flemming 

Higbee, Lemuel 

Higby, FlimmewiU 

Higby, Lemuel 

HUl 

Hilton, Joseph 

Hodge, Abraham 

Hoffman, Daniel 

Hogjaboom, Bartholo- 
mew 

Hogan, Edward 

Hoghtalen, John 

Holmes, Issac 

Holmes, William 

Homes, WiUiam 

Honson, John 

Hoogeboom, Barthol- 
omew 

Hoogland, Derick 

Hoogland, William 

Hoogtalen, John 

Horsuer, Jacob 

Horton, Gilbert 

Horton, Joseph 

Horton, Joseph P. 

Horton, Joshua 

Horton, Matthias J. 

Horton, Peter 



Hosher, Stephen 
Howard, Joseph 
Huff, Angel 
Huff, Lawrence 
Huffman, Daniel 
Hughson, Gabriel 
Hughson, John 
Hughson, WiUiam 
Hulst, Peter 
Humfrey, Henry 
Hutchings, Jacob 
Hutchins, Benjamin 
Hyer, Walter 
Innes, James 
Innis, Peter 
•Isaac, Burnet 
Jackson, Joseph 
Jarepenning, John 
Jarow, Daniel 
Jarowe, Benjamin 
JerwiUinger, Jerean 
JeweU, Abraham 
JeweU, George 
JeweU, John 
Johnson, James 
Johnson, Thomas 
Johnson, Robert 
Jones, David 
Kappelye, Issac 
KeUy, WiUiam 
Kennedy, Henry 
KerriUy, Daniel 
Kershon, Isaac 
Ketcham, Titus 
King, WUliam 
Kip, John 
Kipp, Abraham 
Klump, Zachariah 
Knapp, Shadrack 
Kniffen, Jonathan 
Kniver, Jacob 
Kronk, James 
Ladeau, Daniel 
Ladeu, Nathaniel 
Ladeu, Oliver 
Ladew, Abraham 



144 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Ladua, William 
Ladue, Peter 
Lane, Gilbert 
Lane, Gilbert, Jr. 
Lane, Jacob 
Lane, Jesse 
Lane, Joseph 
Lane, Joshua 
Lane, William 
Lane, WiUiam, Jr. 
Landgon, Jonathan 
Lany, William, Jr. 
Larry, Jno. 
Lattemore, Thomas 
Lattin, Ambrose 
Lawrence, John 
Lean, Joseph 
Lieavy, John 
Ledeau, William, Sr. 
Ledue, Daniel 
Lee, Jonathan 
Leghtatn, John 
Lent, Abraham, Jr. 
Lequiere, Abraham 
Leroy, Francis 
Leroy, Peter 
Leroy, Simon 
Lerye, WiUiam 
Light, William 
Light, Woilsey 
Linderbeck, John 
Lisk, Benjamin 
Losee, Abraham 
Losee, Abraham L. 
Losee, Jacob 
Losee, John A. 
Losee, Simeon 
Low, Jno. 
Low, John 
Luckey, Samuel 
Ludenton, Steapen 
Ludington, Stephen 
Luord, Josiah 
Luyste^ Dirck 
Luyster, Peter 
Lyster, Garret 



McBride, John 
McCaby, Edward 
MacCrady, James 
McCredy, James 
McCudgeon, Robert 
McKaby, Dennis 
McKeeby, Darius 
McKeeby, WiUiam 
McKeely, Edward 
McKeUy, WUliam 
MeManness, Michael 
McNeal, Henry 
Major, James 
Mannery, WiUiam 
Marcius, C. 
Marston, Aurt 
Marten, Aert 
Marten, Peter 
Martense, Adrian 
Martin, Ezekiah 
Martin, Gershom 
Martin, Jeremiah 
Martin, Thomas 
Masten, Aert 
Mastin, Ezechiel 
Maxfield, James 
Mead, David 

Meddagh, Aurt 

Medew, Lewis 
Meed, Jeremiah 

Meger, WilUam 

Menema, John 

Meritt, Joseph 

Mestin, Aurt 

Meyer, Abraham 

Meyer, James 

Meyer, Peter 

Middagfa, Aurt 

Middagh, James 

Miels, Bennajah 

Miels, Noah 

Miles, John 

Miles, Noah 

MiUer, Ezra 

MiUer, James 

Miller, PhiUp 



Mills, Benajah 
MUls, Robert 
Mogar, Caleb 
Moger, William 
Monfoort, Albert 
Monfoort, Domenicus 
Monfoort, Elbert, Jr. 
Monfoort, John 
Monfoort, John C. 
Monfoort, Peter 
Monfort, Elbert 
Monfort, John P. 
Monger, William 
Monson, George 
Montanye, Benjamin 
Morse, Joseph 
Mortisa, Adriaan 
Munfort, Adrian 
Myer, Abraham 
Myer, Adolph 
Myer, Jacob 
Myer, John 
Myer, John, Jr. 
Myer, John Dikman 
Meyer, Peter 
Myer, William 
Myers, Abraham 
Naddue, Lewis 
NeaUy, Samuel 
Neeley, Rolette 
Neepes, Abraham 
Nelson, Paul 
Nettleton, Amos 
Newton, Charles 
Nifer, Jacob 
Noorstrant, John 
Noorstrant, Peter 
Norstrand, Cornelius 
Norstrand, Jacobus 
Norton, Peter 
Nostrand, George 
OdiMa, WiUiam 
Oestrande, Cornells 
Ogden, Benjamin 
Ogden, Joseph 
Osbern, Richard 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



145 



Osborn, Doct 
Osborn, James 
Osborn, Peter 
Osborn, Richard 
Osborn, Samuel 
Ostram, John, Jr. 
Ostrander, Cornelius 
Ostrander, Henry 
Ostrom, John 
Outwater, Daniel 
Paddock, Peter 
Palen, Hendriek 
Palen, Peter 
Paling, Peter 
Palm, Hendriek 
Palmetier, Petrus 
Pardon, Thomas 
Parker, Joseph 
Parker, Nathaniel 
Pating, Hennery 
Patterson, Abijah 
Peck, Joseph 
Peck, Oliver 
Petet, Ebenezer 
Pettit, David 
Phlips, James 
Philips, Ralph, Jr. 
Philips, Roelof 
Philips, William 
Philips, WiUiam C. 
Phillips, Abraham 
Phillips, David 
Phillips, Henry 
Phillips, Jacobus 
Pierce, Richard 
Pine, Philip 
Pine, Robert 
Pine, Silvanus 
Pine, Thomas 
Pollock, William 
PoUom, Tice 
Post, Joseph 
Potten, Danel 
Pudney, Cornelius 
Pudney, Francis 
Pudney, John 



PuUick, John 
PuUick, William 
Purdy, Elisha 
Purdy, Gilbert 
Purdy, Joseph 
Purdy, Nathaniel 
Quan, John 
Rantsier, Andrew 
Rapalgee, John 
Rapelsee, Isaac 
Rayer, Daniel 
Raynor, Daniel 
Reynolds, Andrew 
Right, Daniel 
Robinson, Jonas 
Roe, Benjamin 
Roe, Daniel 
Roe, David 
Rogers, Joseph 
Rogers, Micah 
Rogers, Michael 
Rogers, Piatt 
Rogers, Robert 
Rogers, Uriah 
RoU, Henry 
Romer, John 
Rosekrans, Benjamin 
Rosekrans, John 
Rosekrans, Peter 
Rosekrans, Thomas; 
Roukrans, Dirck 
Rowland, Mai^n 
Runnels, Andrew 
Ryce, Peter 
Rycel, Peter 
Ryder, Caleb 
Ryer, Tunis 
Ryndass, John 
Ryness, Abraham 
Ryness, Andrew 
Ryness, John 
Sackett, Ananias 
Santon, William 
Schenck, Daniel 
Schenck, Philip 
Schenck, Roeloff 



Schounhover, Peter 
Schouten, CorneUus 
Schouten, Ephraim 
Schouten, John 
Schouten, Simon 
Schouten, William 
Schouter, Cornelius 
Schutt, Abraham 
Schutt, James 
Schutt, John, Jr. 
Schutt, Joseph 
Schutt, Stephen 
Schutt, Tennis 
Scofield, Silvanus 
Scot, Walter 
Scouten, Andrew 
Scouten, Andris 
Scouten, Ephraim 
Scouten, Johannes 
Scouten, John 
Scouten, Simon 
Scouten,William 
Scutt, Dennis, 
Scutt, Joseph 
Sebring, Cornelius 
Sebring, Isaac 
Secord, Isaac 
Secord, Josiah 
Seton, Heskieh 
Shaff, Frederick 
Shear, Abraham 
Sherer, James 
Shevling, John 
Shults, Christopher 
Shute, Aron 
Sickles, John, Jr. 
Skutt, Teunjs 
Slack, William 
-Sleight, Abraham 
^Sleight, John 
flight, Abraham, Jr. 
Sloot, John 
Smith, Isaac 
Smith, Jacob 
Smith, John 
Smith, Joseph 



146 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Smith, Joseph, Jr. 
Smith, Joshua 
Smith, Martin 
Smith, Maurice 
Smith, Morris 
Smith, Richard 
Smith, Sylvester 
Smith, WilUam 
Snider, George 
Snider, Moses 
Sodem, John 
Soden, John 
Somendyke, Jacob 
Somemdike, William 
Somes, Nathaniel 
Somes, Richard 
Somes, Stephen 
Southard, Gilbert 
Southard, Henry 
Southard, Isaac 
Southard, John 
Southard, John, Jr. 
Southard, Richard 
Southard, Thomas 
Southerd, Jones 
Spence, John 
Spencer, John 
Stanton, William 
Storm, Isaac 
Storm, John 
Sutton, Joseph 
Swartwort, James 
Swartwout, Cornelius 
Swartwout, John 
Swartwout, Richard 
Swartwout, Samuel 
Swartwout, Thomas 
TaUman, Timothy 
Tanner, Zopher 
Tarpennye, John 
Taylor, Stephen 
Teller, Oliver 
Terbosh, Abraham 
TerBush, Luke 
Tercoss, William 
Terhune, John 



Terhune, Daniel 
Terpanning, John 
Terwilger, Juryan 
Thatcher, Stephen 
Theal, Joseph 
Thomas, Johnson 
Thompson, Ezra 
Thorn, Gershom 
Thurston, Benjamin 
Thurston, James 
Totten, Daniel 
Traverse, Nathaniel 
Tremper, Michael 
Turhune, Abraham 
Turhune, John 
Turner, Alexander 
Turner, Elljck 
Vail, Isaac 
VaU, Jesse 

Van Amburgh, Abra- 
ham 
Van Banech, Jacob 
Van Benchoten, , James 
Van Bomal, Christo- 
pher 
Van Bomelj Peter 
Van Bonnel, Christ- 

offel 
Van Bosnel, Peter 
Vanbumble, Stuffl 
Van Bumbler, Peter 
Van Bunchoten, Jacob 
Van Bunchoten, Tennis 
Van Bunchoten, Teu- 

nis, Jr. 
Vanclackren, Mari- 

nus T. 
Van Cleck, Boltis B. 
Van Cleef, Michael 
Van Cots, John 
Van Cott, Daniel 
Van Crob, Abraham 
Vancuran, Casparus 
Vandeburgh, Abram 
Van Der BUt, Aart 
Van Derbilt, P. 



Vandervoort, Jacobus 
Vandervoort, John 
Van Der Voort, Sam- 
uel 
Vander Water, John 
Vande Water, Adolph 
Vandewater, Harman 
Van Dewater, James 
Vandewort, Peter 
Van Duwnter, John 
Vand Water, James 
Vandworter, Jacobus 
Van Erway, Jacob 
Van Every, Edde 
Van Every, Jacob 
Van Flack, Henry 
Van Kerse, John 
Van Keuren, Matthew 
Van Kleack, Bar- 
rant B. 
Van Kleeck, Baltus 
Van Kleeck, Barent A. 
Van Kleeck, Barn- 
ard C. 
Van Kleeck, Bamet 
Van Kleeck, Michael 
Van Kuren, Caspowres 
Van Leyse, I. 
Van Norstrant, John 
Van Nortstrant, Cor- 

nelus 
Van Siclen, John 
Van Steenberger, Cor- 
nelius 
Van Steenbergh, Cor- 
nelius 
Vantassel, Henry 
Vantassil Jacob 
Van Tassill, John 
Vantiers, William 
Vantine, Abraham 
Vantine, Cornelius 
Van Tine, William 
Van Valen, Daniel 
Van Valen, Jeremiah 
Van Valen, John 




JOHN P. RIDER. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



147 



Van Valer, Moses 
Van Velen, Ede 
Van Veler, Daniel 
Van Vlack, Baient 
Van Vlack, John H. 
Van Vlack, Merinus 
Van Vleck, John 
Van Vleck, Merine 
Van Vleckren, Abra- 
ham 
Van Vleckren, George 
Van Vleckren, Henry 
Vanvleckren, Marinus 
Van Vleckren, Marin- 
us T. 
Van Voorhees, Stephen 
Van Vooheis, Jero- 

nimus 
Van Voorhis, Abraham 
Van Voorhis, Jacob 
Van Voorhis, Jero- 

mus 
Van Voorhis, John 
Van Voorhis, Zacha- 

riah 
Van Wey, Cornelius 
Van Wyck, Abraham 
Van Wyck, Cornelius 
Van Wyck, John 
Van Wyck, John B. 
Van Wyck, Theodorus 
Vandle, James 
Vermilier, Benjamin 



Vermilya, John 
Vermuly, David 
Vermuly, Geraduis 
Vervalin, Daniel 
Vervalin, Jermiah 
Vervalin, John 
Vervalin, Moses 
Vestervals, John 
Voorhis, Jerom 
Waldron, Benjamin 
Waldron, Daniel 
Waldron, David 
Waldron, John 
Waldron, John P. 
Waldron, Peter 
Ward, Daniel 
Ward, James 
Ward, William 
Washburn, Isaac 
Waters, John 
Watts, John 
Way, Frederick 
Way, George 
Way, Gideon 
Way James 
Way, John 
Way, Joost 
Webard, John 
Weed, John 
Wenn, William 
Westervalt, Albert 
Wesftervalt, John 
Westervelt, Elbert 
Westervelt, George 



Westervelt, Jacobus 
Westervelt, John 
Wibard, John 
Wille, James 
Wilsee, William 
Wiltse, Cornelius 
Wiltse, Joseph 
Watse, Peter 
Wiltsee, Hendrick 
Wiltsey, Geradus 
Wiltsie, WiUiam 
Wiltzee, Harmery 
Winn, Johnson 
Winn, Joseph 
Winslow, Samuel 
Wood, Isaac 
Wood, Jesse 
Wood, John 
Wood, Joseph 
Wood, Solomon 
Wood, Thomas 
Wool, Joseph 
Worshboum, Isaac 
Wright, Daniel 
Wright, Daniel, Jr. 
Wright John 
Wright, Thomas 
Wyckoff, John 
Yeomans, John 
Yerks, John 
Young, Abraham 
Young, John 
Zachrider, Moses 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— THIRD REGIMENT. 



Colonel John Field 
Colonel Andrew Morehouse 
Major Jonathan Paddock 
Major Isaac TaUman 



Adjutant Solomon Crane 
Quarter Master Reuben Crosby 
Surgeon Joseph Crane, Jr. 



Captains — Azor Barnum, William Calkin, William Chamberlain, Peter Coon, 
Joseph Dykeman, David Hecock, James Marten, William Pearce, William Pine, 
Ichabod Ward. 



148 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Lieutenants — Joshua Crosby, Daniel Doane, Elijah Oakley, Uriah Parrish, Ed- 
ward Penny, Thomas Sears, Valentine Wheeler, Luke Woolcut 

Ensiox — Nathan Green. 

Additional names on state treasurer's pay hooks. 
Lieut. Joseph Chandler, Lieut. Asa Haines, Ensign Benjamin Slocum. 



Anow, WiUiam 
Ashhy, Anthony 
Baker, Elisha 
Bald-win, David 
Barleson, Joel 
Bamum, Eliakum 
Barnum, Jonah 
Bamum, Noah 
Barnum, Stephen 
Benedict, Ebenezer 
Benedict, Stephen 
Benit, Amasa 
Bennet, Amacy 
Benson, William 
Birdsall, Elemuel 
Birdsall, Thomas 
Birlisson, Joel 
Bishnite, Frances 
Bradshaw, John 
Brewster, Pdatiah 
Brewster, PeU 
Brown, Israel 
Brown, Moses 
Bruster, Samuel 
Bumpus, James 
Burch, George 
Burch, Josiah, Sr. 
Burch, Josiah, Jr. 
Burch, Silas 
BuTJes, Thomas 
Burkler, Jabez 
Burlasand, Joel 
Burleson, Joel 
Burling, Gilead 
Burtch, Benjamin 
Cable, Piatt 
Calkin* Elias 



ENLISTED MEN. 

Campbell, Robert 
Cannon, Abraham 
Carle, John 
Carter, Jabez 
Chamberlain, John 
Chapman, Enoch 
Chapman, Thomas 
Chase, Bary 
Chase, Seth 
Chase, Thomas 
Clark, John 
Clinton, WiUiam 
Closson, Wilber 
Closson, William 
Codsshuer, Jonas 
Cole, Benjamin 
Cole, Sylvenus 
Concklin, John 
Cook, Moses, Sr. 
Cook, Moses, Jr. 
Coon, Jacob 
Coon, John 
Cornwell, David 
Covey, Joseph 
Covey, Walter 
Crandle, Jeremiah 
Crane, Ira 
Crane, William 
Croker, Timothy 
Crosby, Abner 
Crosby, David, Jr. 
Crosby, Elemuel 
Crosby, Elezer 
Crosby, Eli 
Crosby, James 
Crosby, John 
Crosby, Joseph 



Crosby, Josah 
Crosby, Lemuel 
Crosby, Moses 
Crosby, Obadiah 
Crosby, Reuben 
Crosby, Samuel 
Davis, Paul 
Dean, Elijah 
Dehnarter, Marting 
Doane, Elnatban 
Dyckman, Benjamin 
Ellis, Elijah 
EUis, Thomas 
Ellwell, Ezra 
Elwell, Jabez 
Elwell, John 
Elwell, Tabis, Jr. 
Evans, Thomas, Sr. 
Evens, Thomas 
Evens, Thomas, Jr. 
Ferris, Justus 
Field, Jesse 
Foster, David 
Foster, James 
Foster, John 
Foster, Samuel 
Fister, Seth 
Fox, Oliver, Jr. 
Franklin, Nathaniel 
Fuller, Jesse 
Gage, Alden 
Gage, Anthony 
Gage, Justus 
Gage, Mark 
Gage, Moses 
Gage, Silvanus 
Gay, Jason 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



149 



Gilchrist, Samuel 
Gilchrist, Thomas 
Goodshed, Abner 
Grajr, Samuel 
Grean, John 
Green, Caleb 
Green, Isaac 
Green, Jeams 
Griffith, Done 
Hains, Asa 
HaU, Benaijah 
Hall, Benjamin 
Hall, Jesse 
HaU, John 
Hall, Martin 
Hall, Morten 
Hall, Samuel 
Hayden, Alpheus 
Hazard, Samuel 
Heaveland, John 
Hecock, Noah 
Hecocks, John 
Hempsted, Nathaniel 
Henman, Zachariah 
Heverland, John 
Higgins, Thomas, Jr. 
Hinckley, Elkanah 
Hinckley, Reuben 
Hinkley, Josiah 
Hoecee, Tademas 
Holladay, John 
HoUaway, Joseph 
Holley, Joseph 
Holliday, John 
Holliday, Simeon 
Holms, Joseph 
Honeyall, Mathias 
Hopkins, Berry 
Hopkins, John 
How, Garret 
Hunewill, Mathew 
Hunt, Thomas 
Johnston, Joseph 
Jones, Ebenezer 
Jones, Elias 
Jones, Ephraim 



Jones, Isaac 
Jones, Joseph 
Jones, Levi 
Jones, Nehemiah 
Jones, Samuel 
Jones, Thomas 
Kelley, David 
Kelley, Shoubel 
Kelly, Jonathan 
Kelly, Reuben 
Kelly, Sylvenus 
Kent, Moses 
Ketcham, Daniel 
Killey, Reuben 
Killey, Silvenas 
King, Caleb 
King, Myrick 
King, Nathaniel 
KUne, John 
Lincoln, Isaiah 
Lindsay, David 
Lockwood, Henry 
Lockwood, Solomon 
Marks, Holiab 
Marsee, Andrew 
Marsh, Elnathan 
Mash, Elnathan 
Mash, John 
Massy, Andrew 
Merick, Benjamin 
Merjerson, Thomas 
Mills, Benijah 
MiUs, WilUam C. 
Mirit, Gilburt 
Morehouse, Stephen 
Morrell, Abraham 
Mosh, John 
Mosiher, Johial 
Moshoell, Isaac 
Mott, Jacob 
Mott, Joseph 
Mott, Thomas 
Mott, William, Jr. 
Murch, George 
Murch, William 
Myrrick, Benjamin 



Nash, David 
Nicholsone, James 
Nickerson, James 
Nickerson, Thomas 
Nickerson, Thomas, Jr. 
Notter, William 
Nubery, Joseph 
Gates, James 
Olmstead, Ebenezer 
Osborn, Ezekiel 
Osterhout, Gideon 
Paddock, Nathan 
Palmer, Nickelous 
Palmer, William 
Penney, Ammiel 
Penney, John 
Penney, William 
Perkins, Elijah 
Perry, Samuel 
Perry, Simeon 
Petson, Andrew 
Philips, Joseph 
Philips, Joshua 
Pitcher, Benjamin 
Ragon, Thomas 
Raymond, Uriah 
Reed, Jacob 
Richardson, Isaac 
Rider, Christopher 
Rider, David 
Rider, John 
Rider, Simeon 
Rider, Simeon, Jr. 
Rinnalds, David 
Robert, Benjamin, Jr. 
Roberts, Benjamin 
Rockwell, Stephen 
Runnels, David 
Russel, Roland 
Ryder, Zenous 
Sabens, Billings 
Sackett, John 
St. John, Thomas 
Sampson, Abner 
Sealy, William 
Sears, Benjamin 



150 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Sears, Enoch 
Sears, Peter 
Sears, Seth 
Sears, Seth, Jr. 
Sears, Stephen 
Shaw, Ichahod 
Sherman, Darius 
Slocum, Benjamin 
Slocmn, George 
Smith, Alpheus 
Smith, Jonathan 
Smith, Joseph 
Snider, Samuel 
Snow, William 
Spencer, Samuel 
Stark, Aamos 
Stark, Aaron 
Stark, John 



Starke, Henry 
Start, Aaron 
Stevens, Thomas 
Stone, David 
Stow, William 
Termillear, Phillip 
Thomas, Thomas 
Thompson, Daniel 
Thompson, Thomas 
Thornton, Thomas 
Townsend, Isaac 
Townsend, John 
Townsend, Solomon 
Tubbs, Benajah 
Twitchel, Benoni 
Utter, Aamos 
Utter, Ebenezer 
Vickrey, Thomas 
Wairing, John 



Webb, Noah 
Weed, John 
Wickson, Elijah 
Wickson, Elijah, Jr. 
WJkson* Ebenezer 
Willcocks, Rosel 
Willis, Charles 
Willis, Thomas 
Wilson, John 
Winger, Hendrick 
Winger, Samuel 
Wixon, Elijah 
Wixson, Isaac 
Wposter, William 
Wright, Edmund 
Young, Elkany 
Young, Shaw 
Youngs, Samuel 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— FOURTH REGIMENT. 
Colonel John Frear 



Captaiits — Isaac Conklin. 



-Hageman, Elijah Herrick, 



Low, David Ostrand, Samuel Smith, Luke Stoutenburgh, 
nardus Swarthouse, Hugh Van Kleeck, John Van Kleeck 

LiEUTENAifTs — Abraham Fort, Jonas Weeks. 

EirsiGNS — Alexander Furman, (Reuben) Spencer. 

(No Enlisted Men Found.) 



— Kilsey, 

Straight, Ber- 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— FIFTH REGIMENT. 

Colonel William Humfrey. Adjutant John Budd. 

Colonel James Vandeburgh. Adjutant Jeremiah Clerk 

Major Benjamin Birdsall. Quarter Master Henry Bailey. 

Major William Clerk. Quarter Master James Ellsworth. 

Captains — Caleb Bentley, John Boyd, Josiah Burton, Joshua Champlin, William 
Clark, John Clum, Jonathan Dennis, Abraham Hartwill, David Hecock, Job Mead, 
Joseph Rurnids, John Scut, Barardus Swartwout, Is Vail, Francis West, Valen- 
tine Wheeler. 

LnEUTENANTS— Stephen Akins, Silas Anson, Tabor Bentley, Tilling Bentley, 
Jacob Blatner, Joseph Chandler, Andrew Heermance, Jacob J. Heermance, AH 
Houghland, Daniel Hule, James Humfrey, McClees , Peter Magee, Roger 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



151 



Morey, Jr., Theoph Sweet, Brt. Van Kleeck, Moses Van Vranka, Solomon Wheeler, 
Gilbert Wording. 

Ensigns — David Tmsdal, Abraham Van Curah, Peter Van Valklnburgh. 



Abbet, David 
^Acker, Adam 
Adams, Ebenezer 
Allin, Thomas 
Alsworth, William 
Ames, I. 
Anen 

Asseltine, Jacob 
Atwearter, Benjamin 
Andriance, J. 
Aulandorph, Christian 
Babcock, David 
Babcock, Enoch 
Babcock, John 
Babcock, John (1) 
Babcock, John (3) 
Backer, John 
Bailey, Elias 
Bailey, Elisha 
Baker, Elnathan 
Baker, J. 
Baker, Jonathan 
Baker, William 
Ballim, Matthew 
Bannam, James 
Barger 

Barkman, George 
Bamnm, Bethuel 
Barnnm, William 
Barringar, Conradt 
Barringar, William 
Bartlee, Abraham 
Bartlee, Jacob 
Bartlett, Jacob 
Bayley, S. 
Beckett, Sylos 
Bell, Robert 
Benjamin, Cyres 
Bennet, Timothy 
Bentley, Joseph 



ENLISTED MEN. 

Bently, John 
Benton, Moses 
Berry, Nicholas 
Berry, P. 
Bigraft, George 
Bigraft, Jonathan 
BiUings, Increase 
Billings, John 
Birdsall, Daniel 
Birdsall, Jeremiah 
Bishop, 
Borgordis 
Bosehonce, Isaac 
Bouker, Thomas 
Brenkroff, 
Brewer, D. 
Brewer, V. 
Brill, Solomon 
Brinkorff, I. 
Brown, Jonathan 
Brown, Peter 
Brows, Zepheniah 
Brnmfleld, J. 
Brnster, Peltias 
Buck, Zadock 
Budd, Undril 
Bugbee, George 
Bump, I. 
Bump, Joseph 
Bumbler, P'h 
Bunsehoten, Solomon 
Bunt, Leasero 
Burley, Elijah 
Cady, Elisha 
Cahoon, Ben 
Carle, Andrew 
Carley, John 
Carley, Peter 
Carman, Andrew 
Cary, Stephen 



Cash, Jonathan 
Celey, WiUiam 
Chadwick, WiUiam 
Chahart, Jacob 
Champlin, Thomas 
Champlin, William 
Chapman, Josiah 
Chase, Berry 
Chavilear, Peter 
Christian, Cornelius 
Clark, J. P. 
Coberstine, John 
Cole, Benjamin 
Cole, Jacob 
Cole Moses 
Colerell, Henry 
Coller, Norres 
Coltman, William 
Conroo, Darling 
Conroo, William 
Coock, I. 
Coock, W. 
Cook, Jere 
Cook, John 
Cook, Mathew 
Coon, Alexander 
Cooper, William 
Corkins, Joel 
Cornell, Benjamin 
Cornell, John 
Cornell, Lewis 
Cornell, Samuel 
Cornwill, Caleb 
Comwill, Sylvan's 
CorwiU, Benjam 
Cott, D. 
Cranfoot, James 
Crankite, Frederick 
Crankite, Herciilus 
Crankite, John 



152 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Creed, Austin 
Crook, Waiiam 
Crosby, Eliezer 
Crosby, Obediah 
Cudbuth, William 
Cunningham, John 
Curry, Elisha 
Daggitt, Mayhue 
Dannels, J. 
Darling, Peter 
David, I. 
Davis, George 
Davis, Squire 
Davison, Alverson 
Davison, Daniel 
Debons, Math'w 
Delong, Richard 
Demsey, Thomas 
Denney, Charles 
Devow, John 
Dewkine, I. 
Dickson, I. Hanse 
Dimond, Math'w 

Dodg , I. 

Douty, Elias 
Dowing, I. 
Downing, Andrew 
Doxey, Thomas 
Draper, John 
Draper, Joseph 
Dumon, Cornelius 
Duteher, D. 
Dutcher, Simon 
Eda, Joshua 
Egail, Jo'n 
Eldred, William 
Ellott, Christian 
Elwell, Jabez 
Ennis, P. 
Estrus, Benjamin 
Evans, John 
Everit, Clear 
Evins, Amos 
Evins, Oliver 
FUlow, En 
Pillow, Fimus 



Finch, Comfort 
Fish, Joseph 
Flinn, David 
Fonda, Cornelius 
Forbus, John 
Forbush, William 
Force, Benjamin 
Forgerson, Gllb't 
Forgerson, Jeremiah 
Foster, Seth 
Fox, Jonathan 
Freeh, John 
Frier, Peter 
Frier, Simeon 
Gage, Elihu 
Gage, Moses 
Gale, Nob 
Gardner, Simeon 
Gewel, I. 
Gewel, T. 
Gibson, John 
Gideon, Joseph 
GUbert, Ep'm 
GUbert, Thad 
Gillitt, Barny 
Gones, Seth 
Gooden, Robert 
Goodfeller, W. 
Goodwin, I. 
Green, Caleb 
Green, E. 
Greves, Thomas 
Grey, John 
Griflfin, Barney 
GrifSth, Solomon 
Hale, John 
Hall, Benjamin 
Hall, Gideon 
Hamlin, Epraim 
Haner, John 
Hanes, I. 
Hangedoren, John 
Hannaburgh, Christ- 

yaun 
Haping, David 
Harrick, Joseph 



Harrington, William 
Harris, Noah 
Hartwill, Ebenezer 
Hassiem, Jdhn 
Hatch, Cradius 
Heermance, Jacob 
Helmes, John 
Hendrickson, Jacob 
Henry, Elick 
Heracer, Emanuel 
Herrick, Isriel 
Hewit, Edmond 
Hewit, Gidion 
Hicks, Nathaniel 
Hicks, W. 
Hoard, Isaac 
Hodge, K. 
Hoffman, Patrus 
Hightailing, Abraham 
Holmes, Alkany 
Holmes, Ben 
Holmes, John 
Honssinger, Frank 
Horton, D. 
Hoisher, Thomas 
Houck, William 
Howard, Jonathan 
Howlin, Obediah 
Hudson, Asa 
Huff, I. 
Hulin, John 
Hull, Justus 
Humfrey, Thonias 
Hutchens, A. 
Hutchings, Jacob 
Irish, BenjamSn 
Irish, Isaac 
Jaycocks, Thomas 
Jinkins, Jerry 
Johnson, Alexander 
Johnson, Joseph 
Johnson, Nehemiah 
Johnstones, I. 
Jones, Isaac 
Jones, Nathan 
Jones, Robert 




CHARLES M. WOLCOTT. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



153 



Jones, Roger 
Jones, Rufus 
Jones, Seth 
Judard, H. 
Kelly, Jonathan 
Klme, Lourance 
King, Hezeklah 
King, Nathaniel 
Kip 

Kipp, Prank 
Knognard, John 
Kool, Isaac 
Koons, Adam 
Koonts, Nicholas 
Lake, Henry 
Lake, Stephen 
Lamb, Daniel 
Lamb, David 
Lane, J. 
Lane, John 
Lanson, Garrlt 
Lant, Jurry 
Laroy, John 
Lawrence, Isaac 
Lawrence, Oliver 
Lawrence, Riichard 
Lawsin, Mathew 
Lawsin, Peter 
Lean, John 
Lerue, I. 
Levy, Jacob 
Lewis, Felix 
Lewis, Gil 
Linn, Aaron 
Loop, Peter, Jr. 
Losie, Francis 
Luis, Grawdus 
Luke, John 
Lus, Miehal 
Lus, William 
McCreedy, Charles 
McCreedy, James 
Mackeny, I. 
McKiney, Joseph 
McLees,< James 



McLees, Peter 
McNeel, Henry 
Marchant, Abel 
Marchel, Benjamin 
Marta, David 
Martin, Elemuel 
Mason, Francis 
Mathews, Justice 
Mayhue, Ebenezer 
Mayhue, Levi 
Mead, King 
Mead, Zebulin 
Miller, Jacob 
Moon, John 
Moor, Nicholas 
Moore, Poulis 
Moran, William 
Mordock, Zimri 
Mott, Jacob 
MuUer, Stephen 
Mumford, P. 
Myer, Benjamin 
Myer, Henrey 
Near, Charles 
Nelson, Frank 
Neutun, John 
NewlU, Joseph 
Newman, Joshua 
Nichols, Silas 
Norton, Richard 
Noxon, Benj amin 
O'Cane, Edward 
Odell, Crershom 
Odell, Jonas 
Odle, Abiather 
Okla, Thomas 
Olmsted, Elijah 
Orborn, John 
Orsborn, Com'l 
Ostrander, Henrey 
Ostrum, Gilbert 
Owen, Anenias 
Owens, Robert 
Pack, I. 
Paddock, Peter 



Padock, Henry 
Palmer, Sylvanus 
Patterson, Ab'm 
Pelts, Evert 
Perce, John 
Pettitt, Jacob 
Phillip, Adam 
Phillip, Christyan 
Plass, Hendrick 
Post, J. 

Potter, Rowland 
Prope, George 
Prust, Martin 
Randel, I. 
Reesoner, David 
Reise, Jonas 
Reynolds, Era 
Riccord, George 
Richardson, Isaac 
Richardson, William 
Rines, I. 

Robinson, Andrew 
Robinson, Stephen 
Rogers, Ezekiel 
Rolitts, John 
Romer, Aron 
Rosacrance, I, 
Row, D. 
Rowlee, Daniel 
Rowley, Nathan 
Rumm, George 
Runnels, I. 
Ryder^ John 
Ryley, Phillip 
Sabins, Joshua 
Sage, Selah 
Sarmerhorn, Cor- 
nelius 
Saxton, Ebenezer 
Schoulen, 
Schouten, E. 
Schryver, Bartle 
Seberry, John 
Sharks, Thomas 
Sharts, David 



154 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Shaw, Benjamin 
Shede, George 
Sheer, William 
Shephier, Isreal 
ShoS, Andrew 
Shuter, Samuel 
Shuts, Ab'm 
Shnttis, John 
Sickler, Coonrod 
Siekler, George 
Sickle^ Mathias 
Simmons, John 
Sitcher, Andrew 
'^laght, T. 
Slut, John 
Smith, Daniel 
Smith, Ephraim 
Smith, Ezekiel 
Smith, Henry 
Smith, John 
Smith, Phillip 
Smith, Thomas 
Soper, Bart'n 
Soper, Henry 
Soper, Timothy 
Server, Peter 
Sparker, Andrew 
Spencer, Abner 
Spencer, Jabus 
Spencer, James 
Spencer, Rufus 
Spencer, William 
Springer, John 
Stanton, Thomas 
Stark, Aaron 
Stark, Nathan 
Steed, Richard 
Stinebergh^ Grandus 
Stockhohn, D. 
Stone, David 
Stubbelbane, Michal 



Swartout, T. 
Sweet, Amos 
Swider, M. 
Swortout, C. 
Swortont, I. 
Talor, Gamal 
Talor, John 
Tamph, Frederick 
Tanner 

Taylor, Gamalial 
Taylor, Joseph 
Thompson, John 
Thompson, Thomas 
Thorington, Thomas 
Thorn, Benjamin 
Toboys, C. 
Tolks, John 
Tommes, Benjamin 
Torboss, L. 
Tott, James 
Townsend, Able 
Turhoon, I. 
Tyler, John 
Umphey, William 
Uree, John 
Valentine, Benjamin 
Van Cleak, John 
Van Cott, John 
Vanderhoof, Jacob 
Vanderhyder, Abraham 
Vandevort, John 
Vandevort,! S/ 
Van Dusan, John 
Van Dusan, London 
Van Loan, Peter 
Van Luvan, Zacharias 
Van Nette, Isaac 
Van Slyck, Tunas 
Van Tasel, J. 
Van Valkenburgh, 
Peter 



Vanvlack, H. 
Van Voris, L 
Van Wicke 
Van Wogner, John 
Vel^, Peter 
Vermillia, S. 
Vessher, Christopher 
Vincent, Philip 
Vradenburgh, Abraham 
Vradenburgh,' Peter 
Walker, John 
Ward, David 
Ward, Eben 
Warner, Richard 
Warreuj Samuel 
Weeks, William 
Weiley, William 
Welch, Thomas 
WeUer, Amos 
WeUer, William 
Wells, Silas 
Wesee, Abraham 
Welsey, I. 
West, Daniel 
West, Elijah 
Whiper, I. 
Whipple, Nath 
Whitcomb, Simon 
White, John 
White, Solomon 
Whitmarch, Ezra 
Wickson, Elijah 
Wilcox, John 
Wilcox, Stephen 
Willey, Thomas 
Willkason, Jon 
Wistiveltt, James 
Wolven, William 
Wood, Silas 
Young, Benjamin 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



155 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— SIXTH REGIMENT. 



Colonel Morris Graham. 
Colonel Roswell Hopkins. 
Lieutenant Colonel Jacob Griffin. 
Major Peter Fell 
Major Jonathan Landon. 
Major Brinton Paine. 
Adjutant John Graham. 
Adjutant David Hunt. 



Adjutant Daniel Shepherd. 
Quarter Master John Else. 
Quarter Master Nathan Fish. 
Quarter Master Ezra Payne. 
Quarter Master Abraham Van Wart. 
Pay Master Edmtmd Perlee. 
Surgeon William Adams. 
Surgeon Roswell Hopkins, Jr. 



Captaixs — Sybert Acker, John Barnes, Azor Barnum, John Bell, John Brad- 
rick, George Brinkerhoff, Charles Brodhead, Moses Cantine, Colbe Chamberlain, 
John Drake, Andries Heermans, Elijah Herrick, Henry Humfrey, John Klum, 
George Lane. Daniel Martin, William Pearce, William Radclift, John Rouse, Rich- 
ard Sackett, Frederick Strait, Smith Sutherland, James Tallmadge, Elijah Town- 
send, John Van Benschoten, David Van Ness, Samuel Waters, Noah Wheeler, 
Daniel Williams. 

LxEUTENAS-TS — Stephen Adsit, Frederick Benner, John Berry, Phillipp Bowne, 
Wright Carpenter, Samuel Crandle, Daniel Delavan, Christian Dubois, Abner Gil- 
lett, Abraham Smith Hadden, Stephen Haight, Philliph Harimanse, Andries Har- 
mans, Joel Haskins, John Heermanse, Adam Helmer, Abram Hogeland, Solomon 

Hopkins, Stephen Hunt, Elihu Ingalls, William Martine, William Mattemen, 

Mead, James Moore, Francis Nelson, Elijah Park, Jonas Parks, Bezaleel Rudd, 
Abraham Schultz, John Smith, Frederick Stevenson, William Swartwout, Teunis 
Talman, Isaac Townsend, Jacob Trimper, Resolvent Van Houton, Wright White, 
Zophar WiAes, Robert Wood. 

Eirsieirs — William Becker, John More. 



Abbett, David 
Abboth, Abiel 
Abler, James 
Acker, Abraham 
Ackerman, Arie 
Ackerman, John 
Adair, William 
Adams, John 
Adams, Major 
Adsit, George 
Adsit, Silas 
Aldridge, Jonathan 
Allen, Asa 
Allen, Caleb [ 
Allen, Jonathan 



EITLISIED MEX. 

Allendorph, Hendridk 
Allsworth, Thomas 
Ambler, Charles 
Ambler, James 
Andres, George 
Annes, Peter 
Anson, James 
Armstrong, Benjamin 
Armstrong, Gabril 
Armstrong, Robert 
Arnold, Peleg 
Asten, Robert 
Aston, Martin 
Aulomdorph, Hendrick 
AusoT, Nicholas 



Austin, Robert 
Babcock, James 
Backer, John 
Badeau, Jacob 
Bader, Michael 
Baker, Jesse 
Baker, Joshua 
Baker, Judah 
Baker, Richard 
Bailey, Elias 
Banker, Stephen 
Barber, Nathan 
Barber, Reuben 
Barber, Solomon 
Barber, Thomas 



156 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Barker, James 
Barnhard, Henry 
Barns, Jacob 
Barniim, Noah 
Bariinger, Conradt 
Barringer, David 
Barringer, William 
Barton, Gilbert 
Bartow, John 
Bates, Daniel 
Bates, Hickey 
Bayley, Samuel 
Beaty, John 
Becker, John 
Beecher, Nathan 
Bell, Jacob 
BeU, WiUiam R. 
BeU, William W. 
Benner, Hendrick, Jr. 
Berger, John 
Beringer, ^acob, Jr. 
Berry, Jabez 
Berry, John 
Berry, Peter 
Berry, Samuel 
Betts, Gideon 
Bishop, John 
Blaau, Henry 
Blaurelt^ Ckimelius 
Blauvelt, Isaac 
Bodsee, Jacob 
Bogardus, Egbert 
Bogardus, Henry 
Bogardus, Peter 
Bogart, Hendrick 
Bogart, Jacob 
Bonasteal, Nicholas 
Bonker, Stephen 
Bonnell, Jonathan 
Booth, Isaiah 
Bouton, Moses 
Boyce, John 
Boyd Robert 
Boyd, Samuel 
Bradshaw, William 



Brewer, William 
Brewster, John 
Brickell, George 
Briggs, Casparus 
Briggs, Lawrence 
Brinckerhoff, Daniel 
Brinckerhoff, Isaac 
Brinckerhoff, John S. 
Brink, Cornelius C. 
Brinkerhoff, John 
Broadwell, Moses 
Brodhead, Samuel 
Brooks, John 
Brower,^ Samuel 
Brower, William 
Brown, Cornelius 
Brown, Deliverance 
Brown, James 
Brown, James H. 
Brown, John 
Brown, Noah 
Brown, Noah, Jr. 
Brown, Peter 
Brown, Stephen 
Brown, Tower 
Bruce, Robert 
Bruster, David 
Buck, Israel 
Buck, Israel, Jr. 
Buckhout, John 
Buel, Samuel 
Bugbe, Samuel 
Bugbee, John 
Buill, John 
Bullis, Peter 
Bun, John 
Bunschoten, John 
Burel, Jesse 
Burgh, Jonathan 
Burley, Ebenezer 
Burling, 

Burlinsonj Fearnot 
Burlinson, Joel 
Burlsona, Grover 
Burns, Edward 



Burtis, James 
Bush, Peter 
Bush, Tryertar 
Butler, Stephen 
Byce, Abraham 
Byce, John 
Byington, Nathaniel 
Cable, Piatt 
Cakbel, Plat 
Calkins, Eli 
Calkins, John 
Calkins, Moses 
Camberlin, Thomas 
Gamble, Charles 
Campbell, James 
Campbell, Robert 
Canfield, Aaron 
Canfidd, Amos 
Canfield, Titus 
Canniff, Levi 
Carle, John 
Carlee, Jonathan 
Carpenter, Clark 
Carson, Samuel 
Carter, John 
Carver, Barnabes 
Cash, David 
Casher, William 
Castle, Daniel 
Castle, Lemuel 
Chambers, Thomas 
Champanois, Harman 
Chandler, Jonathan 
Chapman, Samuel 
Chapman, Stephen 
Chapman, Thomas 
Charpanard, Simon 
Chase, Elijah 
Chase, Gedaliah 
Chase, Richard 
Chase, Robert 
Christman, John 
Church, Medad 
Churchill,j Edward 
Clapp, Joseph 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



157 



Clark, John 
Clark, Othaniel 
Clason, Wilber 
Clawater, Jacob 
Clement, Charles 
Clement, James 
Close, Caesar 
Closson, Wilber 
Cocktel, Timothy 
Coe, Samuel 
Coenhoven, WiUiam 
Cohler, Leonard 
Cokler, Leonard 
Colbreath, Thomas 
Cole, Abraham 
Cole Joseph 
Collard, Abraham 
Collins, Solomon 
CoUins, William 
Colly, Matthew 
Colwell, James 
Cone, Ben j amis (col- 
ored) 
Conel 

Conklin, Abraham 
Conklin, John 
Conklin, Matthew 
Conklin, Nathan 
Conkling, Jacob 
Conly, Charles 
Conner, Patrick 
Conory, John 
Conroy, John 
Converse, James 
Cook, Darius 
Cook, James 
Cook, Job 
Cook, John 
Cook, Simeon 
Cooke, Benjamin 
Cooke, Samuel 
Cooper, Cornelius 
Cooper, Garret 
Cooper, Jacob 
Cooper, Nicholas 



Cornell, James 
Cornwell, Clement 
Cott, John 
Cowen, Isaac 
Craft, Caleb 
Craig, Francis 
Craw, John 
Crawford, Nathan 
Crompton, John 
Cronk, Abraham 
Crosby, Lemuel 
Crosby, Samuel 
Crouch, David 
Cuch, Phillip 
Cudbeth, Benjamin 
Cuff, William 
Cumfort, Josiah 
Cunnin, John 
Cunningham, James 
Cunningham, John 
Curry, Charles 
Cushman, William 
Dagaettjun, Mayhugh 
Dagget, Mahu 
Dannells, Thomas 
Daten, Cornelius 
Daton, Cornbary 
Daton, Jonah 
Daton, Joseph 
Davids, William 
Davies, Nathan 
Deal, George 
Dean, John 
Deboise, Peter 
Debuy, Peter 
Decker, Reuben 
Declark, James 
Decoine, Edward 
De Graff, Moses 
Degrove, William 
Delamatter, Jacob 
Demmon, Samuel 
Denemark, Stoffel 
Denham, Samuel 
Deniston, John 



Denney, Charls 
Denney, Richard 
Denton, Isaac 
Depue, Abraham 
De Pue, Peter 
Derue, William 
Deuce, William 
Devoe, William 
Dewit, John 
Dicker, Ephraim 
Diel, Samuel 
Dill, John 
Dimmick, Samuel 
Dimmick, Shubell 
Disbey, Andrew 
Disbrow, Andrew 
Dixson, Thaddeus 
Dodge, Stephen 
Dolf, John 
DoUoway, Jeremiah 
Douey, Samuel 
Dowling, Andrew 
Drake, William 
Dubois, Cornelius 
Dubois, Jacob 
Dubois, Jacob J. 
Duel, Wilber 
Dun, Coenradt 
Duncan, John 
Dunham, Joseph 
Dusenbery, Charles 
Dutcher, Abraham 
Dutcher, Jacob 
Dutcher, John . 
Edinger, Christopher 
Elmendorph, Samuel 
Elseworth, Philip 
Esters, Benjamin 
Fairchild, Amos 
FairchUd, Oliver 
Fanbramer, Peter 
Farnell, Danel 
Ferguson, John 
Feriss, John 
Feriss, Silvanus 



158 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Ferrell, Daniel 
Ferris, Seth 
FerriSj William 
Field, Jesse 
Field, Nathan 
Fields,. Thomas 
Finch, Amos 
Pinch, Comfort 
Finch, Elithan 
Finch, Gilbert 
Finch, John 
Finch, Jonathan 
Finch, Philip 
Finch, SUvanus 
Finch, Sj-c 
Finchout, Aurent 
Finchout, Cornelius 
Finton, Amos 
Fish, Joseph 
Fish, Levi 
Fish, Moses 
Fish, Pardon 
Fish, Seaburjr 
Fisher, Daniel 
Fisher, Daniel, Jr. 
Fisher, Jacob 
Flagler, David 
Flagler, John 
Flanders, James 
Foot, John 
Foot, Samuel 
Forbosh, Abraham 
Forbus, Samuel 
Ford, James 
Forgeson, John 
Forster, Joseph 
Foster, Thomas 
Fowler, Caleb 
Fowler, Caleb, Jr. 
Fox, Xenophon 
FrankUn, Benjamin 
Frantz, Jacob 
Frederick, Charles 
Fuller, David 
Furma^, Cato 



Furman, Samuel 
Fjler, Seasor 
Gage, Mark 
Gale, Samuel 
Gambell, Allexander 
Ganong, Marcus 
Gardner, David 
Garret, Benjamin 
Garrett, Isaack 
Gatty, John 
Gaul, Stephen 
Gay, Daniel 
Geaty, Robert 
Gedawale, Elisha 
Gegory, Rusel 
Geray, Allexander 
Germain, David 
German, James 
Germond, Peter 
Gero, Daniel 
Gifford, Elisha 
GifPord, Samuel 
Gilcrease, Thomas 
Gildersleeve, Joseph 
Gillaspy, Greorge 
GiUaspy, James 
Gillaspy, William 
Gillet, Charles 
Gillit, Barnabes 
Goetchins, John 
Gold, Elijah 
Golnack, Michal 
Goodrich, Elisha 
Gordon, Cornelius 
Gorum, Jeams 
Gould, Elijah 
Graham, James 
Graham, Jonathan 
Gray, Jeduthun 
Greek James 
Green, Caleb 
Green, Ezekiel 
Green, Henry 
Green, Joseph 
Green, Samuel 



Green, Tobias 
Grefes, Thomas 
Gregory, Joshua 
Gregory, Roswell 
Griffen, Joseph 
Griffen, Peter 
GrifiSn, John 
Griffin, Michael 
Grigeory, R. 
Guin, Michel 
Gulneck, Michael 
Haborn, John 
Hadley, Greorge 
Hadley, WiUiam 
Haff, Jacob 
Haff, John 
Haight, Samuel 
Haight^ Samuel, Jr. 
Haines, Samuel 
Hall, John 
Hallister, Elisha 
Hanna, William 
Hansen, Jacob 
Hardenburgh, Derick 
Harper, Godfrey 
Harris, Joseph 
Harris, Squire 
Harris, William 
Hase, John 
Havenner, John 
Hawkins, James 
Hawkins, Samuel 
Hawley, Henry 
Hebard, Reuben 
Heermana, Andries 
Heermana, John 
Heermance, Andrew C. 
Heermance, Evans 
Heermance, Evert 
Heermance, John 
Helmer, John 
Helmer, Peter 
Heltz, Lawrence 
Henry, Robert 
Hermans, Simen 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



159 



Herrick, Jonathan 
Herrington, James 
Herrington, John 
Hess, Christian 
Hess, Christopher 
Hibbard, Reuben 
Hicks, Benjamin 
Higgins, Ebenezer 
Higgines, Joseph 
Hill, Isaac 
Hill, John 
Hill, William 
Hiltz, Laurence 
Hinkley, Elkanah 
Hinman, Zachariiah 
Hiser, Martinus 
Hitchis, Benjamin 
Hoffman, Daniel 
Hoffman, Jacobus 
Hoffman, Nicholas 
Hogaboom, Barthol- 

ama 
Hogan, Edward 
Hogan, Path 
Hogins, Edward 
Holems, John 
Holkins, Samuel 
Holley, Henry- 
Holmes, Elkanah 
Holmes, James 
Holmes, Joseph 
Holmes, Nathan 
Hopkins, Benjamin 
Hopkins, Frederick 
Horton, David 
Horton, George 
Horton, Joseph 
Horton, Peleg 
Horton, Samuel 
House, John 
How, John 
How, Thomas 
Howard, Joseph 
Howard, Richard 
Howel, Frederick 



Howel, WiUiam 
Howes, John 
Howes, Thomas 
Hoy, William 
Hoyt, Abijah 
Hoyt, Enoch 
Hubbard, Ezekiel 
Huffman, Daniel 
Hume, William 
Humfrey, William 
Humphreys, James 
Hunsdon, John 
Husted, Peter 
Hutchens, Benjamin 
Hutchons, Absalom 
Hutton, John 
Hyatt, Eben 
Hyatt, Elias 
Idare, William 
Ittig, Coenradt 
Ittig, George 
Jackson, George 
Jacobs, Abraham 
Jacobs, Cornelius 
Jakways, Daniel 
Jansen, Benjamin 
Jero, Daniel 
Jewel, Ezekiel 
Jewell, George 
Jewell, Herman 
Jewitt, John 
Johnson, James 
Johnson, John 
Johnson, Josiah 
Johnson, Paul 
Johnson, Robert 
Johnson, Samuel 
Johnson, Thomas 
Johnson, Timothy 
Johnston, Robert 
Jones, Isaac 
Jones, Levi 
Jones, Ransom 
Joslin, Anthony 
Julaf, Zachariah 



Keator, Benjamin F. 
Keator, John 
Keator, William 
Keeler, Ezra 
Kellee, Jeremiah 
Kelley, Jonathan 
Keltz, Coenradt 
Kenney, Henery 
Kern, John 
Kershaw, John 
Kesler, Nicholas 
Kickam, Solomon 
Kill, Christopher 
Killey, Jaramiah 
Kilpatrick, Samuel 
(Kimmans, John 
Kip, Abraham 
Kip, Abraham R. 
Kip, Aurent 
Kip, Igness 
Kip, John 
Kip, Petrus 
Kip, Racliph 
Kirkun, Solomon 
Klyne, Jacob 
Knapp, Jeremiah 
Knapp, Joel 
Knapp, Nathaniel 
Knickerbacker, John 
Knickerbacker, Law- 
rence 
Kniffen, John 
Koch, Andrew 
Kohler, Leonard 
Kolb, John 
Kole, Jacob P. 
Kole, Simon P. 
Kool, Abraham 
Kool, Elias 
Kool, Jacob 
Kool, Simon 
Kremer, John 
Krum, Peter 
Ladue, WUliam 
Lamb, David 



160 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Laml^ Jehial 
Lamberts, Cornelius 
Lane, Joseph 
Lane, Thomas 
Lane, William 
Langin, Benjam 
Lanphier, John 
Laquire, Abraham 
Larcy, John 
Larrejr, J. 
Lason, Joseph 
Lasure, Samuel 
Lawrence, Samuel 
Learry, John 
Lee, Jonathan 
Legget, WUliam 
Leonard, Robert 
Lepper, Frederick 
Lesher, Conradt 
Levy, Henderick 
Lewis, Hendrick 
Lewis, James 
Lewis, Lewis 
Linderman, Cornelius 
Linningt»n, Timothy 
Litfle, James 
Lockard, David 
Locknnt, John 
Lockwood, Daniel 
Lockwood, David 
Lockwood^ Ebenezer 
Losee, John 
Losee, John A. 
Loux, William 
Loveless, Elisha 
Loveless, Joshua 
Lucas, Israel 
Luddington, Elisha 
Ludenton, Elisha, Jr. 
Luquer, Abraham 
Luther, Eseek 
Lyttle, William , 
MeCabe, Benjamin 
McCoy, Daniel 
McCreary, Robert 



McCutchen, Robert 
McDonald, Cornelius 
McDonald, John 
McDonnals, Thomas 
McGuire, Hugh 
Machan, Robert 
Machoney, James 
McKiel, John 
McKlennen, Andrew 
McKlue, James 
McNight, Robert 
McNitt, Alexander 
McPherson, Daniel 
MafFet, John 
Maffite, John 
Maher, Levy 
Marchant, Abel 
Markell, Henry 
Marshall, William 
Marshill, Josiah 
Marta, David 
Martin, John 
Martin, Robert 
Martin, Roledt 
Masten, Ezekiel 
Mayer, Henry 
Mayer, John 
Mayer, Joseph 
Maxsam, Benjamin 
Mead, Ezekiel 
Mead, Isaiah 
Mead, Marshal 
Meashurcall, Cornelius 
Melangdon, Benjamin 
Menoma, John 
Merrick, Ben j amin 
Merrinan, Titus 
Merrit, Ebnezer 
Merritt, Luke 
Mestan, Ezekiel 
Meyer, Benjamin 
Middagh, Art 
Middledough, Aert 
Miels, Noah 
Mildun, Daniel 



Miller, Christyann 
Miller, David 
Miller, Henderick 
Miller, John 
Miller, William 
MUIs, James 
MiUs, John 
Mingo, WiUiam 
Minner, James 
Moe, Abraham 
Money, Absolum 
Monfoort, Peter 
Monfoort, Peter, Jr. 
Mongomire, Elijah 
Mooney, Absalom 
Moor, Jacob 
Moor, PhUlip 
Moore, John 
Moore, Martin 
Mopes, Frederick 
More, Abraham 
Morehouse, Isaac 
Morehouse, Stephen 
Morris, Elijah 
Morris, John 
Morris, Peter 
Mosier, WUliam 
Mott, William 
Mouer, Henderick 
Moul, Jacob, Jr. 
Mount, Andrew 
Mountain, Andrew 
Mumford, James 
Munrow, Justice 
Murphy, Thomas 
Myer, Abraham 
Myer, Benjamin 
Myles, Benajah 
Myles, John 
Nairn, James 
Neer, Charles 
Neer, Jost 
Neer, Zacharies 
Nelson, Absolum 
Nelson, M. 




HENRY WINTHROP SARGENT. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



161 



Nelson, Paul 
Newcomb, Daniel 
Newcorab, James 
Newcomb, Thomas 
Newel, Joseph 
Newnon, Zebulun 
Nickerson, Isachar 
Nickerson, Joshua 
Nickerson, Justia 
Nogard, John 
Nooney, Zebulun 
Nootnagle, Frederick 
Northrop, Stephen 
Norton, Peter 
Nostragel, Frederick 
Oakley, Cornelius 
Odle, Aaron 
Ogden, Richard 
Olmsted, Ebenezer 
Onderdonk, Garret 
Onderdonk, Thomas 
Orchard, John 
Orim, Robert 
Orsor, Nicholas 
Osborn, Peter 
Ostrander, Jacobus 
Ostrom, Gilbert 
Otterson, Andrew 
Paine, Ichabod, Jr. 
Paine, Samuel 
Palmer, Benjamin 
Palmer, James 
Palmer, Jesse 
Palmer, John 
Palmer, Nicholas 
Pangnut, John 
Pardee, Thomas 
Pardy, Samuel 
Parish, Daniel 
Park, Joseph 
Parker, Joseph 
Parker, Nathaniel 
Parks, Nathaniel 
Parks, Samuel 
Parrish, Azariah 



Parrish, Cypria 
Parrish, Daniel 
Pattison, Michael 
Paul, James 
Paulding, John 
Pawling, Henry 
Peck, Joseph 
Pelham, Elisha 
Pellam, Frances 
Pellum, Abijah 
Penfold, William 
Penny, John 
Penoyer, Amos 
Perry, James 
Perry, John 
Perry, Abadiah 
Perry, Samuel 
Petcher, Peter 
Peters, John 
Pettit, David 
Phelps, Abner 
Phelps, David 
Phenton, Amos 
Phillips, David 
PhuUick, David 
Pifer, Adam 
Pike, Ezra 
Pike, Jarvis 
Pike, Jesse 
Pine, Thomas 
Pink, Jacob 
Piatt, Caleb 
Piatt, Eliphalet 
Plymit, Benoni 
Polhemus, Theodorus 
Pollock, William 
Post, Wilhalmis 
Powell, Abraham 
Price, Ebenezer 
Pullock, William 
Punderson, John 
Purdy, James 
Purdy, Jonathan 
Purdy, Josiah 
Purdy, Samuel 



Purdy, Stephen 
Quackinbush, Abraham 
Randals, Hugh 
Ray, Isaac 
Ray, Zachariah 
Read, David 
Reanolds, Jacob 
Reed, James 
Reed, Samuel 
Reed, Simon 
Reguaw, Abraham 
Rema, Jacob 
Reynolds, Abijah 
Reynolds, Benoni 
Reynolds, Caleb 
Reynolds, David 
Reynolds, Elias 
Reynolds, Ezra 
Reynolds, Joel 
Reynolds, Shubel 
Rhaad, Richard 
Rhodes, Richard 
Rhyne, Timothy 
RiaU, Peter 
Richard, Moses 
Richards, Jacob 
Richards, Moses, Jr. 
Richter, Hendrick 
Rider, Christopher 
Rip, Rulef 
Robins, Ebenezer 
Robinson, Ebenezer 
Robison, Ebenezer 
Rockwil, Enos 
Roe, Benjamin 
Roe, William 
Rogers, Piatt 
Rogers, Reuben 
Romer, Henry 
Romer, James 
Roola, Jacob, Jr. 
Roosa, Aldert 
Roosa, John 
Rose, James 
Rosekrans, Thomas 



162 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Rosekrans, John 
Rowley, Weeks 
Rundel, Abraham 
Riumels, Ezra 
Runnels, Joseph 
Rusel, James 
Rycel, Peter 
Rysedorph, George 
Salkeld, Isaac 
Sammon, Cornelius 
Sauffield, John 
Sayers, Benjamin 
Schermerhorn Cornelius 
Schofield, Henry 
Schofield, Smith 
Schoonmaker, John 
Schouten, Cornelius 
Schouten, John 
Schouten, Simon 
Schultz, Abraham 
Schutt, Joseph 
Schutt, Stephen 
Scott, John 
Scott, Thomas 
Scott, WilUam 
Sciyver, Albartus 
Scutt, Abraham 
Scutt, Joseph 
Scutt, Stephen 
Seacord, Andrew 
Seacraft, William 
Seaman, Jacob 
Seaman, John 
Seaman, Willett 
Sears, Stephen 
Sedore, Isaac 
See, David 
Seelee, Lodwick 
Seely, James 
Seely, Sylvanus 
Selvester, John 
Servine, James 
Servis, John 
Shampinway, Honnay 
Sharwood, Abraham 



Shavellar, William 
Shaw, James 
Shaw, John 
Shaw, Joshua 
Shay, V. 
Shea, Lodowick 
Shear, Lodewick 
Shearman, William 
Sherman, William 
Sherwood, Isaac 
Sherwood, Lucam 
Sherwood, Samuel 
Sherwood, Thomas 
Shidler, John 
Shoemaker, Christopher 
Shomper, Horrima 
Shorter, John 
Shults, Jacob 
Simma, Willet 
Simmons, Aaron 
Simons, Insolo 
Simons, Willet 
Simpkins, Reuben 
Simpson, Andrew 
Simpson, John 
Sinkin, Reuben 
SitutseU, Michel 
Slason, Amos 
Slason, Ebenezer 
Sleight, Abraham 
^^Ught, Abraham, Jr. 
Small, Isaac 
Small, James 
Smith, Abraham 
Smith, Alpheous 
Smith, Asa 
Smith, Daniel 
Smith, Garret 
Smith, Isaac 
Smith, Israel 
Smith, James 
Smith, John 
Smith, Joseph 
Smith, Joshua 
Smith, Martin 



Smith, Michael 
Smith, Philip 
Smith, Samuel 
Smith, Stephen 
Smith, Thomas 
Smith, Zackerias 
Sniffen, Shubel 
Sniffen, James 
Sniffin, John 
Snyder, John 
Sodon, John 
Somerndike, Jacob 
Sonamet, Isaac 
Soper, Burtis 
Southard, John 
Southard, Richard 
Spalding, Olirer 
Sparks, Robert 
Spencer, John 
Spicer, Jeremiah 
Springsteen, James 
Springsteen, amuel 
Stagg, John 
Stanton, William 
Start, Nathan 
Stauts, Peter 
Stauts, Philip 
Stebbins, Lewis 
Steenberg, Cornelius 
Stephend, Timothy 
Stevens, Edward 
Stevens, John 
Stevens, Peter 
Steverson, Frederick 
Stewart, Thomas 
Stockam, Reuben 
Stokum, Jonathan 
Stokum, William 
Storm, Abraham 
Storms, Closs 
Stuart, John 
Sturdefant, Jonathan 
Sturdivent, David 
Surine, James 
Suthard, John 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



163 



Suthard, Jonas 
Suthard, Richard 
Sutherland, Joseph 
Sutherland, Solomon 
Swart, Isaac 
Swinnerton, James 
Talman, Abraham 
Talman, Douwe 
Tarbill, Salvanus 
Tater, John 
Tayler, John 
Taylor, Oliver 
Teller, Oliver 
Terpanning, John 
Terwilleger, Abr'm 
Terwilleger, James Phenix 
TerwUleger, Matthew 
Teunis, John 
Tharston, Josiah 
Thomas, Beriah 
Thomas, John 
Thomas, Thomas 
Thompson, Caleb 
Thompson, Joel 
Thompson, Joseph 
Thomson, James, Sr. 
Thomson, James, Jr. 
Thomson, Richard 
Thomson, Samuel 
Tobias, John 
Townsend, Charles 
Townsend, James 
Townsend, Zephaniah 
Trapp, James 
Travis, William 
Trim, Ezra 
Tul, Hendrick 
Tunis, Peter 
Turner, Alexander 
Turner, Stephen 
Twitchell, Benoni 
Yail, John 

Van Benthuysin, Abraham 
Van Bomel, Peter 
Van Camp, Isaac 



Van Cleef, Garret 
Van Cock, Boltis R. 
Vandeburgh, John 
Vandemark, Solomon 
Vanderbilt, Derrick 
Vanderdunch, Garret 
Vanderdunch, Thomas 
Vander Vort, Garret 
Vandewater, Adolph 
Van Dewater, Herman 
Vandewater, Jaeobus 
Van Dewater, Joseph 
Van Etten, Jacobus 
Vanflacken, Alexander 
Van Houten, Abraham 
Van Houten, John 
Van Houten, John R. 
Van Keuren, Matthew 
Van Kleek, Baltus 
Van North, John 
Vanocker, Peter 
Van Orden, Andrew 
Van Orden, Henry 
Vatiosdol, James 
Vanscoy, Abel 
Van Scoy, Henry 
Vansickle, Peter 
Van Steenbergh Cornelius 
Van Steenbergh Gradus 
Vantasel, Benjamin 
Van Tassel, Cornelius 
Van Tassel, Isaac 
Van Tassel, John 
Van assel, Stephen 
Van Vleckren, Abraham 
Van Voorhis, Abraham 
Van Voorhis, Daniel 
Vanvoorhis, Henry 
Van Voorhis, Jeromus 
Van Vradenburgh, Petrus 
Van Wagenen, Barrant 
Van Wagenen, Garret 
Van Wart, Garret 
Var Wart, William 
Vanwort, Benjamin 



Van Wyck, John 
Van Wyck, John B. 
Van Wyck, Theodorus 
Varnel, Daniel 
Veal, George 
Veal, John 
Verber, John 
Vermillier, David 
Vermillier, Isaac 
Vermilya, David 
Vickrey, Ichibod 
Vom Brocklin, James 
Voorhis, Jeromus 
Vorchase, Abraham 
Vradenburgh, Abraham 
Vradenburgh, Jacob 
Vradenburgh, William 
Wade, Morris 
Waggoner, George 
Waisemillar, Hendrick 
Walalter, Benjamin 
Walbridge, Elijah 
Waldorph, Hendrick 
Waldradt, Adolph 
Walron, Simeon 
Walsh, Samuel 
Ward, Israel 
Ward, Joshua 
Waren, Theodorus 
Waring, Michael 
Warman, Phinas 
Warters, Benjamin 
Wasfalle, Gilbart 
Waters, Cornelius 
Waters, Isaac 
Way, Frederick 
Way, John 
Weaver, Adam 
Weaver, George 
Weaver, George M. 
Weaver, Jacob 
Webb, David 
Webber, Oliver 
Webber, William 
Webbers, Isaac 



164 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Weed, Gideon 
Weed, Jonathan 
Weeks, Nathaniel 
Welch, David 
Westervalt, George 
Westfall, Abraham 
Westfall, Benjamin 
WestfaU, GiUbet 
WestfaU, Levi 
Wheaton, Benjamin 
Wheaton, Isaac 
Wheeler, Ezra 
Whily, Matthew 
Whjtaker, Abraham 
Whitcom, Simon 
White, John 
White, Nathaniel 
Whitney, Ezekel 
Wickes, Silas 
Wickham, Benjamin 
Wickham, Benjamin, Jr. 
Wickham, Daniel 
Wickson, Ebenezer 
Wilbert, John 
Wilcox, Isaac 



Wilde, Bartholomew 
Wile, Nathan 
Wilkinson, John 
Wilkinson, Thomas 
Willcox, Aaron 
Williams, David 
Williams, Stephen 
Williams, Thomas 
Williams, Warren 
Williamson, Nicholas 
WUlson, Amos 
Wilson, Andrew 
Wilson, John 
Wiltse, Cornelius 
Wiltse, WilUam 
Wiltsee, Matthew 
Winans, Silas 
Winegar, Henry 
Winslow, Samuel 
Winston, Joseph 
Winter, Moses 
Withbeck, Harmon 
Wolson, Simeon 
Wood, Henry 
Wood, Jesse 



Wood, John 
Wood, Samuel 
Wood, Solomon 
Wood, Thomas 
Woods, EU 
Woods, Jotham 
Woolsey, Nathan 
Word, Israel 
Workman, Phineas 
Worth, Richard 
Wright, Joseph 
Yarns, Nathan 
Yoemans, Jonas 
Yerkes, Aaron 
Young, Abraham 
Young, Benjamin 
Yoimg, Elkanah 
Young, Garret 
Young, John 
Young, John Christian 
Young, Jonas 
Young, Robert 
Young, Thomas 
Youngs, John 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— SEVENTH REGIMENT. 



Colonel Henry Ludenton 
Lieutenant Colonel Reuben Ferris 
Major Ebenezer Robinson 



Major Wyckoff 

Adjutant Elijah Townsend 
Quarter Master Elezer Baker 



Captains — Edmund Baker, Noah Bouton, Calken, John Crane, Du- 

senbury, Haight, Alexander Kidd, Israel Knapp, George Lane, David 



Marick, Hezekiah Mead, Joel Mead, 
Richard Sackett, Nathaniel Scribner, 



Morton, Joshua Myrick, 
Ward, David Waterbury, 



Pierce, 
Winne. 



LiBtJTEifANTS — Jonas Auser, John Berry, Charles CuUin, Timothy Delevan, 

Elliott, Ellijah Fuller, Josiah Gregory, Solomon Hopkins, David Porter, John 
Robinson, Thomas Russell, Elliah Sears, David Smith, Isaac Townsend, Israel 
Vail, Abram Van Wert, Danil Willee. 

EnsiGirs— Josiah Baker, William Calkin, James Egelston, Joseph Gregory, Caleb 
Hazen,*Jacob Mead. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



165 



A 



^cker, Abram 
Adams, Gilbert 
Adams, John 
Adams, William 
Addems, John 
Addems, Major 
Addems, Thomas 
Adriance, George 
Aliet, Elijah J. 
Angevine, Joseph 
Anim, Azra 
Armstrong, Gabriel 
Armstrong, Jacob 
Armstrong, Jacob, Jr. 
Armstrong, John 
Arnold, Peleg 
Arnold, Seymour 
Astin, Joab 
Astin, John 
Astin, Smith 
Astin, Robert 
Auser, Abram 
Austin, Job 
Austin, Robert 
Austin, Smith 
Auston, John 
Baker, Joshua 
Baker, Stephen 
Baldwin, Elisha 
Baldwin, Henry- 
Baldwin, James 
Baley, Elias 
Ballard, Caleb 
Ballard, Peleg 
Ballard, Tracy 
Baly, Joseph 
Banker, Nicholas 
Barber, Samuel 
Barber, Stephen 
Barger, Peter 
Barit, John 
Barret, Isaac, Jr. 
Barret, Samuel 
Barret, William 



EXLISTED MEir 

Barrett, Isaac 
Barrett, Justus 
Barton, Aijdrew 
Barton, Elisha 
Barton, Gilbert 
Bartow, Andrus 
Basby, Olirer 
Baset, Edmund 
Bashford, James 
Bayley, Peleg 
Begal, Stephen 
Bemy, Samuel 
Benjamin, Darius 
Benjamin, Elijah 
Bennet, Isiah 
Berry, Jabez 
Berry, Jabez, Jr. 
Berry, Samuel 
Beyea, Isaac 
Bice, John 
Binton, Samuel 
Birdsall, John 
Bisbey, Oliver 
Blackman, Ephraim 
Bolding, Elisha 
Bolding, Henry 
Bolding^ James 
Bonker, Jacob 
Bostwick, John 
Boughten, Samuel 
Boyd, Isaac 
Brewer, Hendrick 
Brooks, William 
Brown, Cornelius 
Brown, Deliverance 
Brown, Ebenezer 
Brown, Josiah 
Bruce, Robert 
Brundage, Jeremiah 
Brundage, John 
Bruster, John 
Bruster, Samuel 
Buckbee, Sylvester 
Buckout, John 



Buckley, Jabez 

Bugbee, Ezekiel 

Bugbee, Silvester 

Bulkley, Jabez 

Burdick, Amos 

Burdick, Caleb 

Byington, Samuel 

Byington, Solomon 

Calwell, James 

Calwell, William 

Cambell, James 

Carey, John 

Carle, Jonas 

Carley, John 

Carly, Abert 

Carver, Barnabas 

Carver, Timothy 

Caton, Isaac 

Cayton, Isaac 

Certain, James 

Chadwick, Comfort 

Charlick, Henry 

Chase, Jabez 

Chase, John 

Chase, Judah 

Chase, Obadiah 

Chase, Robert 

Christian, Charles 

Christian, George 

Christian, John 

Christian, Richard, Jr. 

Christian, Ritchard 

Christian, William 

Clason, William 

Closson, William 

Colberth, Thomas 

Colberth, Thomas G. 

Cole, Daniel 

Cole, Ebenezer 

Cole, Elisha 
jCole, Elisha, Jr. 
''I Cole, Joseph 
"Cole, Reuben 
^ Colly, John 



166 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Colwell, Joseph 
Conklin, Nathan 
Conklin, Samuel 
Cornelius, Ever 
Cornwell, Daniel 
Covart, Silvenus 
Covey, Walter 
Cowen, Isaac 
Cowin, David 
Crab, John 
Praft, Caleb 
Craft, Charles 
Crane, Samuel 
Crosby, Enoch 
Crosby, Solomon 
Crosby, Thody 
Culbreth, Thomas 
Cushman, Consider 
Daily, Lawrence 
DaJdn, Elisha 
Dakln, Johnson 
Dan, Thadus 
Daniels, James 
Dann, William 
Davis, Albert 
Davis, John 
Davis, Samuel 
Davis, William 
Dean, Benjamin 
Dean, Caleb 
Dean, Ezekiel 
Dean, John 
Dean, Joseph 
Delanay, Abram 
Delevan, Timothy, Jr. 
Delivan, Abraham 
Demerce, David 
Deusenberry, Moses 
Deusenbery, WiUiam 
Deyenbeg, Jarvis 
Dian, Joseph 
Dickson, James 
Dickson, Theodorus 
Dimmic^, Shubel 
Din jab, Elijah 



Disbrow, Andrew 
Disbrow, David 
Disbrow, Nathan 
Disbrow, Nathan, Jr. 
Dixson, James 
Donmee, David 
Doten, William 
Downer, Israel 
Drake, John 
Drew, Gilbert 
Drew, Isaac 
Drew, Samuel 
Drew, William 
Dusenbnry, Charles 
Dusenbury, Jarvis 
Dutcher, Abram 
Dutcher, Jacob 
Dykeman, Hezekiah 
Eakly, Benjamin 
Edy, Joshua 
Egelston, James 
EUwell, Jabez 
Elsworth, John 
Evans, Samuel 
Evens, Thomas 
Everitt, George 
Everitt, Isaac 
Ferguson, John 
Ferguson, Thomas 
Ferris, Ezra 
Ferris, Jonathan 
Finch, Jonathan 
Finch, Nathaniel 
Finch, Reuben 
Finch, Silvanus 
Piniche, Reuben 
Fish, Nathan 
Fisher, Nathaniel 
Porgason, John 
Porgason, Thomis, Jr. 
Forman, Joseph 
Fostor, David 
Frost, David 
Fuller, David 
Fuller, Isaac 



Fuller, Robert 
Furman, Joseph 
Furman, Samuel 
Gage, Ebenezer 
Gage, Moses 
Gage, Nathaniel 
Ganog, Markus 
Ganong, Isaac 
Ganong, John 
Ganoung, Jacob 
Ganung, Reuben 
Gaul, Stephen 
GifFord, Elisha 
GifFord, Samuel 
Golding, Amoss 
Goodfellow, William 
Gomey, John 
Green, Thomas 
Gregory, Daniel 
Gregory, Ezra 
Gregory, Joshua 
Gregory, Rusel 
Gregory, Samuel 
Gregory, Thomas 
Gregory, Timothy 
Griffet, Lazarus 
Griffeth, Wiliam 
GrifSth, Joshua 
Hadley, Moses 
Hadley, William 
Hadley, William, Jr. 
Hager, Robert 
Hager, Thomas 
Haight, Samuel 
HaU 

Hall, Elisha 
Hall, John 
HaU, Thomas 
Hambler, Benjamin 
Hankkey, Richard 
Harris, William 
Hasen, Aron 
Haul, Elisha 
Hawkins, James 
Hawkins, Joseph 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



167 



Hawkins, Samuel 
Hays, William 
Hazelton, David 
Hazen, Caleb 
Hazen, Eleazer 
Hazen, Hoses 
Heazeltine, David 
Heazelton, Daniel 
Hedger, Joseph 
Heger, Robert 
Higgins, Ebenezer 
Hill, Thomas 
Hill, William 
Holley, Daniel 
Holmes, David 
Holmes, Joseph 
Hopkins, Ely 
Hopkins, Isaiah 
Hopkins, Jeremiah 
Hopkins, Jonathan 
Hopkins, Jonathan, Jr. 
Hopkins, Joseph 
Hopkins, Thatcher 
Hopkins, Thomas 
Horten, Thomas 
Horton, Thomas, Jr. 
How, Jesse 
How, John 
Howes, Daniel 
Howes, Job 
Howes, Moodey, Jr. 
Hughson, Jeremiah 
Hunt, Jesse 
Huson, Aron 
Huson, Robert 
Hyatt, Alvan 
Hyatt, Elias 
Hyatt, Minan 
Hyatt, Sminah 
Hyattjj Stephen 
Jean, John 
Jedd, Jonathan 
Jenkins, Nathaniel 
Jenkins, Samuel 
Jenkins, Solomon 



Johnston, Thomas 
Jones, Amos 
Jones, Ananias 
Jones, Nehemiah 
Jones, William 
June, Ezra 
Kane, John 
Keifl, Andrew 
Keley, Jonathan A. 
Kelley, John 
KeUey, Judah 
Kelley, Silvanus 
Kerley, Albert 
Kickem, Solomon 
Killey, John 
Killey, Judah 
Killey, Silvenus 
Killey, Zebedee 
King, Barzilla 
KingJ Bazley 
King, David 
King, Heman 
King, Heman, Jr. 
King, Obadiah 
King, Stephen 
Kircum, Solomon 
Knap, Gabriel 
Knapp, Benjamin 
Knapp, Danniel 
Kniffen, Amos 
Kniffen, Samuel 
Knott, Nathaniel 
Lake, Stephen 
Lambert, Connelius 
Lane, Nathan 
Langdon, Benjamin 
Lasher, Samuel 
Lawdue, Ambres 
Leddoo, Ambros 
Leonard, Robert 
Light, Henry 
Lockwood, Ebenezer 
Lockwood, Peter 
Lorens, Isaac 
Loveless, William 



Ludinton, Comfort 
Lupuye, John 
McCabe, Benjamin 
McCale, Benjamin 
McCormick, Haxel 
McFadden, James 
Mclntyre, Jaims 
McLean, John 
McShosen, Peter 
McTassel, Peter 
Maybee, Peter 
Maconth, Arlen 
Mahoon, James 
Maibe, Tobias 
Maker, Solomon 
- Mane, Sebeus 
Maner, Salvus 
Marchous, Elijah 
Marick, Isaac 
Martine, James 
Martine, Samuel 
Mason, Jerred 
Mazer, Abraham 
Mead, Abner 
Mead, Bille 
Mead, Eli 
Mead, Isaac 
Mead, James 
Mead, Moses 
Merick, John 
Merrick, Isaac 
Merrick, Seth 
Miller, Ebenetus 
Millerd, Solomon 
Mills, Titus 
Moes, William 
More, William 
Moris, Eliga 
Morse, William 
Morten, Samuel 
Myrick, John 
Myrick, Seth 
Nelson, Absalom 
Nelson, Elijah 
Newman, Jeremiah 



168 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHElSS. 



Newman, Joseph 
Nickerson, Aron 
Nickerson, Isaachar 
Nickerson, Thomas 
Nickerson, Uriah 
Noriis, Ezra 
Nott, Nathaniel 
Oakley, Robert 
Oakley, Timothy 
Odal, John 
Odall, Amors 
Odel, Amos 
Odell, Isaac 
OdeU, John 
Odle, Isaac 
Ogden, Benjamin 
Osborn, Denvis 
Owens, Jesse 
Paddock, David 
Paddock, Judah 
Paddock, Peter 
Paddock, Seth 
Paddock, Stephen 
Parce, Daniel 
Park, John 
Parrish, Daniel 
Parrish, Silas 
Parse, Daniel 
Paulding, John 
Peace, Isaac 
Pearce, Isaac 
Pell, Philip 
Pelton, PhiUip 
Perse, Isaac 
Petton, Philip 
Pinfold, Waiiam 
Pinkney, Frederick 
Pinkney, Isariel 
Pinkney, Jonathan 
Pinkney, Luis 
Piper, Isaac 
Piatt, John 
Piatt, Richard 
Porter, David 
Post, llennery 



Price, Ebenezer 
Price, James 
Purdy, James 
Ransier, Gieorge 
Raymond, Eben 
Raymond, Ebenezar 
Raymond, Thadeus 
Raynolds, Moses 
Read, Jacob 
Reed, Frederick 
Reed, John 
Reed, Samuel 
Requa, James 
Requa, James, Jr. 
Requa, Joseph 
Rewel, James 
Rhead, Jacob 
Rhoad, Richard 
Rhoades, Isaac 
Rhoads, Isaac, Jr. 
Rhodes, John 
Rhodes, Richard 
Rice, Edward 
Rice, Samuel 
Richards, David 
Richards, Ezra 
Richards, Moses 
Richards, Thomas 
Rider, John 
Rill, Samuel 
Robenson, Asakar 
Roberts, Peter 
Robinson, Issachar 
Robinson, Peter 
Rods, John 
Roe, William 
Romer, Henry 
Rorcom, Solomon 
Runald, Moses 
Russel James 
Russel, Robert 
Russel, John 
Rush, John 
Sackett, John 
Sackett, Solomon 



Sampson, George 
Same, Jolel 
Scofield, Ezra 
Scribner, Nathaniel 
Scutt, Peter 
Sears, Willard 
Shaddick, Comfor 
Shadrick, Comfort 
Sharpenard, Simon 
Shaw 

Shaw, Joshua 
Sherwood, William 
Simkins, John 
Simkins, John, Jr. 
Simkins, Robard 
Simkins, Robert 
Simmons, Jonathan 
Simons, Aron 
Simpkins, John 
Slrrine, Isaac 
Sloot, Isaac 
Sloot, John 
Slut, Isaac 
Slut, John 
Small, James 
Small, James, Jr. 
Smally, James 
Smally, Zachariah 
Smith, Abraham 
Smith, Asa 
Smith, Bennajah 
Smith, David 
Smith, Edward 
Smith, Elisha 
Smith, Gideon 
Smith, Gilbert 
Smith, James 
Smith, Jeremiah 
Smith, Jesse 
Smith, John 
Smith, Nehemiah 
Smith, Phaiip 
Smith, Richard 
Smith, Samuel 
Smith, Seth 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 



169 



Smith, Solomon 
Smith, Thomas 
Sniffen, Sam., Jr. 
Sniflen, Amos 
Soddore, Frederick 
Soddore, Isaac 
Sorine, Charles 
Sorine, Israel 
Sprage, Elijah 
Sprage, Jaben 
Sprage, John 
Sprague, Jeremiah 
Spreg, Jeremiah 
Stats, John 
Steward, George 
Stirdevent, Richard 
Storm, James 
Swift, Isaiah 
Tannors, John 
Taylor, Daniel 
Terry, Samuel 
Tiler, Ezekial 
Tomkins, Cornelius 
Tomkins, Cornelius, Jr. 
Tomkins, James 
Tomkins, Jeremiah 
Tomkins, Stephen 



Tounesend, Levi 
Townsend, Amos 
Townsend, Charles 
Townsend, Charles, Jr. 
Townsend, Daniel 
Townsend, Daniel, 3d 
Townsend, Eber 
Townsend, Isaac 
Townsend, James 
Townsend, John 
Townsend, Zephaniah 
Travis, George 
Travis, James 
Travis, Titus 
Travis, William 
Tucker, Samuel 
Turner, Elisha 
Turner, John 
Turner, Nathan 
Turner, Stephen 
Utter, William 
Vail, John 
Vanpett, Henry 
Vanpett, John 
Van Scoy, Abel 
Van Scoy, Jacob 
Van Wert, William 
Veal, John 



Vermilya, William 
Vermilyea, John 
Walter, Daniel 
Ward, Finnes 
Waring, Thaddeus 
Waterbury, David 
Waterbury, Enos 
Weeks, Jonathan 
Weeks, Stephen 
Whaley, James 
White, Stephen 
Willcox, Stephen 
Williams, Ichabod 
Williams, Thomas 
Wilsie, Daniel 
Wilson, Daniel 
Wilson, Thomas 
Wiman, Jeduthan 
Wixsom, Daniel 
Wixsom, John 
Wood, Israel 
Wood, John 
Wooden, John 
Wright, William 
Wright, Zebulon 
Yarnes, Nathan 
Young, John 



DUTCHESS COUNTY MILITIA— COOPER'S RANGERS. 
Capt. Ezekiel Cooper, Lieut. Jasper Fulmore, Lieut. Martin Ray. 



Ammerman Dirick 
Baily, John 
Bakehorn, Jacob 
Bogg, John 
Boyce, Hendrick 
Boyce, James 
Bunt, Lodewick 
Clink, Frederick 
Cooper, James 
Curry, Samuel 
Darling, John 



ENLISTED MES". 

Davison, John 
Delong, Jonas 
Depew, Abraham 
Depew, Peter 
Doty, Jacob 
Ferguson, James 
Ferguson, Jeremiah 
Frayer, Thomas 
Hart, James 
Hicks, Jacob 
Hinckom, Eliga 



Honse, Tunis 
Horton, Matthias 
Hurly, James 
Jackson, Hyland 
Jackson, James 
Jackson, Robert 
Kinscom, Elisha 
Knifer, Jacob 
Lemon, John 
Lent, Hercules 
Lent, Moses 



170 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Love joy, Andrew 
Love joy, Nathan 
Mandigo, Jeremiah 
Medlar, Aure 
Messenger, Andrew 
Nichols, Isaac 
Norris, Henry 
Norton, Ahel 
Norton, Sebe 
Scott, James 
Sickler 



Simpson, Garret 
Smith, Deliverance 
Smith, Israel 
Smith, Philip 
Spencer, Amos 
Stark, James 
Steenbark, Peter 
Stork, James 
Straghan, John 
Taylor, Gamaliel 
Van Hoosen, Francis 



Van Kleek, Jeremiah 
Van Steenbergh, Peter 
Van Valkenburgh, Levi 
Vermillia, Benjamin 
Vorce, David 
Welding, Jeremiah 
Wheeler, William 
Williams, Richard 
Willis, Henry 
Wilsey, WUliam 
Wood, Isaac 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 171 



CHAPTER XII. 
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 

Local Events. 

THE second and third Provincial Congresses convened in the 
city of New York, the former November 14, 1775, and the 
latter May 14, 1776. The fourth Provincial Congress met 
at White Plains, July 9, 1776, in consequence of the British having 
possession of New York, and in the forenoon of that day a letter 
enclosing the Declaration of Independence which had been adopted 
by the Continental Congress on the fourth, was received from New 
York's delegates in that body, and unanimously approved. On the 
day following, July 10th, it was "resolved and ordered that the style 
and title of this house be changed from that of the 'Provincial Con- 
gress of the Colony of New York' to that of 'The Convention of the 
Representatives of the State of New York.'" 

But the situation of affairs had become too alarming for a lengthy 
deliberation. The seat of war had been transferred to New York, 
and the "Convention" — afterwards so called — was occupied in raising 
troops and supplies and providing for the immediate public wel- 
fare. British ships of war were anchored off Tarrytown, within 
six miles of where they were then sitting. July 27th they found it 
necessary to move to Harlem, thence to King's Bridge, and August 
29, 1776, the Convention removed to Fishkill, where it held sessions at 
different times, first in the Episcopal church and later in the Dutch 
church until February 11, 1777, when it adjourned to Kingston. 
During the recesses of the Convention the government powers were 
exercised by the Committee of Safety, which held its sessions at Fish- 
kill, at intervals, from September 2, 1776, to February 14, 1777. 
Nathaniel Sackett, a resident of Fishkill, and secretary of the Com- 
mittee, was authorized by that body, January 3, 1777, "to employ 
such detachments of the militia of Dutchess County as are not in 



172 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

actual services, as he may deem expedient, for inquiring into, detect- 
ing and defeating all conspiracies which may be found against the 
Liberties of America." 

Although Dutchess County was not invaded by the British, it never- 
theless became of paramount importance during the Revolution. In 
population and taxable wealth it exceeded the other counties of the 
State. In addition to the large numbers of troops as evidenced by 
the lengthy muster roUs of Dutchess regiments, it furnished a very 
large proportion of army provisions. 

Early in the spring of 1776 materials arrived at Poughkeepsie for 
the construction of the frigates Congress and Montgomery for the 
Continental navy. They were staunch vessels of good model, the for- 
mer of twenty-eight and the latter of twenty-four guns. The fate of 
these frigates is contained in a letter dated October 9th, 1777, from 
Gov. CUnton to Gen. Washington which reads: 

"I have to add that by some fataUty the two Continental frigates 
were lost, they having been ordered down by General Putnam to the 
defence of the chain; but being badly manned, they could not be got 
ofF in time, though I ordered the ship Congress to proceed to Fort 
Constitution (opposite West Point) the day before the attack, lest 
she should meet with a disaster; and the ship Montgomery, which lay 
near the chain, having neither anchor nor cables to secure her, it 
being the ebb of tide and the wind failing, fell down so near the chain, 
that Captain Hodge was constrained to set her on fire to prevent her 
from falling into the hands of the enemy. The Congress, unfor- 
tunately getting aground on the flat near Fort Constitution, shared 
the same fate." 

Fire rafts were also built at Poughkeepsie, fourteen of which were 
launched in July, 1776. 

Immediately following the adoption of the State Constitution at 
Kingston April 20, 1777, one of the secretaries was directed to pro- 
ceed to Fishkill and have printed 500 copies of the Constitution with 
the preamble, and 2,500 copies without. The document was printed 
by Samuel Loudon, a whig printer of New York, who set up his press 
in Fishkill, when Washington's army evacuated the city. 

Fishkill, from its secure position at the head of the Highlands, was se- 
lected at an early period of the war, as the natural depot of supplies for 
this section, being on a direct route of communication with the New 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 173 

England States. Large quantities of stores from Dutchess and adjacent 
counties, as well as from the eastern States, were there accumulated 
for the use of the Continental army. A sergeant and fourteen men 
from each regiment within the county were detailed to erect barracks 
there. They were located on the level plateau southeast of Fishkill 
village. Frequently large bodies of troops were stationed there. The 
officers' quarters were at the "Wharton House," made memorable by 
its association with the hero of Cooper's story of "The Spy." These 
barracks became the retreat for wounded and naked soldiers. After 
the battle of White Plains, the wounded were conveyed to Fishkill 
where, in addition to the barracks hospitals, the churches were used 
for that purpose. Of the many who died, it is asserted, their bodies 
were piled up as high as cord wood in places between the Dutch and 
Episcopal churches. Near the base of the mouiftain a short distance 
south of the village is the soldiers' burial ground, where moulder the 
remains of hundreds of patriots, whose devotion and blood helped to se- 
cure for us the inestimable boon of liberty. Small-pox which broke out in 
the camp added the bodies of many more. The sufferings and priva- 
tions of those heroic men, who, wrote Washington, ate at one time 
every kind of horse food but hay, and whose clothing was patched 
until nearly every substance of originality was lost, is further em- 
phasized by the Marquis de Chastellux, who remarks that they "were 
not even covered with rags." Gen. Washington made his head- 
quarters in Fishkill village for brief periods, stopping at the house of 
Col. John Brinckerhoff. /'' 

The town of Pawling is also made memorable by its revolutionary 
associations. In the fall of 1778 a portion of the Continental army 
was cantoned within its borders on the slopes of Purgatory Hill. 
Washington spent several weeks with these troops. On his arrival 
September 19th, he was entertained for six days at the house of Reed 
Ferris, about two miles southeast of the present village of Pawling. 
He then moved a few miles southwest to the place designated as his 
Headquarters on his maps by Erskine. His letters written during his 
residence here are all dated from "Fredericksburgh," the name at 
that time of the western and older part of the town of Patterson. 
Washington's general officers were quartered in the homes of various 
residents of the neighborhood. The Oblong Meeting House the larg- 
est available building was appropriated by the army officers for a hos- 



174 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

pital, and so utilized for about four months. The only oflScial record, 
says Mr. Lewis S. Patrick in "Washington Headquarters at Fred- 
ricksburgh," is that of Washington's order of October 20th, "No more 
sick to be sent to the Hospital at Quaker Hill, without first inquiring 
of the Chief Surgeon there whether they can be received, as it is already 
full." The Quakers were not in sympathy with their Meeting House 
being used for a hospital and literally "froze out" the doctors and 
soldiers by leaving them alone in the bitter winter and let- 
ting them starve. Dr. James Fallon, physician-in-chief of the 
sick who were left on Quaker Hill after the departure of the 
Continental army, wrote Gov. Clinton that he could hire no one to 
draw wood to the hospital; that he could buy no milk without paying 
in Continental money, six for one, and denounced most of the residents 
as Tories. Many of the soldiers who lay sick are said to have died, 
but Dr. Fallon's letter to Gov. Clinton furnishes the only account 
known to' exist: "Out of the 100 sick, Providence took but three of my 
people off since my arrival." 

The Ferris House in PawUng is further made notable by the trial 
there October 1, 1778, of Gen. Philip Schuyler, by courtmartial, on 
the general charge of neglect of duty while in command of the North- 
ern Department in 1777, especially for his absence at the capture of 
Ticonderoga July 6th of that year. Gen. Schuyler was honorably 
acquitted and pending the action of Congress on the verdict of the 
court, he was appointed to that body by the Legislature of New York, 
then in session at the court house in Poughkeepsie. 

October 4, 1777, Sir Henry Clinton, then in command of the 
British troops in New York started a force, estimated to number 4000, 
up the Hudson, presumably to co-operate with Burgoyne, who was 
■struggling with Generals Schuyler and Gates for the supremacy of 
the upper Hudson. Arriving at the Highlands the superior numbers and 
generalship of the British quickly captured Forts Montgomery and 
Clinton in the afternoon of October 6th. These forts were more strictly 
batteries for the defence of the famous chain which had been stretched 
across the Hudson from Fort Montgomery. The batteries taken the 
chain amounted to nothing. The second obstruction to navigation, the 
chevq,ux-de-frise from Nicoll's Point proved more formidable and the 
English fleet was detained here several days. They passed up the 




< 
< 

H 
H 
<1 



en 
O 

A 



M 



be 

o 

PS 



3 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 175 

river on the 15th, firing several shots at Fishkill and Poughkeepsie, 
and on the 16th, destroyed Kingston. 

The defence of the Hudson on the east shore was entrusted to the 
ineflScient General Israel Putnam. Encamped at Peekskill with 600 
regulars and several companies of militia, he retreated to the stronger 
Highlands before an insignificant force sent by Sir Henry CHnton to 
conceal the advance of his forces on the west side of the river. Oc- 
tober 7th he wrote to Gates who was opposing Burgoyne in the north: 
"I cannot prevent the enemy's advancing; prepare for the worst." 
Following the English fleet he led his army northward as far as Red 
Hook, arriving too late to prevent the burning of many buildings at 
this place, as well as at Rhinebeck, by a detachment of British soldiers. 
The presence of his army, on the eastern shore, however, prevented 
the further destruction of villages and property* along the river in 
Dutchess County, by the English as they sailed down on the 24th. 

Shortly after the burning of Kingston, the newly formed State 
government was removed to Poughkeepsie. December 15th^^JJ.77, 
Gov. George Clinton issued his proclamation summoning the Senate 
and Assembly to meet at Poughkeepsie, Monday the 5th day of Jan- 
uary 1778. Three sessions were held here that year and the winter 
session of 1779. After that it met at irregular intervals at Kingston, 
Albany and Poughkeepsie; the subsequent Poughkeepsie sessions con- 
vening September 7th to October 10th, 1780 ; June 15th to July 1st, 
and October 10th to November 3rd, 1781; February 23rd to April 
14th, and July 8th to 25th, 1782; January 11th to March 22nd, 
1788; December 11th, 1788 to March 3, 1789; and January 6th to 
IMh, 1795. 

Hundreds of Gov. Clinton's letters were written in Poughkeepsie 
indicating that he made his home here for several years, but there is 
;no positive evidence what house was the gubernatorial Mansion. The 
«tone house built by Clear Everitt, who was sheriff of the county from 
1754 to 1761, was used for important purposes during the Revolu- 
tion, and it is quite probable that Clinton occupied it for a time as his 
residence. Through the efforts of members of Mawenawasigh Chap- 
ter, Daughters of the American Revolutibn, the State in 1900 appro- 
priated $5,000 for the purchase of this building, and it is now in the 
custody of this society and known as the Gov. Clinton House, where is 
maintained a Museum. 



176 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In December 1778, General McDougall in command of the High- 
lands was greatly in need of shelter for his troops of the Continental 
army. Two regiments were in tents at Fishkill, and some four hun- 
dred men occupied the hospitals. He accordingly ordered a regi- 
ment of two hundred men to Poughkeepsie where they could be pro- 
tected from the storms of rain and snow. Gov. Clinton at first was 
opposed to the Continentals being stationed here, fearing they might 
interfere with the Legislature, whose members were afforded but in- 
different accommodation. However, in February of '79, when the 
regiment was about to be withdrawn, he wrote that the troops had be- 
haved in a most orderly manner ; had repaired their barracks, and laid 
in ample firewood to make their quarters very comfortable. 

When the struggle for American independence was virtually termi- 
nated by the surrender of Comwallis at Yorktown, October 19, 1781, 
the Legislature was in session at Pougkeepsie and, according to local 
historians, on receipt of this joyful news, both houses, with the Gov- 
ernor, proceeded to the Dutch Church and there offered thanksgiving 
to God for the great deliverance. 

The crowning event of historical interest to the citizens of Dutchess 
was the ratification, in their court house, of the Constitution of the 
United States, by the State of New York. The State Convention as- 
sembled at Poughkeepsie, June 17th, 1788, to consider and act on the 
proposed Constitution recommended by the General Convention at 
Philadelphia, September 17th, 1787. The State delegates elected to 
attend, numbered sixty-five, of whom sixty are recorded as present 
and voting.^ Governor Clinton, who was one of the delegates from 
Ulster County, was unanimously elected president, and it soon de- 
veloped that he was opposed to ratification, and that a large majority 
of the delegates shared his opinion. In fact Clinton is said to have 
been "the bitterest hater of the Constitution that could be found any- 
Iwhere in the thirteen States." Other conspicuous leaders in opposi- 
tion were Melancton Smith of Dutchess, and Robert Yates and John 
Lansing. 

Robert R. Livingston, then chancellor of the State of New York, 
and afterwards Minister to France, led the majority in favor of ratifi- 
cation. Warmly supporting him were John Jay, who became the first 
• 

1. For delegates from DntchesB and their vote, see Civil List, Chapter VII. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 177 

Chief Justice of the United States, and "foremost of all, Alexander 
Hamilton, whose name alone is his best eulogy." 

Among the arguments advanced by Melancton Smith was, that no 
power worth speaking of, would remain to the Legislatures of the 
States, and that it was impracticable to govern a country so widely 
extended as this, by the plan proposed. To these and all other ob- 
jections, Hamilton and his coadjutors replied with sohd reasoning and 
consummate tact. For many days the discussion continued, the spec- 
tators enjoying a mental feast, and it is safe to say, that in no State 
was the Constitution more powerfully opposed, and more ably defended. 

Of local interest is the following letter written in Poughkeepsie, un- 
der date of July 1st, 1788, by Hon. Isaac Roosevelt, a member of the 
Convention, to Hon. Richard Varick of New York: 

"I wish it was in my Power to inform you that our Convention had 
agreed to adopt the Constitution or Even what the Propable Event 
will be 

Our oponents keep themselves much at a distance from us and we 
Cant Collect any of their Sentiments Either out or in Doors by any 
means whatever 

In our discussions on the Constitution we have got only to the 8th 
Section of the first Article. 

The time is mostly taken up in reasoning on the impropriety of 
their Proposed amendments. 

I now only Can sugest that the Event of Verginia may influence their 
determination, should they reject I think it Propable our Convention 
•will, but should they adopt, I am not Clear ours will, they may then 
Propose an Adjournment to Collect the Scence of their respective 
Constituents, Tho all will depend on their Leaders, Hope shall be able 
to Write you more by Saturday next." 

"While the logic of discussion was thus going on," says the Rev. A. P. 
Van Gieson, D. D., in an address delivered January 30th, 1895, in Vassar 
Brothers' Institute, "there intruded into it the logic of events. The 
plan was, that when the Constitution should have been ratified by nine 
States, it should go into effect. When the Convention of the State 
of New York met, eight of the States had already ratified and the Con- 
ventions of New Hampshire and Virginia were in session. On Thurs- 
day the 24th of June a courier arrived at Poughkeepsie from the Cap- 



178 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

itol of New Hampshire, bringing to Mr. Hamilton the welcome news 
that the Convention of that State had ratified. This made the re- 
quisite nine States, and seriously changed the face of affairs. The 
question for the remaining States was not whether they would con- 
tribute to the forming of it, but whether they would enter into or stay 
out of a Union already formed. But by the opposition in the New 
York Convention, the accession of New Hampshire was not deemed 
decisive. It was a border State, and consisted mostly of a wilderness 
with no population except that of bears and panthers. Virginia, the 
foremost of all the States still held out, and without her and New York 
the new Union could not be a success. Mr. Smith spoke not only for 
himself but for his party when he said, on the day after the news came 
from New Hampshire, that the change in circumstances made no 
change in his views." 

July 2nd a courier arrived at Poughkeepsie with a package con- 
taining a despatch from the president of the Virginia Convention at 
Richmond, and a letter from Madison to Hamilton, announcing that 
Virginia had, on the 26th day of June, unconditionally ratified the 
constitution. The accession of Virginia caused great enthusiasm 
among the Federalists in the Convention, and proved a severe blowl to 
the opponents of ratification, who, however, continued to stubbornly 
contest their ground, insisting that the Constitution was radically de- 
fective. After many days of lengthy debate and eloquent speeches, 
which won over several of the Anti-Federalists, Saturday July 26th, 
was appointed for the final vote, which stood SO to 2T for uncon- 
ditional ratification. By the small majority of three. New York de- 
cided to become a member of the American Union. The final ratifi- 
cation might have been unanimous had Governor Clinton consented to 
vote for the Constitution. 

It seems to the Editor that the great credit rightly given Hamilton 
for his brilliant and persistent fight in the Constitutional Convention 
in favor of its adoption has partially eclipsed the credit that should 
be given to Clinton and his followers, and that history has made scant 
acknowledgement of the true patriotism and far-seeing statemanship 
that actuated Clinton in his opposition. 

Besides the criticism justly made that in certain regards the consti- 
tution did not give proper recognition to the great State of New York 
as compared with smaller and less important states, was the objection 




JOHN PETER SCHENCK, M. D. 



THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 179 

based upon the fact that in other respects the constitution was crude, 
and failed to guarantee proper protection to both personal rights and 
to State rights. This latter fact was recognized even by those who 
favored the adoption of the constitution as proposed. The oppon- 
ents finally insisted that the constitution should be adopted only upon 
the expressed condition of the immediate adoption of necessary amend- 
ments. This course was seen to be impracticable, and finally the op- 
ponents patriotically agreed to the adoption with only an implied 
promise, or a tacit understanding, that these amendments should be 
adopted as soon as possible. 

The sequel of events justified their action, for at the first Congress 
held at the City of New York on the 4th of March, 1789, there were 
proposed ten articles of amendments, and thejj were subsequently 
adopted by the requisite number of States. 

These articles were called the American "Bill of Rights" and prop- 
erly so, for they safe-guard the most valuable rights of person and of 
property : 

Such as freedom of religion; freedom of speech and of press; the 
right of assembly and petition; the right of the people to keep and 
bear arms; the prohibition of quartering troops on house-holders in 
time of peace, or in time of war, "but in a manner to be prescribed by 
law" ; the right of the people to be secure in their persons and property 
against unreasonable searches and seizures and from arrest without 
warrant supported by oath; the right not to be held for trial for a 
felony unless on indictment of a grand jury, and not to be put in jeop- 
ardy of life or limb twice for the same offense ; not to be compelled in 
any criminal case to be a witness against oneself, nor to be de- 
prived of life, liberty or property without due process of law, nor to 
have one's property taken for public use without just compensation; 
the right of the accused in all criminal prosecutions to a speedy and 
public trial, by an impartial jury of his locality, and to be informed 
of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him, and to have compulsory process for obtaining 
witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his de- 
fense. 

It was prescribed that excessive bail should not be required nor ex- 
cessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. 

Article nine of the amendments provided: 



180 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

"The enumeration in the constitution of certain rights shall not be 
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people." 

The right of trial by jury was preserved in suits at conunon law, 
where the value in controversy should exceed $20. 

Finally, regarding States' rights, as distinguished from personal 
rights, article ten of the amendments provided that: 

"The powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution, 
nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respec- 
tively or to the people." 

In the working out of our history as a Nation under the Constitution 
it has been found that the provisions of this Bill of Rights have been 
the bulwarks of the liberties of the people. They were worth con- 
tending for and insisting upon, and the men who contended for and in- 
sisted upon them are worthy of all honor and of all praise by the suc- 
ceeding generations of a free people living under the constitution, as 
amended; for we would in no sense have been a free people without 
these amendments, and the sufferings and struggles of the Revolu- 
tionary patriots in behalf of liberty might have been in vain. 

By their success in the aAitrament of arms, the American patriots 
had sustained their contention that "taxation without representation" 
was oppression; and they had justified their Declaration that "these 
united colonies are, and of right ought to be jree and independent 
states, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, 
and that all political connection between them and the State of Great 
Britain, is, and ought to be, totally dissolved." 

They were, moreover, heritors of all the rights of the people of 
Great Britain — all that had been won through battle and bloodshed, 
wrested from King John and guaranteed by Magna Charta ; all that 
had been claimed in the original Enghsh "BiU of Rights" and secured 
through the "glorious Revolution" in England, the infringement of 
which had cost Charles I his head, and James H his crown; and the 
wise men of this new nation, who had vivid memories of the struggles 
of the past and clear foresight for the dangers of the future, and who 
insisted that these hard won rights should be guaranteed to the people 
by the government about to be formed, should have all honor and glory. 



TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 181 



CHAPTER XIII. 

De CHASTELLUX'S TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS 

COUNTY. 

IN the year 1786 there was published at Paris in two volumes the 
"Voyage De M. Le Marquis De Chastellux, Dans L'Amerique 
Septentrionale, Dans les annes 1780, 1781 and 1782," the 
"Travels of the Marquis of Chastellux in North America in the years 
1780, 1781 and 1782." * 

By the kind permission of Mr. Reginald W. Rives, the editor of this 
work has been allowed to examine and have translations made from 
the rare original books in French, owned by him. 

The Marquis was a French general officer under Rochambeau and 
one of that group of French noblemen, sympathizers with the Ameri- 
can cause, who took such an active interest and gave such valuable 
assistance in our struggle for liberty during the Revolutionary period. 

Having landed at Newport, R. I., in July 1780, he was detained 
there some time by reason of the presence of the English fleet before 
that place. Admiral Rodney, however, having undertaken nothing 
up to the beginning of October, and the season being far advanced, 
after the Marquis had seen the troops properly installed in winter 
quarters, on the 11th of November, he started upon a "long tour upon 
the Continent." He was accompanied by two Aides de Camp, M. 
Linch and M. de Montesquieu, each of whom had a servant. The 
Marquis had three, one of whom looked after a led horse and another 
drove a little cart upon which was carried his baggage. 

It was very cold and snow covered the land. 

Proceeding across Connecticut and stopping at various places, on 
the 19th of November he left Litchfield and pursued his journey, trav- 
elling through the mountains; passing Washington, whose name "de- 
clars its recent origin," and New Milford, he found himself "upon 
the bank of the Housatonic, otherwise called the river of Stratford. It 
is not necessary to remark that the first name is the true one, that 



182 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

is to say, the one given to it by the Savages, the ancient inhabitants 
of the country." 

We shall proceed to quote the Marquis's own words of the narrative 
of his further journey, as he enters and proceeds through Dutchess 
Comity, translating them literally: 

"That river (the Housatonic) is not navigable, and you cross it easily at a ford 
near the forges of Mr. BuU (Bvdl's Iron Works). You turn next toward the left, 
and follow its banks; but if you are sensible to beautiful nature, if you have 
learned in looking at the pictures of Vernet and of Robert, to admire examples 
of it, you will pause, you will forget yourself in looking at the charming country 
which forms the surroundings of the forges, the water fall which serves to work 
them and the accessories of trees and of rocks with which that picturesque scene 
is embellished. 

Scarcely have you gone a mile, when you cross again the same river, but upon 
a wooden bridge; you find another soon, which etapties itself into it, called Ten 
Miles River. You follow that for the space of two or three miles and see next 
many pleasant houses which form part of the district called the Oblong. It is 
a long and straight tract of land ceded by Connecticut to the State of New York 
in consequence of an exchange made between those two States. The Inn where I 
was going is in the Oblong, but two miles further along. It is kept by Colonel 
Moorhouse; for in America nothing is more common than to see a Colonel an 
Inn keeper. They are for the most part Colonels of Militia, chosen by the Militia 
itself, which rarely fails to intrust the command to the most honest and best 
accredited citizens. I urged my horses and hastened to arrive to get ahead of a 
traveller on horse-back, who had joined me on the road, and who would have 
had the same right as myself for lodging, if we had arrived there together. I had 
the satisfaction to see him continue on his way; but soon afterwards I had the 
misfortune to learn that the fair sized Inn, where I had counted upon passing the 
night, was occupied by thirteen farmers and two hundred and iif ty cattle, which 
had come from New Hampshire. The cattle were the least troublesome of the 
whole company. They had driven them some distance from there into a meadow, 
where they left them free at their own will, without leaving any guard with them, not 
even that of a dog; but the farmers, their horses and their dogs were the possessors of 
the Inn. I informed myself of the reason which caused them to journey thus, and 
I learned that they were conducting to the Army a part of the contingent of 
subsistance which New Hampshire furnished it. That contingent is a kind of tax 
which is divided among all the inhabitants, who are taxed, some at the rate of 
150, others at 100 or 80 pounds of meat according to their means, so that they 
agree among themselves to furnish a steer, more or less heavy, it makes no differ- 
ence, because each animal is weighed. The driving of the herd is then intrusted 
to several farmers and servants. The farmers have a little more than a dollar a 
day; tmd their expenses as well as that of the herd are repaid them upon their 
return according to the receipts which they have taken care to get from all the 




m 
> 
o 

Q 

O 
Z 

o 

iJ 
<! 
Q 
O 
•z 



> 

H 

en 
& 
O 
iU 

P3 
O 



p. 
o 



C9 

3 



6 

V 

.S 00 

3 '^ 

_- ° 

tc O 

< H 

c" . 

5 S 

CO 4-> 

^^ CO 

^2 



C3 cd 



a 






TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 183 

Inns where they stop. They pay ordinarily from 6 to 10 French sols for each of 
the cattle for one night; the supper is in proportion. I informed myself of these 
details while my men sought lodging for me, hut all the rooms, all the beds were 
occupied by the drovers of the cattle, and I found myself in the greatest distress, 
when a large and fat man, the leader among them, having learned who I was, came 
to me and told me that neither he nor his companions would ever suffer that a 
French General Officer should want a bed, and rather than consent to that they 
would all sleep upon the floor, which they were accustomed to, and that that would 
not cause them the least discomfort. I answered them that I was a soldier and 
was just as accustomed as they to have the ground for my bed. A grand debate 
of politeness upon that point; on their part rough but cordial and more touching 
than the best turned compliments. The result was that I had a room and two 
beds for myself and for my Aides de Camp. But our acquaintance did not rest 
there. After we had separated each for his own affairs, I to fix myself up and to 
rest, they to continue to drink of grog and of cider, I saw them re-enter my room. 
I was then occupied in verifying my route upon a map* of the country. That 
map excited their curiosity. They saw there with surprise and satisfaction the 
routes by which they had come. They asked me if they knew them in Europe, 
and if it was not in that part of the world that I had bought my maps. They 
appeared very much pleased when I assured them that we knew America as well 
as the countries that were nearest neighbors to us; but their joy had no bounds 
when they saw on my map New Hampshire, their country. 

They immediately called those of their companions who had remained in the 
other room and mine found itself full of huge men, the most strong and most 
robust which I have yet seen in America. I expressed surprise at their height and 
their stature. They told me that the inhabitants of New Hampshire were strong 
and vigorous; that that came from several reasons, because the air there was 
excellent and because agriculture was their sole occupation, and especially because 
their blood was not mixed, that country being inhabited by the families of the 
original emigrants who came from England. We separated very good friends, 
touching, or rather shaking, hands in the English manner, and they told me that 
they were happy to have had occasion 'to shake hands with a French Greneral.' 
The horse that carried my baggage having failed to travel as quickly as myself, 
did not join me until the next morning. Therefore on that day, which was the 
20th of November, I was not able to start until ten o'clock. Three miles from 
Moorhouse Tavern you find a very high mountain, you next descend, but a little 
less than you ascend; then you follow the road upon an elevated plain, leaving 
the high mountains upon the left. The cotmtry is well cultivated, and you see 
there some beautiful farms and some mills and notwithstanding the war they are 
building there again, especially at 'HopeV township, principally settled by the 
Hollanders, as for the most part the State of New York is, that State having be- 
longed to the Republic of Holland, which exchanged it afterwards for Surinam. 
My intention was to sleep five miles this side of FishkiU at a tavern of Colonel 
Griffin. I found him cutting and shaping wood to make fences. He assured me 
that his house was full which I did not hesitate to believe because it was very 
small. I continued then my journey and arrived at FishkiU toward four o'clock 



184 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

in the afternoon. That village where you count scarcely more than fifty houses 
in the space of two miles, has for a long time been the principal depot of the 
American Army. It is there that they have placed the magazines, the hospitals, 
the work-shops, &c., but all these establishments form a village by itself, composed 
of fine and large barracks which they have constructed in the woods at the foot 
of the mountains; because the Americans, like the Romans in many regards, have 
for their winter quarters only these villages of wood or barrack camps, which one 
can compare to those which the Romans called Hiemalia. 

As to the position of Fishkill, the results of the campaign of 1777 have proved 
how important it was to occupy it. It was dear that the plan of the English had 
been, and could again be, to get possession of the whole course of the North River, 
and to separate thus tne States of the east from those of the west and the south. 
It was necessary to make sure of a post on this river. They chose West Point as 
the most important to fortify, and Fishkill as the most convenient place to es- 
tablish the principle depot of provisions, ammunition, etc.; these two positions are 
connected. I will speak presently of that of West Point; but I will observe here 
that Fishkill has all the necessary conditions for a place for a depot, because that 
village is situated on the main road from Connecticut, and near the North River, 
and because at the same time it is protected by a chain of inaccessible mountains, 
which occupy a space of more than twenty miles between the Croton river and 
that of Fishkill. 

The approach of Winter quarters and the movements of the troops that this 
circumstances occasioned rendered lodgings hard to find; I had trouble enough to 
find any; but finally I established myself in a mediocre Inn, kept by an old Madam 
Egremont. The house had not the cleanliness that one commonly finds in America; 
but the greatest inconvenience was that several panes of glass were lacking. In- 
deed, of all repairs, those to the windows are the most difficult, in a country where, 
the houses being so scattered and separated from one another, it is necessary some- 
times to send twenty miles to get a glasier. We used everything which came to 
hand to fill up to the best of our ability the cracks, and we made a good fire. A 
moment afterward, the doctor of the hospital, who had seen me pass, and who had 
recognized me as a French General Officer, came with much politeness to find out 
if I had need of anything, and to offer me everything which he could supply. I 
am using the English word "Doctor" because the distinction between Surgeon and 
Doctor of medicine is no more known in the army of Washington than in that of 
Agamemnon. One reads in Homer, that the Doctor Macon himself dressed all 
the wounds; but our Doctors, who are not Greeks, are not willing to follow this 
example. The Americans conform to the ancient usage, and are well pleased with 
it; they are well satisfied with their Doctors, for whom they show the greatest 
consideration. Doctor Graig, whom I knew at Newport, is the intimate friend of 
General Washington; and lately M. Lafayette had for Aide de Camp Colonel 
MacHenry, who, the past year, acted as Doctor in the same army. 

The 21st, at 9 o'clock in the morning, the Quarter-master of Fishkill, who had 
come in the evening watch with all possible politeness, to offer me his services 
and fo place two sentinels at my door, an honor that I refused in spite of all his 
insistence, came to my house; and after having partaken of tea, according to cus- 



TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 185 

torn, he conducted me to the barracks where I saw the quarters, the magazines and 
the work-shops of the different workmen attached to the service of the army. 
These barracks are in fact houses of wood, well constructed, well covered, and 
having garre^^to store grain and even cellars; of such a kind that one gets a 
very false idea, if one judges of them by those which one sees in our army, when 
we put our troops in barracks. The Americans make them sometimes more like 
ours, but only to put the soldiers under cover, when they are more in reach of 
the enemy. They give to these latter the name of huts, and they are very clever 
in constructing both kinds. It takes only three days to construct the firsi^ count- 
ing from the moment when they commence to cut down the trees; the others are 
finished in twenty-four hours. They consist of low walls, made of piled up stones, 
the chinks of which are filled with earth mixed with water, or simply with mud; some 
planks form the roof; but that which makes them very warm, is that the chimney is 
on the outside and one enters only by a little side door, practically at the side 
of that chimney. The army has passed whole winters under such huts without 
suffering and without sickness. As to the barracks, or ^rather as to the little 
military village of Fishkill, they have so well provided for all which the service and 
discipline of the army can need, that they have constructed there a Provost house 
and a prison which are surrounded with palisades. There is only one door by 
which to enter into the enclosure of the Provost and before that door they have 
placed a body-guard. Through the bars with which the windows of the prison 
are guarded, I distinguished several prisoners wearing the English uniform; these 
were a band of thirty soldiers or enlisted Tories. These wretched men had fol- 
lowed the Savages in an invasion that they had just made by Lake Ontario and 
the Mohavdi River. They had burned more than 300 houses, killed the horses and 
cows, and destroyed more than 10,000 bushels of wheat. The gallows ought to be 
the price of such exploits; but the enemy having also made several prisoners, they 
feared retaliation and contented themselves vrith guarding these robbers in a close 
and narrow prison. 

After having passed some time in visiting these different establishments, I 
mounted my horse, and conducted by a guide of the State that the Quarter-master 
had given me, I pushed on into the wood and followed the road to West Point, 
where I wished to arrive in time for dinner. Pour or five miles from Fishkill, I 
saw several trees cut down and a clearing in the wood; having approached nearer, 
I perceived it was a camp, or rather Isome huts inhabited by several hundred 
invalid soldiers. These invalids were all in very good health; but one must know 
that in the American Army one calls all those soldiers invalids who are not in a 
condition to do service, or those who have been sent to the rear, because their 
uniforms are in truth 'invalid.' These honest people, for I will not say these un- 
happy ones (they know too well how to suffer abd suffer for a cause too noble) 
have not in fact coverings, not even rags; but their assured mien, their arms in 
good condition, seem to cover their nakedness, and allow one to see only their 
courage and their patience. It was near this camp that I met Major Liman, Aide 
de Camp of General Heath, whom I had known very well at Newport, and M. de 
ViUefranche, a French ofScer, serving at West Point, in the rank of an engineer. 
General Heath had been informed of my arrival by a dispatch that the Quarter- 



186 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

master of Fishkill had sent him on my arrival, and he had sent these two ofBcers 
to meet me. I continued my way through the wood and on a road shut in on two 
sides by some very steep mountains, which seemed made expressly for bears to live 
in and where in truth they make frequent excursions during the Winter. One 
profits by a pass where the mountains are a little lower to turn toward the west 
and approach the river; but one does not see it yet. I descended these mountains 
slowly, when all at once at a turn of the road, my eyes were struck with the most 
magnificent view that I have seen in all my life; it was that which the North River 
presents, flovidng in a deep gap formed by the mountains through which it had 
long ages ago forced a passage. 

The fort of West Point and the formidable batteries with which it is defended 
fixed the attention on the west side of the river; but if one raises one's eyes, one 
sees on all sides lofty summits bristling with redoubts and batteries. I leap down from my 
horse and remain a long time looking through my spy-glass, the only means which 
one can use to comprehend the whole of the fortifications with which this important 
post is surrounded. Two high summits, on each of which they have cons,tructed 
a great redoubt, protect the river on the east. These two works have not received 
any names except those of the 'North Redoubt' and 'South Redoubt'; but from the 
fort of West Point properly speaking, which is on the bank of the river, up to the 
top of the mountain, at the foot of which it has been built, one counts six different 
forts all in an amphitheatre and protected by one another. They induced me to 
leave that place, where I would willingly have passed the entire day; and I had 
not gone a mile before I saw why they had urged me to come. In fact I per- 
ceived a body of infantry, more than two thousand five hundred men, very near, 
which was in battle array on the bank of the river. They had just crossed it to 
march at once toward Kings Bridge, and to cover a grand foraging raid that they 
were proposing to make toward the White Plains and up to the very gates of 
New York. General Starke, he who whipped the English at Bennington, com- 
manded these troops, and General Heath was at their head; he wished to have 
me see the troops before they set out on the march. I passed before their ranks, 
saluted by all the ofScers with their swords, and the drums beating 'to the field,' 
an honor that they show in America to Major Generals, whose rank is the highest 
in the Army, although it corresponds only to that of Marshal of the camp. The 
troops were badly dressed, but they made a good appearance; as for the officers, 
they left nothing to desire, either in respect to their appearance or their manner 
pi marching and commanding. After I had passed down the front of the line it 
broke, and marched before me and continued on its way. 

General Heath conducted me to the river bank, where his barge awaited him to 
carry me to the other side. It was then that a new scene opened to my view, not 
less sublime than the first. We descended, our faces turned toward the north; in 
that side one saw an island covered with rocks which seemed to close the channel 
of the river; but soon across the kind of opening that its bed had formed in 
separating the immense mountains, one perceived that it flowed obliquely from the 
west »nd made a sudden turn around West Point, to open a passage and hasten to 
rejoin the sea, without making from there on the slightest detour. One's glance 
turning towards the north above Constitution Island (this is the island of which 



TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 187 

I have just been speaking) sees again the river, distinguishing New Windsor on 
its left bank, then resting on different amphitheatres formed by the Appalachians, 
the furthest summits of which close the scene and are more than ten leagues away. 
We embark in the barge and cross the river which is nearly a mile wide. As we 
approach the opposite bank, the fort of West Point which, seen from the east 
bank appeared situated low down at the foot of the mountain, lifted itself up 
before our eyes and seemed to be the summit of a steep rock; this rock was how- 
ever on the bank of the river. When I had not remarked that the openings which 
pierced it in different places were not else than embrasures for cannon and for 
formidable batteries, I had my attention drawn to them by thirteen shots of 241- 
pound cannon, fired one after the other. This was a military salute, with which 
General Heath wished to honor me, in the name of the thirteen states. Never had 
honor been more imposing or more majestic; each shot of the cannon, after a long 
interval, was reechoed from the opposite bank with a noise almost equal to that 
of the discharge itself. If one remembers that two years ago. West Point was a 
wilderness almost inaccessible, that this wilderness has been covered with fort- 
resses and artillery, by a people who, six years before, had never seen a cannon; 
if one reflects that the fate of the thirteen states has depended on this important 
post, and that a horse trader changed into a general, or rather become a hero, 
always intrepid, always victorious, but buying victory always at the price of his 
blood; that this extraordinary man, at the same time the honor and disgrace of his 
country, had sold and thought to deliver to the English this Palladium of American 
liberty; if finally one groups together so many wonders, both of the physical and 
of the moral world, one would easily believe that my thoughts were indeed fully 
occupied and that 1 was not bored by my journey. On landing, or rather on 
climbing up the rocks which rose on the border of the river, and the feet of. which 
the river wa«hed, we were received by Colonel Lamb and Major Bowman, both 
artillery ofBcers, by Major Fish, a young man of fine figure, refined and in- 
teUeetual, and by Major Frank, formerly Aide de Camp to General Arnold." 

After a visit to Philadelphia, the Marquis returned in December, 
1780, and stopping at Newburg, was entertained over night by Gen- 
eral Washington at his headquarters at that place. 

After an interesting account of this visit the Marquis proceeds: 

"I greatly wished that it were possible for me to yield to the importunities 
which he (General Washington) made me to agree to pass some days with him. 
I had made at Philadelphia a solemn engagement with the Vicomte de Noailles 
and his travelling companions to arrive twenty-four hours after them at the head- 
quarters, if they should stop there or at Albany, if they should go straight on. 
We wished to see StiU-water and Saratoga. It would have been difficult for us to 
make a proper observation of that country if we should not be together, because 
we counted upon General Schuyler, who should not have to make two trips to 
satisfy our curiosity. I had been faithful to my promise, because I had arrived at 
New Windsor the same day that they had left West Point. I hoped that I should 
accompany them to Albany and General Washington seeing that he could not 



188 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

detain me, wished to conduct me himself in his barge to the other side of the 
river. We landed at 'Fishkill Landing Place,' to take the road on the east which 
travellers prefer to that on thBJ west. Arriving at the river bank, I parted from 
the Greneral, but he insisted that" Colonel Smith should accompany me as far as 
'Pokepsie.' The road which leads to that village passes sufficiently near to Fish- 
kill, which you leave upon your right. From there you travel upon the high 
land, where the view is beautiful and extended; and traversing the township which 
they call 'Middlebrook,' you arrive at the Creek and the 'Fall' of 'Wapping.' There 
I stopped some moments to take in, under different points of view, the charming 
landscape which that stream forms, as much by its cascade, which Is rushing and 
picturesque, as by the groups of trees and of rocks, which united with the saw 
mills and other mills made a picture most pleasing and agreeable. 

It was not yet half past three o'clock when I arrived at Pokepsie. Although 
I had the intention to sleep there, yet having found that the Court of Sessions 
was assembled there and that all the taverns were full, I took advantage of the 
little of the day that remained for me to reach an Inn, which someone told me of, 
three miles further on. 

Colonel Smith who had business at Pokepsie stayed there and I thought 
myself very happy to find myself again that night with my two Aides de Camp. 
In truth it was always a new pleasure for me, when free by ourselves, and in per- 
fect liberty, we could render to ourselves a mutual account of the impressions 
which so many different objects had left upon us. 

I regretted only not to have seen Governor Clinton, for whom I had some let- 
ters of introduction. He is a man who governs with all the vigor and firmness 
possible, inexorable toward the Tories, whom he makes tremble although they are 
in great number. He has been able to maintain in loyalty that vast province of 
which one end borders on Canada and the other the City of New York. He was 
then at Pokepsie, but occupied by the Court of Sessions. Besides, Saratoga and 
the different fields of battle of Burgoyne were henceforth the sole object of my 
trip. I tried always to advance in the hope that the snows would not prevent 
me and render the roads impracticable. Arriving at 'Pride's Tavern, I put some 
questions to my host upon the probable signs which he found for the continuation 
of good weather, and perceiving that he was a good farmer I asked him about 
agricvflture and I learned the following details. The land is very fertile in the 
County of the Duchesse ('Dutchess County'), of which Pokepsie is the capital, 
as much so as in the State of New York; but they let it remain fallow one out 
of two or three years, less from necessity than because they have always more 
land than they can cultivate. They sow upon an acre of land only a bushel of 
wheat, at the most, and the sowing yields 20 and 25 for one. Certain farmers 
sow oats, on the land which has borne corn the year before, but more often that 
kind of grain is reserved for land newly cleared. 

Flax is also a quite considerable object of culture. They plough with horses, 
and they harness three or four to one plough, sometimes even a greater number, 
when it is necessary to break up new ground, or that which has for a long time 
lain fallow. 

Mr. Pride informed me of these details, and made me hope for good weather 



TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 189 

for the next day. I went to bed perfectly satisfied with him, and his prognosti- 
cations. Nevertheless in the morning when I awoke I saw the land already all 
white with snow, which continued to fall in abundance, mixed with hail. What 
should 1 do under such circumstances? That for which I decided without hesita- 
tion. It was to continue my journey, as if it were pleasant, and only to breakfast 
little more heartily than I would have done otherwise. That which caused the 
most annoyance was the £^ow, or rather the hail, which struck me in the eyes, and 
prevented me from seeing the country. As far as I was able to judge, I found it 
beautiful and well cultivated. After I had gone nearly ten miles, I crossed the 
township of 'Straabourg,' which the inhabitants of the country called '8trattt- 
borough.' That township is five or six miles long, yet the houses are not at a 
distance from each other. When I saw one sufficiently fair looking and attractive, 
the proprietor came out, without doubt from curiosity, and asked me in French, 
if I would dismount from my horse, enter his house and dine with him. Nothing 
was more tempting, because of the bad weather, than such a proposition, but also 
nothing is more cruel when one has taken shelter than tojeave a second time the 
corner of the fire, to expose oneself anew to the cold and to the snow. I there- 
fore refused the dinner which the polite man offered me, but I did not refuse to 
answer the questions which he put to me. On my side 1 asked him if he had seen 
some French officers pass. I would speak of the Yicomte de Noailles, Comte de 
Damas and Chevalier de Mauduit, who having with them three or four servants 
and six or seven horses would have been remarked upon the road. My Hollander, 
for 1 have since learned that he was called Mr. LeRoy and that he was a Hol- 
lander, born in Europe and knew France, where he had lived some time^— My 
Hollander answered then as a man who knew France and who spoke French: 
'Monsieur, it is very true that M. le Prince de Conty has passed here this after- 
noon with two other officers going to Albany.' I did not know whether it should 
be to the Vicomte de Noailles or to the Comte de Dames that I should pay my 
respects for his Princeship, but as they are both my cousins, I answered very 
truly that my cousin having wished to take the advance, I was glad to know at 
what hour he had passed and when I should be able to join him; so that, if Mr. 
LeRoy consulted his Almanach, as I have no doubt he did, he will conclude that 
I was the Duke of Orleans or the Duke of Chartres, that which would seem all 
the more probable, as I had nine horses with me, while the Prince de Conty, a 
little further removed from the Crown, had only seven. As soon as you leave 
Strasbourg, you enter the township of 'Rhynbeck.' It is useless to remark that all 
these names disclose the German origin. At Rhynbeck, no one leaves his house to 
ask me to dinner, but the snow mixed with hail was so cold, and I was so fatigued 
keeping up my horse upon the ice, that I should have stopped at that place even 
if I had not been invited by the good appearance of the Inn, called 'Thomas' 
fnn.' Although it was only half past two o'clock, seeing that I had so far made 
twenty-three miles, that the house was good, the fire well lighted and the pro- 
prietor a big man of good mien, a hunter, a horse merchant and disposed to talk, 
I decided, according to the English expression, to 'dispense with' the rest of my 
journey. 



190 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Here is all that I learned from the most interesting part of my conversation 
with Mr. Thomas: 

In time of peace he carried on a large trade in horses, which he bought in Canada 
and which he sent to New York to transport them to the West Indies. It is nearly 
nnbelievable with what ease one carries on that trade in Winter. He assured me 
that at one time he had taken only fifteen days to go to Montreal and in driving 
back seventy-five horses which he had bought. The reason is that one travels 
straight across Lake Greorge upon the ice, and the wilderness which is between that 
lake and Montreal upon the snow. The horses of Canada travel usually eighteen 
or twenty hours a day, and two or three moimted men are enough to drive a 
hundred before them. 'I am the man,' added Mr. Thomas, 'who made, or rather 
who reestablished the fortunes of that scoundrel Arnold. He had badly conducted 
his affairs in the small business that he had carried on in New Haven. I per- 
suaded him to buy some horses in Canada and to go and sell them himself in 
Jamaica. That one speculation sufficed to pay his debts and to put him afloat.' 

After we had talked commerce, we talked agriculture. He told me that all the 
land about Rhynbeck was of extreme fertility, and that for one bushel of wheat 
that is sown, they gather thirty and forty bushels. The wheat is so abundant that 
they did not take the trouble to reap it, but they mowed it like hay. Certain 
dogs of a beautiful breed, which were running about revived my passion for the 
chase. I asked Mr. Thomas what use he made of them. He told me that they 
were used only to chase the fox. That roebucks, deer and bears were sufficiently 
common in the country, but that they killed them only in Winter, either by follow- 
ing their tracks in the snow or by drawing the woods. Every American conver- 
sation is apt to finish with politics. The politics of Mr. Thomas were a little bit 
doubtfuL He was very rich and he complained too much about the supplies of 
flour he had to furnish for the Army, for him to appear to me to be a good 
Whig. Nevertheless he held himself out as such; but I observed that he was very 
much attached to an opinion which I have found spread throughout the State of 
New York. It is that there is no expedition more useful and more easy than the 
conquest of Canada. The reason of it is that their country is so fertile and so 
happily placed for commerce that they are sure to become rich, provided they 
have nothing to fear from the savages, but the savages are only redoubtable be- 
cause they are backed up and inspired by the English. 

The 23rd (December, 1780,) I left the Thomas Inn at eight o'clock in the morn- 
ing and travelled for three hours, always in the district of Livingston (Livingston 
Manor). The road is beautiful and the country rich and well cultivated. You go 
through many quite considerable hamlets. The houses are fine and commodious, 
and everything there announces prosperity. In leaving that district you enter 
into that of Claverack, where you descend the mountains and approach the Hud- 
son River." 

Two years afterwards, in 1782, the Marquis, on his way from 
Mas^chusetts to Pennsylvania, again passed through the lower part 
of the County of Dutchess. He says : 



TRAVELS THROUGH DUTCHESS COUNTY. 191 

"The 4ith (December) I departed (from Litchfield, Connecticut,) at half past 
eight in the morning. I stopped at Washington, after I had admired once again 
the picturesque tableau which the two falls and the two mills presented, which you 
find half way on the road between Litchfield and Washington. It was not with- 
out much pleasure that I observed the great change which two years had pro- 
duced in a country that before was wild and savage. 

When I passed that way two years ago there was only a bad public-house. At 
the present time one can choose between four or five Inns, all fit and habitable. 
That of 'Morgan' passed for the present for the better, but a mistake caused me 
to alight at another, which I think was not less good. This is so because the war, 
by stopping the growth of commerce, has been advantageous to the interior of the 
country. It has not only forced many traders to leave the coasts and to seek 
peaceful habitations among the mountains, but it has forced commerce to resort 
to land transportation, and to frequent the roads, which before people made only 
a little use of. 

I arrived at 'Moor House'i Tavern' about five o'clocl^ in the afternoon. This 
time, as I crossed the river at 'Bull's Works' stopping again to behold that beau- 
tiful scene, I was convinced that I had not made too great an eulogy upon it in 
my first journal. 

The river, which was swollen from the thaw, was itself more imposing in its 
cataract, but they had let a charcoal pit tumble down, and that made the view of 
the mills less pleasing. On this occasion, I had no reason to praise the Inn of 
Moor House. The Colonel, who had given it his name, kept it no longer, but had 
conveyed it to his son, who was absent, so that there were only some women in the 
house. M. DiUon, who had gone a little in advance, had all the trouble in the 
world to make them kill some chickens. Our supper was poor, and after it weu 
finished and we had withdrawn to the chimney corner, we saw the women, to the 
nimiber of four, seat themselves at the table in our places, and eat the rest of our 
supper, with an American dragoon, who was stationed there. This caused us 
some anxiety on account of our men. We learned afterwards that the women had 
left them only a very little portion of the supper." 

Two of the women in the house were young girls, refugees from the 
Wyoming massacre, and they gave to the Marquis of Chastellux a 
very interesting account of their escape, all of which he sets forth in his 
journal. 

"On the Sth, I leave at 9 o'clock, and go straight to Fishkill, where I arrive at 
half past two, after I had made twenty-four miles over very bad roads. 

I alighted at the Tavern of Mr. 'Boerbm,' which I recognized was the same where 
I had lodged two years before, and which was kept then by Madam Egremont. 
I found the house changed to its advantage, and had a, very good dinner. I crossed 
the North River at night-fall and arrived at six o'clock in 'Newborough' where I 
found Madame Washington, Colonel Tighman, Colonel Humphreys and Major 
Walker. 



192 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The headquarters at Newborough consist of a single house, and that house is 
constructed in the Holland style. It is neither large nor commodious. The larg- 
est room which it contains is that where the family of the proprietor lives and 
which General Washington made his dining room. It is, to be sure, sufficiently 
Spacious, but it has seven doors and only one window. The chimney, or to speak 
more correctly, the back of the chimney, is against the wall, so that there is in 
fact only a flue of a cMmney, and the fire is in the room itself. On arriving 1 
found the company assembled in a rather small room which served for a parlor." 

The Marquis goes on to recount a very pleasant visit with Wash- 
ington and the officers whom he met at the Colonel Jonathan Has- 
brouck house, Washington Headquarters at Newburgh. 

On the 7th of December, 1782, he took his leave of Washington and 
proceeded on his journey to Philadelphia. 






SAMi!ff/i>,!u. nihUiAe 



DUTCHESS COUNTY IN THE REBELLION. 193 



CHAPTER XIV. 
DUTCHESS COUNTY IN THE REBELLION, 

IN the Civil war of 1861-'65 the people of this county proved them- 
selves worthy representatives of a heroic ancestry. In all the 
larger towns meetings were held immediately upon the fall of 
Fort Sumter. Men and money were freely tendered for the defense 
of the Union. Enlistments commenced forthwith, and the action of 
the citizens was everywhere prompt and enthusiastic. At a later 
period when it became necessary to raise large sums to fill the several 
quotas, these were voted without hesitation. 

On the 16th of April, 1861, meetings of the officers of the 21st 
Regiment and the American Citizens' Corps were held to put those 
organizations on a war footing and prepare them for any emergency. 
Within a few days from the issuance of the Governor's call on the 
18th of April, companies were raised and organized in many of the 
towns of the county, and united with various regimental organizations. 
Many joined the 20th Regiment, which was raised at Kingston. Com- 
pany A of this Regiment, commanded by Captain James Smith, was 
raised in Poughkeepsie. Theodore Van Kleeck was sergeant-major 
of this Regiment, and Dr. Robert K. Tuthill went as assistant sur- 
geon. Others imited with the SOth Regiment, forming Company E, 
commanded by Captain Harrison Holliday. Eleven battlefields wit- 
nessed the devotion to the Union of the SOth Regiment. In the battle 
at Gainesville and second Bull Run, the Poughkeepsie company lost its 
captain, and the Regiment its colonel. 

Company I of the 74th Regiment was raised in Poughkeepsie in 
the summer of 1861, by Captain Arthur Wilkinson; and in Septem- 
ber of the same year 135 men were enlisted in the county by Lieut. 
Broom for Col. Ramsey's Regiment, then stationed at Dobb's Ferry. 
About the same time,^ Edward Titus, of Little Rest, in the town of 
Washington, was authorized by Col. De Forest to recruit a company 
of cavalry; fifty-five men, mostly from the interior and eastern part 



194 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

of the town, were accepted, and joined the Ira Harris Guard then 
rendezvoused in New York. August 19, 1861, Pawling sent six young 
men to the "People's Elsworth Regiment" at Albany. In the same 
month a company was raised at Fishkill Landing to join the 19th 
Regiment, whose headquarters were then at Newburgh. Nearly an 
entire company of the Washington Greys, recruited from the towns 
of Stanford, Pine Plains and Chnton, under command of Col. Henry 
Moore, joined the 47th Regiment in New York the latter part of 
August. In September, 1861, a recruiting office was opened at the 
comer of Main and Bridge Streets, Poughkeepsie, by Captain Charles 
Bohrer, who recruited twenty-eight men for the Morgan Rifles, com- 
posed entirely of Germans, and commanded by Col. Andrew Leutz. 
Thirty men were enlisted by William H. Wheeler for Captain Crom- 
well's company of the First New York State Cavalry. They left 
Poughkeepsie for the encampment at Troy on the 24th of September. 

Thus the bone and sinew of the yeomanry of Dutchess County were 
represented in detached fragments in these and various other military 
organizations, exceeding in the aggregate a thousand men, who re- 
sponded to the President's first call for troops. 

The prospects of an early peace in the spring of 1862 induced the 
government to suspend the organization of new regiments; but on 
the 2d of July of that year, the President realizing the severe losses 
sustained by the federal armies in recent campaigns, issued a call for 
an additional 300,000 men, to serve for three years or during the war. 
New York's quota was 59,705 men, and to facilitate the labor of rais- 
ing them the State was divided into military districts corresponding 
with the senatorial districts. Dutchess and Columbia counties formed 
the 11th district, in which the raising of a regiment was authorized, 
and TivoH was designated as the regimental camp. Hon. William 
Kelly of Rhinebeck was appointed chairman of a joint committee 
from the two counties, which met at Poughkeepsie July 17, 1862, when 
it was resolved to request the Governor to change the camp for this 
district from Tivoli to Hudson. The change was authorized July 25, 
1862. Early in August more than a thousand men were rendesvoused 
in Camp Kelly at Hudson, and the organization of the district regi- 
ment, designated the 128th, was soon completed, with the following 
officwrs from Dutchess: Lt. Col. James Smith, Poughkeepsie; Quar- 
termaster, Alexander Annan, Fishkill; First Asst. Surgeon, C. H. 



DUTCHESS COUNTY IN THE REBELLION. 195 

Andrus, Poughkeepsie ; Commissary Sergeant, E. Augustus Brett, 
Fishkill; Quartermaster Sergeant, George S. Drake, Amenia; Ordi- 
nance Sergeant, John Matthews, Jr., Matteawan; Color Sergeant, 
James M. Braley, Rhinebeck. Companies B, C, D, F, H, and I were 
raised in this county. September 4, 1862, the regiment was mus- 
tered for three years. 

The 128th bore a conspicuous part in the movements in Louisiana, 
comprising a part of the second brigade of Sherman's division. In 
the assault on the rebel works at Port Hudson, near Baton Rouge, 
May 27, 1863, this regiment lost twenty in killed, and seventy-nine 
in wounded. In 1864 the regiment was sent to the Shenandoah Val- 
ley, participating in the brilliant engagements which distinguished 
their intrepid commander, Sheridan. ^ 

The 128th was mustered out in Savannah, July 12, 1865, and sent 
to Albany to be paid off. The regiment went out with 993 men and 
returned with only five hundred. Their return was appropriately 
welcomed by the towns from which the several companies went. 

THE DUTCHESS COUNTY REGIMENT— 150th.^ 

In response to a resolution passed by the district war committee, 
the Board of Supervisors met August 22nd, 1862, and adopted meas- 
ures for the raising of a Dutchess County Regiment, so that the 
county's full quota of troops could be raised without a draft. After 
obtaining the required permission from the Governor, the war com- 
mittee on the 26th of August, selected Hon. John H. Ketcham for 
Colonel of this regiment, Alfred B. Smith for Major, George R. Gay- 
lord for Quartermaster and William Thompson for Adjutant. The 
regiment was designated the 150th, and recruiting offices were opened 
by Joseph H. Cogswell, Robert McConnell, Henry A. Gildersleeve, 
William R. Woodin, Andrus Brant, John Green, Edward Wickes, 
Edward Crummey, Benjamin S. Broas and John S. Schofield. As 
soon as eighty men were enrolled by any one of these gentlemen, he 
went to Albany and received his commission as Captain ; the com- 
panies receiving their alphabetical designation, commencing with A 
in the order in which their respective Captains were commissioned. 



1. A history of the Dutchess County Regiment, edited by S. G. Cook, M. D., an4 Charles 
E. Benton, published In 1907, contains a detailed and interesting account ot the organiza- 
tion of the 150th, and Its participation in the various campaigns ; also a complete roster 
of the regiment. 



196 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Platte M. Thorne of Company H filled the place of Edward Crummey, 
who had recruited the company for him. The regimental camp was 
located at Poughkeepsie, just north of the old Alms House farm, and 
was named "Camp Dutchess." At this camp on Saturday, October 
11th, 1862, the 150th was mustered into the service of the United 
States for three years, and that night left for Baltimore, where the 
regiment was stationed until June 25th, 1863. 

The part borne by the 150th in the battle of Gettysburg may be 
briefly told. It arrived on the field of Gettysburg between 4 and 5 
o'clock on the morning of July 2d, 1863, and was assigned to the 
2d brigade, first division, of the 12th corps. It was held in reserve 
until the afternoon of that day, when, with the first division of its 
corps, it was marched to the support of Gen. Sickles, who had in- 
judiciously posted his forces in an untenable position and was forced 
back with the loss of half his troops to the position originally de- 
signed for him by Gen. Meade. The 150th returned during the night 
to the position of the 12th corps, on the extreme right of the National 
line, at the barb of the hook formed by Cemetery Ridge, on the crest 
of which from Gulp's Hill to Round Top, Meade's army was posted. 
While the contest for the possession of Little Round Top was in 
progress, Ewell, who had discovered that Gulp's HiU was weakly 
defended, from the withdrawal of troops from Slocum's command to 
the left of the line, made a vigorous attack late in the afternoon and 
succeeded in getting a foothold within the exterior entrenchment, but 
was dislodged at the point of the bayonet early the next morning. 
This was the first actual fighting in which the 150th regiment en- 
gaged. Its casualties were 8 killed and 23 wounded. Some 200 of 
the rebels surrendered to it. 

The regiment then joined in Meade's pursuit of Lee's army, march- 
ing and countermarching until August 1st, when it crossed the 
Rappahannock at Kelly's Ford, and supported as skirmishers the 
cavalry, who drove the enemy. During the month of August the 
regiment lay in camp and many of the men were sick with acchmating 
fever. There were 250 cases in the hospital with typhoid and malarial 
fever. 

Late in September the 150th was transferred to the army of the 
Cumberland. In April of '64 it participated in the battle of Resaca, 
where one ofllcer and eight men were wounded. During the Atlanta 



DUTCHESS COUNTY IN THE REBELLION. 197 

campaign, in which it was next engaged, the casualties of the 150th 
where 1 officer and 18 men killed; 4 officers and 83 men wounded. In 
Sherman's memorable march from Atlanta to the sea, the Dutchess 
County Regiment was a part of the first division of the 20th Army- 
Corps. They left Atlanta November 15th, 1864, and arrived at 
Savannah just one month later. In a skirmish on Argyle Island, 
near Savannah, December 20th, 1864, Col. Ketcham was seriously 
wounded, and was unable to join his command again in active cam- 
paign service. While at Atlanta, he had been promoted to be 
Brigadier-General by Brevet, and subsequently for conspicuous 
bravery, to the rank of Brevet Major-General. 

The 150th was discharged from the United States service, June 
8, 1865, near Washington, D. C, and June 12tji was formally wel- 
comed home by a public celebration in Poughkeepsie. 

The following is a list of the forty-seven members of the Dutchess 
County Regiment who were killed in battle, or died from wounds re- 
ceived in battle, arranged by companies and in order of occurrence. 
In addition to this list of fatal casualties, sixty-one deaths occurred 
from disease. 

Company A — John Van Alstyne, killed at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. Charles 
Howgate, killed at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. Levi Rust, killed at Gettysburg, 
Pa., July 3, 1863. John P. Wing, killed at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. Henry 
L. Stone, killed near Marietta, Ga., June 11, 1864. Henry C. Winans, wounded 
near Pine Hills, Ga., June 11, 1864, and died in Nashville Hospital July 12, 1864. 
First Lieutenant Henry Gridley, kiUed in action at Gulp's Farm, Ga., June 32, 
1864. John Hart, killed on picket near Marietta, Ga., June 24, 1864. WiUis D. 
Chamberlain, kiUed in front of Atlanta, Ga., August 23, 1864. John Cass, killed 
at Averasboro, N. C, March 17, 1865. 

CoMPAiTT B — Stephen Simmons, killed at Peach Tree Creek, Ga., July 20, 1864. 
Folsom Richardson, died of wounds, Cumberland Hospital, Nashville, Tenn., Au- 
gust 8, 1864. Wounded at Resaca, Ga., June IS, 1864. James M. Chambers, wound- 
ed before Atlanta, Ga., August 2, 1864. Died in hospital, Jeffersonville, Ind., 
December 28, 1864. William J. Wallin, killed on skirmish line near Averasboro, 
N. C, March 17, 1865. 

CoMPANT C — TaUmage Wood, woimded at Gettysburg, July 3, 1863. Died of 
wotmds, July 14, 1863, at Baltimore, Md. George Lovelace, killed by Guerillas 
between Mulberry and TuUahoma, Tenn., February 11, 1864. Henry W. Story, 
killed in action at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 1864. William A. Palmatier, killed in 
action at Savannah, Ga., December 20, 1864. 



198 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Company D — Daniel Glancey, wounded in action, June 16, 1864. Died at Pine 
Knob, Ga., June 17, 1864. James Todd, wounded in action, June 22, 1864, at 
Gulp's Farm, Ga. Died at Nashville, Tenn., July 26, 1864. 

CoMPAiTT E— Judd Murphy, killed at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. James 
Elliott, killed in action at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 1864. Samuel Myers, killed in 
action at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 1864. Isaac I. Blauvelt, wounded in action May 
25, 1864. Died May 27, 1864, at Dallas Ga. John Sweetman, wounded in action 
at Gulp's Farm, Ga., June 22, 1864. Died at Ghattapooga, Tenn., July 3, 1864. 
James E. Davidson, wounded in action at Gulp's Farm, Ga., June 22, 1864. Died 
at Ghattanooga, Tenn., July 10, 1864. Bernard Gonnolly, killed in action at 
Peach Tree Creek, Ga., July 20, 1864. 

CoMPAirr F — John E. Odell, kiUed by guerillas between Mvilberry and TuUa- 
homa, Tenn., February 11, 1864. Isaac Smith, wounded at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 
1864. Died at Peach Tree Greek, Ga., June 4, 1864. Henry Sigler, killed on 
picket near Marietta, Ga., June 16, 1864. Cornelius G. Sparks, killed in action 
at Golgotha, Ga., Jime 16, 1864. Nathan C. Hedden, wounded in action before 
Atlanta, Ga., July 20, 1864. Died at Cumberland Hospital, Tenn., September 2, 
1864. John E. Pultz, wounded in action at Peach Tree Greek, Ga,, July 20, 1864. 
Died September 20, 1864. John Simon, wounded in action at Gulp's Farm, Ga., 
June 22, 1864. Died at Ghattanooga Hospital, July 9, 1864. 

GoMPAUT G — Barnard G. Burnett, killed at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. 
Thomas Burnett, wounded in action, July 20, 1864, at Peach Tree Greek and died 
July 30, 1864, near Atlanta. James Horton, wounded in action at Peach Tree 
Greek, Ga., July 20, 1864. Died August 9, 1864. Thomas W. Wright, wounded in 
action in Resaca, Ga., May 15, 1864. Died at Atlanta Hospital, October 22, 1864. 
Benj. A. Harp, wounded in action at Resaca, Ga., May 15, 1864. Died Septem- 
ber 7, 1864. 

Company H — John Grad, killed in action at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 1864. Noah 
Wixon, killed in action near Savannah, Ga., December 20, 1864. 

Company I — Henry Barnes, wounded at Gettysburg, Pa., July 3, 1863. Died 
July 4, 1863. Charles LeClaire, killed at Dallas, Ga., May 25, 1864. William R. 
Phelps, killed in action at Golgotha, Ga., June 16, 1864. Henry Dykeman, wounded 
at Peach Tree Greek, Ga., July 20, 1864. Died at Ghattanooga Hospital, Septem- 
ber . 13, 1864. First Lieutenant David B. Sleight, killed in action at Averasboro, 
N. G., March 16, 1865. 

Company K — Richard Hyde, wounded in action in front of Atlanta, Ga., July 
23, 1864. Died July 25, 1864. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 199 



CHAPTER XV. 
TOWN AND CITY OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

By Edmund Platt. 
AUTHOR'S NOTE. 

A few words in regard to the arrangement of tl^s chapter on Pough- 
keepsie are perhaps necessary. The chief events which go to make 
up the history of the town, village and city of Poughkeepsie are car- 
ried down chronologically from the earliest settlements to very nearly 
the present time. Following this comes the history of the churches, 
of the schools, of the manufacturing and other industries, of the banks 
and financial institutions, of the "newspapers, politics and public men," 
each under its own heading, with something about the development of 
each institution from its beginnings to the present. The institutions 
which are thus treated under separate headings are not referred to in 
the main story, except where something in their development was of 
great importance in the history of the town or city. The military 
history of the County of Dutchess is to be found in chapters by itself, 
elsewhere in this book, and therefore I have made but brief references 
to the enlistments of men or to the regiments that served either in the 
Revolution or in the Civil War. As the bench and bar are also given 
a separate chapter, I have said no more than is necessary about the 
lawyers. In the history of the churches only brief reference is made 
to the Catholics because a separate chapter is also devoted to them. 
The short history of Poughkeepsie contained in this volume is not a 
mere synopsis of my History of Poughkeepsie. Certain problems 
which could not be solved at the time that book was written have been 
re-examined from the records, some of them have been solved and con- 
siderable new matter has been obtained. 

Edmund Platt. 

March, 1909. 



200 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

TOWN OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

THE towns of Poughkeepsie, Fishkill and Rhinebeck are the 
three oldest political divisions of the County of Dutchess, 
dating back at least to 1717, as the first book of the Super- 
visors and Assessors shows, though the division does not seem to 
have been definitely authorized by colonial law until June 24<, 1719. 
That act refers in its first clause to a previous act of the "Twelfth 
year of the reign of the late Queen Anne," evidently the act of October 
23, 1713, directing "the freeholders and inhabitants in the respective 
precincts thereof to assemble and meet at the most convenient place" 
to elect a supervisor, treasurer, two assessors and two collectors. 
Probably when these officers had been elected they made the first 
division of the county themselves for convenience, calling the sections 
wards. The record shows that the middle ward was called "Pockep- 
sing" as early as 1718 and the lower ward Fishkill, while the northern 
a little later came to be called Kipsburg. In the act of 1719 the word 
"ward" is not used, but they are called merely divisions, and the mid- 
dle division was given practically the same boundaries along the river 
as the present town of Poughkeepsie, namely, from Wappingers Creek 
to Esopus Island. The next division into a greater number of towns 
or precincts was made in 1737, when the Poughkeepsie precinct had 
a small slice taken off its northern end and was given a definite east- 
ern boundary. It included "All the lands to the northwest of Wap- 
pingers Kill, or Creek, from the mouth thereof and up along the said 
kill or creek and Hudson's River until it meets the patent granted to 
Heathcote and Company, called the Lower Nine Partners." The 
creation of the towns of Clinton and of Hyde Park made only a slight 
change in this northern boundary, for the Lower Nine Partners Pat- 
ent extended to the Wareskeechen, the stream which crosses the Post 
Road this side of Teller Hill, and the present boundary is only a mile 
or so further south. 

The name Poughkeepsie dates far back of definite political divisions. 
It is first found in an Indian deed, dated May 5, 1683, still on file in 
the Fort Orange records at Albany, granting to Pieter Lansingh and 
Jan Smeedes each a farm and to the latter "also a waterfall near the 
bank of the river to build a mill thereon. The waterfall is called 
PooghJcepesingh and the land Mmnismgh, situate on the east side of 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 201 

the river." This word "Pooghkepesingh," according to authorities 
on Indian nomenclature, means "where the water breaks through or 
falls over." In this deed it plainly refers to the fall at the mouth of 
the Fall Kill. The first grant of land in the town of Poughkeepsie 
is dated October 24, 1686, and refers to an Indian deed dated one 
year earlier. This was made to Robert Sanders and Myndert Har- 
mans. It contains no mention of Poughkeepsie, though the land is 
called Minnisink, but in 1697 Sanders and Harmans conveyed to Bal- 
tus VanKleeck a tract of land called by the Indians "Mennisink and 
Poghkepesing." This appears to be the last use of the word "Minni- 
sink" in local records, but Poughkeepsie, with a great variety of spell- 
ings, soon came into general use to describe the neighborhood. 

Just who the very first white settler in the limits of the town of 
Poughkeepsie was remains unknown, but the first deed dated June 15, 
1680, was of land between the mouth of Wappingers Creek and the 
Caspar Kill, granted by five Indians to Arnout Cornelissen Viele, a 
well-known interpreter of Indian languages. As a general thing some 
one was usually already living, camping or squatting in a neighbor- 
hood for which the warrant of a title to land was sought, and prob- 
ably Viele or someone else was living near the Caspar Kill at that 
time. Two years later, in 1682, there is record of a "bond and mort- 
gage given by a Highland Indian, Tapias, to Laurence van Ale and 
Gerrit Lansing, secured by his land, situate upon Hudsftn's River on 
the east side, nearly opposite Danskammer, * * * where Arnout 
Cornelissen's land ends." This gives strong ground for the suppo- 
sition that several families had been living near the mouth of the Wap- 
pingers for some time. The land granted to Viele soon afterwards 
came into the possession of Pieter Lansing, or Lassing, and some of 
his descendants lived there for many years. In fact, we may say that 
some of them are still living there, for the Lawsons, of New Ham- 
burg, are undoubtedly the same family, as Lauson was one of the 
early variations of the spelling of the name. 

With the granting of the Sanders-Harmans patent the site of the 
City of Poughkeepsie began to acquire settlers enough to determine 
the location of a center or hamlet. By 1697 there were at least six 
families here. The first settler, who is merely referred to in a deed 
as "Sovryn the Baker," was on the ground as early as 1686, and the 
others were Myndert Harmans, the patentee, Balthazer Barnse, Hen- 



202 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

drick Ostrom, Simon Scoute and Baltus VanKleeck. These with oth- 
ers who came soon afterwards formed a small Dutch village com- 
munity. Their deeds from the patentees included the right to cut 
wood in 'the forests and the right to pasturage in common lands. A 
saw mill may have. been built by Jan Smeedes at the Pooghkepesingh 
waterfall as early as 1683, when he obtained his deed from the Indians, 
though no further record of Smeedes has been found. A miU, at any 
rate, had been built there by 1699, for it is mentioned in a deed from 
Col. Peter Schuyler, the ^second patentee, to Sanders and Harman^. 
This deed conveyed land between the Rust Plaest, the stream that flows 
through the Poughkeepsie Bural Cemetery, and the Fall Kill, and was 
probably given to straighten titles and make more definite boundaries 
between the two patents. Schuyler's patent, granted in 1688, con- 
veyed land "Bounded on the north by the lands of Robert Sanders and 
Myndert Harmense," and "on the south by a certain creek that runs 
into Hudson's River on the north side of a certain house now in the 
possession and occupation of one Pieter the Brewer." The "certain 
creek" was the Caispar Kill and Peter the Brewer was undoubtedly the 
Peter Lansing above referred to. Schuyler's land included, therefore, 
almost the whole town of Poughkeepsie south of the city limits. 

The settlement of the town proceeded slowly. There was good 
lands along the streams and a comparatively level tableland stretching 
north and south for some distance in the neighborhood of the present 
city limits. Probably some of the land along the Fall Kill as well as 
along the Wappingers and the Caspar Kill was natural meadow land, 
free from trees, only occasionally flooded and very fertile. By 1703, 
when the first Post Road act was passed, settlements in the County of 
Dutchess had not yet warranted the Legislature^ in requiring the in- 
habitants to "clear or maintain any other path or highway than for 
horse and man only," but by 1712 there was reference in a deed to 
"the waggon path leading to Pokepsink," and the highway law of 
1713 provided that "If the commissioners for the County of Orange 
and Dutchess County see cause to have any roads laid out for a 
waggon road, the inhabitants of said counties shall be hereby obliged 
to clear the same." This act named Barent VanKleeck, Jacob Vos- 
burg and Johannes Busch commissioners for Dutchess. 

1. "Tlie Sanders-Harmans and the Schuyler grants covered nearly all of the town of 
Poughkeepsie, except a strip included In the Rombout patent along the Wappingers 
Kill. Later grants were made but declared fraudulent. 




a 
ui 

I 

(0 

J 


s 
111 

D 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 203 

It is impossible to tell where the original line of the Post Road, or 
King's Road, was, but in Poughkeepsie it must have been about where 
it is now by 1716, when the first church, the Dutch Church, was or- 
ganized, for the land then conveyed by Jacobus Van den Bogert to 
the trustees of the church is still owned by the church and was de- 
scribed by the deed, December 26, 1716, as "butted and boundett, 
Vz., on the Nort side to the Rood that runs to the Eastward to the 
fore said Captain Barent VanKleeck's and on the west along the Rood 
that runs to the Sout." That was clearly the southeast corner of 
Main and Market streets, and on the opposite side of the road that 
runs to the south the first court house was built by 1720. The 
Legislature first made provision for the building of a county house 
and prison in Dutchess County by an act, July 21, 1715, but did not 
indicate where the building was to be located. A second act, passed 
May 27, 1717, provided for its location "at or near the most con- 
venient place at Poghkepse." 

As a county seat, therefore, Poughkeepsie dates from May 27, 
1717, and there is evidence that general county meetings previous to 
that time had usually been held here. A court house and a church 
and a blacksmith shop make a good nucleus for a village any- 
where, but Poughkeepsie grew with rather more than true Dutch de- 
liberation and it was not until about eighty years after the building 
of the first court house that the place had become large enough to 
necessitate incorporation as a village. It should be noted that, like 
Fishkill and Rhinebeck, Poughkeepsie made its early growth, not on 
the river bank, but on the King's Road, or Post Road. The river, of 
course, must have been the great highway to the outer world during 
most of the year, but the road was undoubtedly the chief avenue of 
intercourse between scattered settlements and was doubtless available 
also for longer horseback journeys. As early as June 30, 1717, a 
payment of six shillings is recorded "for carrying an express to Fish- 
kill for his Magesty's sarvis," and "To James Hussey for ye same 
Express as fare as Croten River." Evidently the road was in use 
all the way to New York, despite the statement in some histories that 
Lord Loudon opened it through the Highlands when he marched his 
troops northward during the French and Indian War. 

There must have been some kind of a road to a landing place at the 
river and also a road leading to the eastward before 1716, but there 



204 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

is no indication in the early records as to how far it extended and no 
evidence of the appointment of an overseer or pathmaster for it for 
a considerable number of years. The first Book of the Supervisors 
and Assessors, bringing the records down to 1722, mentions only 
overseers of the King's Road, but in 1730 the Second Book of the 
Supervisors contains an account of an election for the middle ward of 
an assessor and a collector, Arrye Rosa and Richard Sackett, Jr., 
for Dover and pochquayeck, and also the election of Hendrick Neess 
"surveyor of ye road from Dover, and Arrye CooU surveyor of ye 
road from Pochquayeck." It seems that these roads both ran to 
Poughkeepsie. The first mention I have found in the records of a 
road leading to the river is the 'following: 

And Whereas we the hereafter Named Commissioners of pooghkeepsing and the 
Neighborhood of Wassayck Called Dover at the Request of Many persons free- 
holders and Inhabitants of said County & Two Neighborhoods have on the fourth 
day of November 1736 

Concluded & agreed that the Bridge where it Now Stands Erected over the 
Wappingers Creek is the most Convenient place for the passing and Repassing 
for Travelers; and the Road is to Contineu from Said Bridge as it Now Goes to 
a Swinging Gate of Mr. Franc Filkins Land Now in the Tenure of Mr. Johannes 
Lewis from thence Straight over the land of Mr. Moses De Graeff till it meets 
with the Road that Leads through the Land of Mr. Johannes Van Cleeck and so 
through the same Land as it Now Goes quite Down to the Landing at Pooghkeep- 
sinck as the said Road Now Leeds. 

A considerable number of new roads were laid out after the pas- 
sage of an act in 1732 "for the better clearing and further laying out 
public high roads in Dutchess County," and in 1738 it is stated that 
the commissioners "have viewed a road that leads from Pokeepsinck 
Church to Mr. Johannes Van Kleeck's," etc., and found the same very 
inconvenient and proceeded to alter said road as follows: "From Po- 
keepsinck Church eastward along the fence now in the possession of 
Mr. Francis Filkins until the end of the Lane and so along to the street 
line of the west end of the Lane of Col. Barent Van Kleeck's land, and 
so along the line as the same now is to the end thereof by Hendrick 
Ostrom's, then along the road as is there used to the end of the fence of 
Myndert Van Den Bogart. * * « And we said commissioners 
hope this may be conformable and agreeable to law and that this road 
be tfce King's High way or road from said Church at Pokeepsinck 
until the Wappingers Creek by the bridge aforesaid and no other, and 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 205 

also that there be a publick high way from the said Church as the 
road now goes until Hudson's River at a place called the Call Rugh 
Landing." This mention in 1738 is the first mention I have seen of 
the Kaal Rock landing, which appears many times, however, in the 
later records of the precinct or town of Poughkeepsie. It is almost 
impossible to tell from the early surveys just where the old roads ran, 
but the road above mentioned was apparently the main road to the 
eastward from the Kaal Rock landing, passing by the Poughkeepsie 
Church (that is the Dutch Church) and so out across Wappingers 
Creek. The records of elections for the precinct of Poughkeepsie 
begin in 1742 and the first page mentions four roads, as follows: 

Barent Lewis, overseer of ye road to ye northward. 

Benjamin Van Keuren, do to ye southward. 

John Tappen, do to ye eastward. 

John Maxfield, do to ye northeast. 

The next year the roads to the eastward and to the northeast come 
out and in their places are the "road to DuBois's," and "road to ye 
Nine Partners." In 1744 the last mentioned road becomes the "road 
to Filkintown," while the road to the eastward, or to DuBois's, becomes 
"from Lewis DuBois's to Callrugh," and a new road is mentioned 
"from Lassing's to Du Bois's mill." In 1745 the roads are simply, 
"Post Road North," "Post Road South," "Filkintown," "Simeon 
LeRoy," "Lewis Du Bois." Now where did Simeon LeRoy and Lewis 
DuBois live? In 1751 these roads are designated as "DuBois's 
Bridge," and "LeRoy's Bridge," while another is mentioned "from 
Perdon's to P. Lansing's." LeRoy's Bridge, sometimes called Simeon 
LeRoy's Bridge, comes aU the way down the records to 1755, when a 
pathmaster is appointed for a road "from Callrugh to Simeon Le- 
Roy's Bridge," and in 1754 we find the following in the record: "It 
was voted that the men from Boudewyn Lacount's, himself included, 
to Johannes VanKleeck's, himself included, shall work upon the road 
leading from the Callrugh landing to Simeon LeRoy's Bridge, and 
likewise those living at Crary Fly." This road running from the 
river to Wappingers Creek is evidently the same one mentioned in the 
earlier 1738 record. ^Simeon LeRoy had purchased land on the east 



1. Simeon LeBoy was a son of Frans, or Francois LeRoy, who came to Poughkeepsie 
as early as 1719. He was the ancestor of the LeRoy family in Dutchess County and Is 
the only French Huguenot, so far as I know, who came to this neighborhood hy way 
of Canada. He hought land In the neighborhood of Smith Street on the Fallkill. 



206 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

side of Wappingers Creek, about in the neighborhood later known 
as Titusville, not far from the time these road records began. The 
puzzling thing about the town of Poughkeepsie records is that they 
seem to indicate that Lewis DuBois lived in the same neighborhood 
and, in fact, we have maps showing that at a later period he did live 
on this side of the Creek opposite the site of Titusville. It is not 
easy to conclude, however, that DuBois's Bridge and LeRoy's Bridge 
were the same, because they occur together in the same records in 
1751. Matthew, Mathys or Matthias DuBois bought a tract of some 
1,S00 acres of land on this side of the Wappingers, opposite Titus- 
ville, in 1730, and his descendants lived there for a long time. The 
county records show that a road was laid out "from Lassen's to 
Mathys Du Boys mill" in 174(3, and this record also mentioned Lewis 
DuBois, which proves that he was living somewhere in the same neigh- 
borhood along the Wappingers. Li 1771 the Matthew DuBois estate 
was settled by Peter DuBois, Edward Schoonmaker and Zephaniah 
Piatt, who made a map of the property. This shows a bridge across 
the stream, just back of the house now owned by Hon. A. B. Gray, 
and it appears from this and subsequent maps that Mr. Gray's house 
was built certainly as far back as 1771 and was the mansion of the 
various owners of the property for many years. The ^place was 
called "Anne's Field" in the early days, but by 1791 had become 
"Greenvale," the name it still bears. The neighborhood was evidently 
a center of some importance, the main road to the eastward crossing 
the stream there, and another road passing on to the southeast, marked 
on the maps of 1791 as "the road to Fishkill." It is possible that 
there were as early as 1750 two bridges across Wappingers Creek in 
that neighborhood, one near Mr. Gray's house and the old Titusville 
mill and the other near or at the site of the present Red Oak Mills. 
If so, one of them was doubtless LeRoy's Bridge and the other Du- 
Bois's Bridge. The road laid out in 1743 and mentioned in the 
Poughkeepsie town records in 1744 as "from Lassing's to DuBois's 
mill" probably indicates the present Spackenkill Road, for it comes 
down in the records finally as "the road to Van Keuren's" and some- 
times as "the road to Anthony's," evidently referring to the neighbor- 

1. *hiB house and property belonged to several well known-men. Including James Des 
Brosses In 1771, Francis Ingram, Abraham Adrlance (1813) and John E. Varick (1833). 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 207 

hood of the old ^Milton Ferry, where Captain Van Keuren and 
Theopilus Anthony lived before the Revolution. The ferry crossing 
the river there may have been established as early as 17.50. 

It should be stated that the road from Kaal Rock Landing past the 
Dutch Reformed Church and so on to Wappingers Creek and to the 
eastward did not follow the present Main street from the Post Road 
westward. Main street was not put through to the river until 1800. 
The road wound up the hill, crossing the lines of the present North 
Clover and Mill streets, reaching the Post Road to the north west- 
ward of the Dutch Church, then following Main street out to the 
neighborhood of Arlington, where it turned to the southward, following 
nearly the lines of the present Raymond avenue and winding around 
over the limestone ridge, called the Hornberg, and so on to Dubois's 
place and the bridge over the Wappingers. Additional evidence that 
this was the case is found in a statement in one of the surveys of this 
road where the "Fountaine KilHtie" is mentioned. This was ap- 
parently the "spring brook" that flows through Vassar College 
Lake. The earliest road to the northeast apparently branched off 
from this road at Arlington and was probably the same as that now 
called the Back Road to Pleasant Valley. A little later, certainly 
before 1771, another road branched where the Manchester Road now 
leads off and went around into the Wappingers valley, crossing the 
stream at the Zephaniah Piatt (now Frank DeGarmo) place. The 
bridge at this location may possibly have been one of the very early 
ones. It seems as if it should have been the LeRoy's bridge referred 
to above, but all the evidence I have found is to the contrary. The 
existence of several old stone houses on the road east of the Wapping- 
ers suggests that the bridge may possibly have been built before the 
present line of the turnpike across the flats on the west side of the 
stream. The short cut over the swamp and the brickyard hill was 
laid out by the Turnpike Company at the time of its organization 
in 1802, when the road to Pleasant Valley was taken over and much 
improved. This short cut is not shown in the town map made in 1798, 
nor is the Manchester road. The latter appears to have been put 
through about 1811. 



1. The ferry at Milton was not only a very old one, but it was the last on the river 
to run a horseboat, the old boat remaining in service till about the time of the Civil War. 
See Appendix for history of this ferry by C. M. Woolsey, of Marlborough. 



208 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Neither the county, nor the town of Poughkeepsie, grew very much 
until about 1740, when there was a continuous immigration from the 
south, much of it from Long Island. In 1745 a new and more commo- 
dious court house was built and in 1756 the English population had 
so much increased as to call for the occasional services of a missionary 
of the Church of England. The river trade gradually increased in 
importance as the farms were cleared and settled and a storehouse 
was built about 1761 at the foot of Pine street, and a few years later 
at the foot of Union street. The last named street or road was laid 
out by the town authorities in 1767 on petition of John DeGraff and 
his son-in-law, James Winans. It was in part an old road then, how- 
ever, but is not mentioned as requiring the services of a pathmaster 
before the Revolution. There was doubtless also a very early road to 
the mill at the mouth of the Fall Kill. Pine street was for a long time 
known as Richard Davis's Road, or the road to Richard Davis's land- 
ing, and was apparently a private road until nearly the close of the 
century. The "Caulrugh" road was still the only one in the limits 
of the City of Poughkeepsie mentioned in the records and even that is 
not distinctly shown on the map made in 1770 by WiU Cockburn. In 
that year there were some fifty or sixty houses in Poughkeepsie within 
the pi'esent city limits, twenty-five or thirty of which were on the main 
roads, iiot far from the center. A good deal of the land adjacent to 
these roads had already been divided into lots so small as to suggest 
that their occupants could not have been depending wholly upon farm- 
ing for their living. Though scarcely deserving the name of village 
in 1756, by 1776 the town had become one of some importance. 

In colonial times the houses of this neighborhood belonging to peo- 
ple of wealth were many of them stone houses, not handsome but of 
great durability. Few of them, however, remain, only two in the City 
of Poughkeepsie — ^the house on Main street now known as the Grov. 
George Clinton House and probably one of the residences of Clinton 
while in Poughkeepsie, and the old Noxon House on the east side of 
Market street. The last mentioned has been remodeled at the present 
time with a brick front and does not look like an old house, but it 
probably dates fnfem the neighborhood of 1741. Of the houses along 
the Post Road the only ones remaining in good preservation in the 
town of Poughkeepsie are the Davies House, opposite the Spackenkill 
Road, and the Abraham Fort House, about five miles below the city, 




GEORGE M. HINE. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 209 

near the Caspar Kill. This house has been much altered and en- 
larged by the present owner. The old Judge Piatt place, now occu- 
pied by Frank DeGarmo, near the Wappingers Creek above Man- 
chester, is perhaps more nearly than any of the other stone houses in 
the town in its original condition. Another house, probably older, is 
that occupied by A. B. Gray and referred to in the discussion of the 
roads leading to LeRoy's Bridge and DuBois's Bridge. The Theoph- 
ilus Anthony House, later the Gill House, on the river front at the 
mouth of the Spackenkill, is another notable house of colonial days. 

DUaiNG THE REVOLUTION. 

The leading people of the town of Poughkeepsie were conservative 
and not inclined at first to take much part in the agitation over the 
stamp act and tea taxes that so greatly aroused the dwellers in some 
of the seaport cities. The agitators worked very systematically to 
stir up the country, sending letters far and wide, asking the people 
everywhere to call meetings, pass resolutions, appoint committees, etc. 
In response to a letter from Isaac Low, chairman of the committee 
of correspondence in New York City, a meeting was held in Pough- 
keepsie, August 10, 1774, a report of which has been handed down. 
The people decided not to comply with the request of Mr. Low to 
appoint a committee, but adopted resolutions stating that they "agree 
fully in opinion with the many respectable bodies who have already 
published their sentiments in declaring that the unlimited right claimed 
by the British Parliament, in which we neither are or can be repre- 
sented, of making laws of every kind to be binding on the colonies, 
particularly of imposing taxes, whatever may be the name or form 
under which they are attempted to be introduced, is contrary to the 
spirit of the British Constitution and consequently inconsistent with 
the liberty which we as British subjects have a right to claim." The 
only action this meeting would take in the matter, however, was to 
instruct its members of the General Assembly to urge the Legislature 
"to lay before his Majesty an humble Petition and Remonstrance, 
setting forth the state of our several grievances and praying his royal 
interposition for a repeal of the said Acts." The resolutions also cited 
that "In the opinion of this meeting they ought and are willing to 
bear and pay such part and proportion of the national expenses as 
their circumstances will admit of, in such manner and form as the 
General Assembly of this Province shall think proper." 



210 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

This was the legal, orderly way to go to work to have grievances 
redressed, but the General Assembly of the Province of New York was 
not in sympathy with the revolutionary spirit of the times and noth- 
ing could be immediately expected from an appeal to it. Other meet- 
ings, perhaps held elsewhere in the county, did appoint correspon- 
dence committees and chose delegates to the Continental Congress at 
about this time. Certain leading Poughkeepsians, most of them mem- 
bers of the English Church (now Christ Church) refused to consider 
the acts of the First Continetal Congress binding and called them- 
selves "Friends of Constitutional Liberty." As the spirit of resent- 
ment against the mother country grew and as the revolutionary or- 
ganizations became more aggressive, these Friends of Constitutional 
Liberty were considerably harassed and a few were finally driven out 
of the county. They were strong enough in March, 1775, neverthe- 
less, with the aid of the Tory sheriff, "a judge of the inferior court, 
two of His Majesty's justices of the peace and a constable" to cut 
down a liberty pole erected near the house of John Bailey, two or three 
miles from Poughkeepsie. The Poughkeepsie precinct early in April 
refused to elect delegates to the Second Continental Congress, but only 
a few weeks later, when the news of the battles of Lexington and Con- 
cord reached here, the people became thoroughly aroused and the rep- 
resentatives sent to the Provincial Congress to meet in New York May 
22, included Gilbert Livingston and Zephaniah Piatt, of the Pough- 
keepsie precinct. This Provincial Congress promulgated the "Pledge 
of Association," which aU citizens were asked to sign In support of 
the measures of the Continental Congress. There were 207 signers 
and eighty who refused to sign in this town or precinct. The latter 
included some of the most substantial people. Some forty or fifty 
of these adhered so strongly to the king that their personal property 
was confiscated and sold, probably after they had fled from their 
homes, and Bartholomew Crannell's farm, wholly within what is now 
a closely built up part of the City of Poughkeepsie, was also con- 
fiscated and sold. Crannell street perpetuates his name and is a little 
west of the center of his farm of 102% acres. He entered the Brit- 
ish army and afterwards settled in Canada. Two of his daughters, 
however, married leaders of the Revolutionary party, Gilbert Liv- 
ingsfbn and Peter Tappen, and broke with their father. The Eng- 
lish Church suspended services when the Declaration of Independence 



POUGHEEEPSIE. 211 

was promulgated and the rector, Rev. John Beardsley, entered the 
British service as chaplain of Beverly Robinson's regiment of Loyal 
Americans, the same regiment that Crannell had entered. 

When the war was fairly under way Poughkeepsie became a center 
:^r the meeting of committees arranging for the defense of the Hud- 
son River, for furnishing provisions for the army and for recruiting 
service. Here were built the two frigates assigned to the State of 
New York for the American navy, and here was forged much of the 
great iron chain stretched across the River from Fort Montgomery, 
at the lower entrance of the Highlands. The frigates were launched 
in the autumn of 17T6, but never got to sea, for both had been sent 
to the defense of Fort Montgomery and they were destroyed during 
the raid of Vaughn and Wallace, in October, 177J. It may be well 
to repeat here that the chain stretched across the river at West Point 
at a later period was not made at Poughkeepsie but in Orange County. 

Poughkeepsie had its only actual taste of war at the time of 
Vaughn's raid. The British sent about thirty ships up the river, 
most of them gunboats, but some transports filled with troops. As 
they passed the town they fired a few shots, one of which went through 
the house of Henry Livingston, a house still standing, and another of 
which buried itself in the neighborhood between North Bridge stteet 
and Vassar street. The British are said also to have fired at the 
storehouse of James Winans, near the foot of Pine street. Nd con- 
temporary account of these incidents has been found, excepting as 
they are referred to in the letters of Gov. George Clinton and of General 
Israel Putnam. There were apparently but two companies or 
bodies of mihtia here at the time, one commanded by Col. Jacobus 
Freer of 171 men and the other by Col. Zephaniah Piatt of 120 men. 
It is said that they fired at the ships and had a cannon which was used 
from what we now call Reynolds HiU. This is probably true, but 
there is no evidence to show whether the firing was during the ad- 
vance or retreat of Vaughn or at both times. There was great alarm 
throughout the whole neighborhood at this time and Gov. Clinton 
sent his wife out to the neighborhood of Pleasant Valley for safe keep- 
ing. Gen. Israel Putnam followed the ships with a considerable body 
of Continentals by the Post Road, and it was probably knowledge of 
the fact that kept the British from attempting any serious depreda- 
tions on this side of the river. 



212 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

After the destruction of the forts that guarded the Highlands and 
the wanton destruction of Kingston (Oct. 16, 1777), Poughkeepsie 
became much more than ever before the center of revolutionary 
activity. The newly formed state government had scarcely organized 
in Kingston when the enemy arrived. After the retreat of the British, 
Gov. CHnton came to Poughkeepsie and the Council of Safety soon 
followed. Accommodations in the little town were scanty, but were 
the best to be had in any reasonably safe neighborhood and a number 
of pretty good houses belonging to ^Tories, who had been driven 
away, were available as residences, while the court house and perhaps 
the two churches could be used for legislative sittings. By proclama- 
tion dated December 15, 1777, Gov. Clinton called the Legislature to 
meet in Poughkeepsie on January 5, 1778. The first laws of the State 
of New York were passed here, and though the Legislature held two 
sessions in Kingston a few years later and two in Albany, most of its 
sessions were held here until after the evacuation of New York. A 
very large number of Gov. Clinton's letters are dated Poughkeepsie 
and show that the state offices were fixed here and that his residence 
remained here even when the Legislature met elsewhere. John Holt's 
paper, which had been removed from New York to Kingston and from 
Kingston to Poughkeepsie, contained the following notice. May S, 
1778 : ' "The Court of Probate of the State of New York is now open 
at Poughkeepsie in Dutchess County, and the office kept at the house 
of Captain Ezekiel Cooper, of that place." This is signed, "Thomas 
Treadwell, Judge of the said Court." In the winter of 1778-1779 
a regiment of Continentals was quartered in Poughkeepsie and bar- 
racks were erected on the south side of the village. 

An interesting matter concerning Poughkeepsie's connection with 
the Revolution was the fact that the first American flag used in battle 
after the adoption of the stars and stripes, at the defense of Fort 
Stanwix or Schuyler in the summer of 1777, was made in part from 
a blue coat belonging to Captain Abraham Swartwout, of Pough- 
keepsie, the rest of the flag having been made also from such similar 
materials as could be obtained from the soldiers. This statement is 
substantiated by the following letter: 

1. Becord bas recently been found in Holt's Journal for June 19tb, 1780. of tbe In- 
dictment of Richard Everltt along with Bartholemew Crannell, Key. John Beardsley, 
Bamuft Finknej, Isaac T. Lasslng and others for "adhering to tbe enemies of this State," 
■0 It Is certain that Everltt's bouse as well as Crannell's was available for Governor Clin- 
ton's use. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 213 

Poughkeepsie, 39 Aug. 1777. 
Colonel Peter Gansevort, Fort Schuyler. 

Dear Sir; — The great distance which your duty calls us apart obliges me at this 
time to give you this trouble which otherwise I would not — ^You may remember, 
agreeable to your promise, I was to have an order for eight yards of broadcloth 
on the commissary for clothing of this state in lieu of my blue cloak which was 
used for colors at Fort Schuyler. An opportunity now presenting itself, I beg 
you to send me an order enclosed to Mr. Jeremiah Renseler, pay master at Albany, 
to Mr. Henry Van Vaughter, Albany, where I will receive it, and you will oblige 
me, who will always acknowledge the same with true gratitude. Please make my 
compts to the other officers of the regiment. 
I am, dear sir. 

Your Hble. servt., 

Ab&aham Swabtwotjt, 

Captain. 
• 

Until the capture of Stony Point by General Wayne, in July, 1779, 
and the transfer of the seat of war to the south there were frequent 
rumors that the British were planning another raid up the Hudson 
and the authorities at Poughkeepsie were constantly on the alert, with 
an eye upon the Fishkill beacons, where it was expected that a big 
fire would notify them of impending invasion. At the commissary 
headquarters in Poughkeepsie there was great activity in collecting 
and forwarding stores and ammunition to the army and there was 
also a storehouse at Wappingers Falls. During the severe winter of 
1779-1780, when New York harbor became frozen over and all the mill 
streams of Dutchess froze solid, it was only with the greatest difficulty 
that enough provisions could be gathered to keep the garrison at 
West Point from starving. In September, 1780, the treason of Ar- 
nold created another scare along the Hudson and at the same time the 
constant depreciation of the Continental currency made the purchase 
of supplies and, indeed, the carrying on of any business more difficult 
than ever. The newspapers of the day, including both John Holt's 
Journal, published in Poughkeepsie from May, 1778, to November, 
1783, and Loudon's New York PacTcet, published in Fishkill, were 
filled with reports of meetings and discussions over the best means of 
regulating prices and preventing further depreciation of the currency. 

The Legislature was in session at Poughkeepsie when the news of 
the surrender of Cornwallis was received, in October, 1781, and both 
Houses immediately adjourned and went over to the Dutch Church, 
where a service of thanksgiving was conducted by Rev. John H. Liv- 



214 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ingston. The following account of this celebration is given in John 
Holt's Journal for November S, 1781: 

"On Monday, the 39 ultimo, when the first certain intelligence of the above 
glorious event (capture of the British army) arrived here, his Excellency, the 
Governor, the members of the Senate and Assembly, and many other persons, at- 
tended divine service in the Dutch Church, where the Revd. Dr. Livingston officiated 
in a solemn manner, to express their joy and gratitude to the Almighty for this 
signal interposition in our favor. The members of the Legislature then waited on 
his Excellency the Governor at his house with their congratulations and the voice 
of the cannon 13 times proclaimed the general joy, spreading the happy tidings; 
at night all the houses in and near the town were beautifully illuminated, a large 
bonfire was lighted, 13 skyrockets and other fireworks were played off and the 
evening concluded with social mirth and every decent demonstration of joy." 

Poughkeepsie received considerable renown and some growth from 
the Revolution and became a rendezvous and place of residence for 
a good many famous men. It attracted particularly young men who 
wished to study law, and among the first of these was James Kent, 
afterwards the famous chancellor and the author of Kent's Commen- 
taries. He entered the law office of Egbert Benson, the first State 
Attorney General, in November, 1781, and was admitted to the bar 
in 1785. He married a Poughkeepsie girl, Elizabeth Bailey, and lived 
here, practicing law and studying, until 1793. He hved in "a snug 
and endearing little cottage and cultivated an excellent garden," as 
he tells us in his Memoirs, located about where the Morgan House 
now stands. He was a law partner of Gilbert Livingston, who Hved 
in the next house to the east, while across the street, on the comer 
of what is now Academy street, lived Andrew Billings, the well-known 
silversmith of the day, who did work for Washington, Lord Sterling 
and other famous men. Kent was a strong Federalist and supporter 
of Hamilton and Jay, and though once elected to the Legislature, he 
was defeated for Congress in 1793 by his brother-in-law, Theodorus 
Bailey, and thereupon removed to New York. Other men afterwards 
distinguished, who were law students in Poughkeepsie or began their 
careers here soon after the Revolution, were James Tallmadge, Jr., 
James Emott, the elder, CadwaUader D. Colden, Thomas J. Oakley 
and Jonas Piatt. 

EATIFYING THE CONSTITUTION. 

The only really great event that has taken place in Poughkeepsie 
was the ratification of the Constitution of the United States. It was 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 215 

a great event because New York's ratification was essential to the 
success of the nation, and also because ratification was obtained only 
after a memorable forensic struggle in which such great men as Ham- 
ilton, Jay, George Chnton, and Chancellor Livingston took part. The 
court house in which the Legislature had met during the Revolution 
was burned in the spring of 1785 and a new one was built in 1787. 
The Legislature, after a long absence, returned in 1788 to hold its 
winter session in Poughkeepsie and appointed this place for the con- 
vention to act upon the Constitution. Gov. Clinton was very stropgly 
opposed to ratification and his influence determined the election of a 
large majority of the delegates against it. In ability, however, the 
majority was no match for the minority, which included Hamilton, 
Jay and Livingston. The delegates assembled June 17th and elected 
Gov. Clinton chairman. The debates dragged on until Virginia, the 
eighth state, and New Hampshire, the ninth, had ratified, and finally 
on July 15th Melancthon Smith, of this county, partly convinced by 
the eloquence and reasoning of Hamilton and Jay, moved that the 
Constitution should be ratified upon condition that a new convention 
of the states should be called to pass amendments. A ratification 
"upon condition" would not have been really a ratification at all, and 
Hamilton devoted all his energies to obtaining a change in the form of 
Smith's motion. At length Samuel Jones, of Queens County, one of 
the anti-federal members, was prevailed upon to move to substitute 
the words "in full confidence" for "upon condition." Melancthon 
Smith and Zephaniah Piatt agreed to and spoke in favor of this 
change and the victory was won, though only by the nairowest kind 
of a majority, the vote upon the ^ Jones motion being thirty-one to 



1. The delegates who yoted for Mr. Jones's motion, and they were practically the 
eame as those who voted for the final ratification, were John Jay, Richard Morris, John 
Sloss Hobart, Alexander Hamilton, Robert R. Livingston, Isaac Roosevelt, James Duane, 
Richard Harrison and Nicholas Low, comprising the complete delegation of the County 
of New York; Henry Scudder, Jonathan N. Havens, John Smith, of Suffolk; Samuel 
Jones, John Schenck, Nathaniel Lawrence and Stephen Carmen, the complete delegation 
from the County of Queens; Peter Lefferts, Peter Vandervoort, the delegates from Kings; 
Abraham Bancker and Gozen Ryerss, of Richmond ; Lewis Morris, Philip Livingston, Rich- 
ard Hatfield, Philip Van Cortland, Thaddeus Crane and Lott W. Saris, of Westchester; 
Zephaniah Piatt, Melancthon Smith, Gilbert Livingston and John DeWitt, of Dutchess, 
and John Williams, one of the delegates from Washington and Clinton Counties. Those 
who voted in the negative were Robert Yates, John Lansing, Jr., Israel Thompson, An- 
thony Ten Byck, of Albany; Thomas Tredwell, of Suffolk; George Clinton, John Cantine, 
George C. Schoonmaker, Ebenezer Clark, James Clinton, Dirck Wynkoop, the complete 
delegation from Ulster; John Haring, Jesse WoodhuU, Henry Wisner and John Wood, of 
Orange; Jacobus Swartwout, Jonathan Akins, of Dutchess; William Harper, Christopher 



216 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

twenty-nine. The final vote was thirty to twenty-seven. Smith, 
Piatt and Gilbert Livingston, of Dutchess County, the last two 
of Poughkeepsie, saved the day. The story of the convention has 
been fully told in an address delivered by the late John I. Piatt at 
the centennial of the ratification, June 26, 1888, and in an address 
by the late Rev. A. P. VanGieson, which has been published. The 
Journal of the Convention has also been recently republished by Vas- 
sars Brothers' Institute in fac simile form, of the original printed re- 
port of "The Debates and Proceedings of the Convention," in 1788. 

After the notable men of the convention had departed to their homes 
the little village of Poughkeepsie continued to reach out and grow. A 
map made in 1790 shows that some twenty houses in the central sec- 
tion were built between 1770 and 1790. The town of Poughkeepsie, 
also, must have been by that time pretty well settled and probably the 
area of cleared land was almost as great as it is at present. The 
limekilns at Barnegat were beginning to flourish certainly at this 
time. C. M. Woolsey's history of Marlborough publishes a map 
made in 1797 by Dr. Benjamin Ely, which shows limekilns on this side 
of the river at Barnegat and also at the mouth of the Wappingers. 

New Hamburg, first called the Hook Landing, afterwards Wap- 
pingers Landing, had made some progress and there was certainly by 
1789, and probably much earlier, a ferry at Captain VanKeuren's, or 
Theophilus Anthony's, about three miles below the village, at the 
neighborhood that was later called Milton ferry and still later Came- 
lot. It is called "Lewis's Ferry" in one of the early maps. (The 
present Camelot railroad station, it should be remembered, was moved 
from its old location a few years ago to Barnegat, where it now 
stands.) 

The ferry at the village of Poughkeepsie was regularly established 
by 1798 and had probably been running irregularly for a long time 
before that. Poughkeepsie's first real home newspaper, first called 
the Covmtry Journal and Poughkeepsie Advertiser, a name soon 

p. Tates, John Frey, John Winn^ Volkert Veeder and Henry Staring, of Montgomery; 
Ichahod Parker, David Hopkins and Albert Baker, of Washington and Clinton ; Peter 
Van Ness, John Bay, Matthew Adgate, of Columbia. 

It cannot be said that the eflCorts of George Clinton, John Lansing, Melancthon Smith 
and the other Anti-Federalists In the convention were without important results, for they 
may be said to have succeeded, in spite of the final form of New York's latlflcation, In 
forcingt upon the states the first series of amendments to the Constitution which em- 
bodied the bill of rights. 




THE "CLINTON HOUSE." 

Owned and preserved by the State as a Revolutionary Memorial, in the care and 
cnstody of Mawenawasigh Chapter, Daughters of the American Revolution. 



The top picture shows the hiiilding before alteration. Copyrighted lf)04 hy Helmus W. 
Barrett. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 217 

changed to the Poughkeepsie Journal, was established by Nicholas 
Power in 1785. It is still published, one hundred and fourteen years 
later, as the Poughkeepsie Eagle. It became at an early date a Fed- 
eralist newspaper, supporting Washington and Hamilton, and toward 
the close of the century opposition papers made their appearance, 
though all were very short Uved until the establishment of the Political 
Barometer, in 1802. Isaac Mitchell, a writer of some note, was the 
editor of this paper for several years and author of the popular novel, 
"Alonzo and Melissa," which was published first in its columns as a 
continued story in 1804. 

THE VILLAGE OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

March 27, 1799, Poughkeepsie was incorporated as a^ village, the 
charter providing for a board of five trustees to be elected on the third 
Tuesday in May. That, however, was only for the first election, all 
subsequent elections for many years coming in April. The boundaries 
of the village as then fixed remain the limits of the City of Pough- 
keepsie to-day. The first trustees were James S. Smith, Valentine 
Baker, Andrew BiUings, Ebenezer Badger and Thomas Nelson. The 
extant records of the village begin in 1803, when Andrew BiUings 
was president. The village then had something like 1,500 inhabitants 
and the population of the whole town in 1800 was 3,246. In 1810 
the town had 4,669 inhabitants and the village 2,981. In 1855, when 
the city had been taken out, the town had left but 3,110 people. The 
town added population very slowly down to 1900, when the growth 
of one of the suburbs of the city, called Bull's Head, East Pough- 
keepsie and more recently Arlington, had made much progress, chiefly 
because of the growth of Vassar College. ChanjiingviUe, that part of 
Wappingers Falls north of the creek, accounts for several hundred of 
the town's population. 

The earliest recorded act of the trustees authorized the digging of 
wells for a village water supply. There was already a fire company 
in existence with a fire engine. The citizens were required to turn out 
to fires and and assist in extinguishing them by forming bucket hues 
and passing water from the nearest well or other source of supply to 
the engine. The buckets were the property of the people individually 
and after each fire were collected at the dourt house where their owners 
came to pick them out. The most notable fire of the early village 
days was the burning of the court house, September 25, 1806, and 



218 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

on that occasion the difficulty of procuring water was a subject of 
comment. A new court house, the one torn down in 1903, was built 
in 1809 and the village trustees at a meeting held May 25th of that 
year warned the commissioners who had the work of construction in 
charge that "they do not build the said public building further east- 
ward on Market street than the ground in range of the houses of Joseph 
Nelson, John Forbes and Valentine Baker, situate on said Market 
street — also that the said company of commissioners be notified not 
to put unslacked lime adjacent to the market so as to cause injury 
to the village." The market at that time stood in the middle of Mar- 
ket street, at the junction with Main. It was frequently the subject 
of controversy and stood for a while adjacent to the Dutch Burying 
Ground — ^that is on the corner north of the present building of Smith 
Brothers. The graveyard remained there until 1830, when the prop- 
erty was leased for a hundred years and the Brewster block, still 
standing, was erected By 1830 the village had begun to grow very 
rapidly and land was considered too valuable to allow a burying 
ground on its most prominent comer. It is perhaps rather too bad 
that this open space in the center of the city could not have been pre- 
served, and it is certainly to be regretted that the court house was not 
built in the center of the square, between Main, Market and Washing- 
ton streets, where the land in 1809 was worth little. Washington 
street, I think, had not at that time been extended through to Union, 
and on the plot where the City Hall stands was the residence of 
Ebenezer Badger. West of the court house on Union street there 
was only a small frame building or two, one of which was the fire 
engine house. The village market remained in the center of Market 
street for a number of years after the construction of the court house, 
but had been removed for some time when the new market building, 
now the City Hall, was erected in 1831. The new market building, 
the upper floor of which was used as a village hall and the lower floor 
as a market, cost $7,200. Before the time of the Civil War its use 
as a market had been given up and it was rented to the United States 
Government for a postoffice during the early years of the war. The 
postoffice remained there until the present government building was 
erected in 1886 under the first postmastership of Robert H. Hunter, 
^mong the memorable events in Poughkeepsie during the early part 
of the nineteenth century was the visit of General LaFayette, Septem- 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 219 

ber 16, 1824. Many people must have stayed up all night to greet 
the famous Frenchman, for the steamboat James Kent on which he was 
a passenger arrived at about 2:30 A. M., and was welcomed by a great 
bonfire and a military salute from the Kaal Rock. LaFayette landed 
early and was greeted with an address of welcome at the Forbus House 
(on the site of the Nelson House) by Col. Henry A. Livingston, who 
compared the occasion to the visits of Washington to the village and 
to the ratification of the Constitution. Gen. LaFayette in reply re- 
ferred to his own former visits to Poughkeepsie and to the "great and 
astonishing changes" he beheld in the place. An official breakfast, 
for which the village trustees appropriated sixty-five doUars, was held 
at the Poughkeepsie Hotel, then called the Myers Hotel, and the 
breakfast room had been elaborately decorated foB the occasion by a 
committee of ladies. George P. Oakley described it as an apartment 
of "Portraits and Banners and Emblems and Evergreens and Flowers 
and Festoons and Garlands and Temples and Plate and Porcelain and 
Arches and Mottoes." 

Ten years later, or July 3, 1834, the village mourned the death of 
LaFayette. There were public services, a gun was fired every half 
hour all day from "Pine's HiU on Mansion Square," while a long pro- 
cession wound through the village and the bells were tolled. 

An important event was the establishment of the first central village 
water supply by the building of the reservoir on top of Cannon street 
hill in 1836, at a cost of $30,000. Water was pumped from the 
Fall Kill and was used only for fire extinguishing purposes, pipes being 
laid only on the main streets. The reservoir happened to be empty 
on May 12, 1836, when Poughkeepsie was visited by the greatest fire 
in its history, a fire which burned nearly all the buildings on the south 
side of Main street, between Liberty and Academy streets. At one 
time the destruction of a very large section of the village seemed in- 
evitable, as buildings on the north side of the street were several times 
on fire, but the force pump which supplied water to the reservoir had 
been started and water came down through the pipes at the critical 
time, so that the flames were controlled. 

Between 1830 and 1837 the village grew rapidly and a remarkable 
real estate boom was inaugurated by the Poughkeepsie Improvement 
Party, which included such men as Paraclete Potter, editor of the 
Poughkeepsie Journal, Nathaniel P. Tallmadge, United States Sena- 



220 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

tor, Matthew Vassar, Walter Ctinningham, George P. Oakley and 
Gideon P. Hewitt. Many acres of land were plotted and sold in lots, 
two chief centers of development being around Mansion Square and 
the old French farm, south of the English Burying Ground, that is, 
south of the present location of Christ Church. The industries and 
schools estabhshed by these enterprising men are described under spe- 
cial headings. Some of their enterprises were daring in the extreme. 
Among them may be noted here a locomotive factory, started long 
before there was any railroad in the neighborhood. They did much 
more than establish enterprises ; they made Poughkeepsie an up-to- 
date, model village according to the light of the times. The streets in 
the central section were aU paved with cobblestones and the sidewalks 
paved with brick. Trees were planted and efforts were made to make 
the town as attractive as possible. In the lower part of the town 
Delafield street was expected to become a leading residence street and 
land was sold under the restriction that all houses should be placed 
fifty feet back from the street, which was named after John Dela- 
field, a New York capitalist who backed many of the local financial 
enterprises. Nathaniel P. Tallmadge built there his own mansion, a 
fine house, still standing. The real estate boom was so notable as to 
attract considerable attention in New York and it is mentioned in 
many contemporary letters, particularly in those published by Free- 
man Hunt, who says, under date September 25, 1835, "Lots which 
were sold eighteen months ago for $600 have been sold for $4,000. 
A plot of fourteen acres in the suburbs of the village which was pur- 
chased ten months since for $4,000 was recently sold for $14,000. 
Another plot which could have been purchased nine months ago for 
$10,000 was sold a few days ago for $24,000." The many buildings 
still standing about town, ornamented by Grecian columns and por- 
ticos, all date from this period. The panic of 1837 ruined nearly all 
the members of the improvement party, except Matthew Vassar, who 
was able to buy what others had to sell and is believed to have made 
substantial additions to his fortune by doing so. Several of the lead- 
ing men of the time went west after the panic to retrieve their for- 
tunes. Senator Tallmadge was appointed Governor of the territory 
of Wisconsin in 1844 and Paraclete Potter had been made registrar 
of the United States Land Office in Milwaukee in 1841. Gideon P. 
Hewitt and Henry Conkhn were among others who went to Wisconsin. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 221 

The collapse of the real estate boom and of several enterprises es- 
tablished by the improvement party retarded the growth of the vil- 
lage only temporarily, for the schools founded at this time continued 
to flourish and gave the place a wide reputation. In 1830 the village 
population was 5,0S3, in 1840 it was 7,710, in 1856, after incorpora- 
tion as a city, it was 12,763. The rate of growth was evidently not 
less after 1841 than between 1830 and 1840. 

The Hudson River Railroad was built through from New York to 
Poughkeepsie in 1849, and for a time trains ran to the lower part 
of the city, where passengers were transferred to steamboats, the 
heavy rock cutting beyond that point proving a source of delay. The 
first train, however, came through to the station on January 4, 1850. 
The Hudson River Railroad was distinctly a Poughkeepsie enterprise. 
Isaac Piatt had been advocating it for a long time in the Eagle and 
had taken a great deal of interest in obtaining subscriptions for the 
stock. In March, 1842, a convention of delegates from river towns 
was brought together at the village hall in Poughkeepsie, and though 
there were not very many outsiders present, the meeting ajppointed a 
central executive finance and correspondence committee, made up 
whoUy of Poughkeepsians, Matthew Vassar, Thomas L. Davies, Isaac 
Piatt and E. B. Killey; and the Poughkeepsie Telegraph in describ- 
ing the completion of the enterprise in 1850, gives the chief credit to 
this committee, which as early as 1842 opened subscription books and 
raised $1,450 for preliminary expenses of obtaining a complete sur- 
vey and a charter. New York City was very much inclined to oppose 
the railroad at first and took little interest in it until after it had 
been practically assured. When the charter was passed its enemies 
succeeded in incorporating in it a requirement that $3,000,000 must 
be subscribed before March 1, 1847, with ten per cent paid in. The 
newspapers of the day contained urgent appeals to the people to "save 
the charter," and the Eagle on February 27 printed the announce- 
ment that the amount had been raised, together with a historical sketch 
of the progress of the enterprise and the difficulties encountered by 
the original promoters. So rejoiced were the people at the announce- 
ment that bonfires were lighted and salutes were fired and there was a 
formal celebration with a splendid spread at the Poughkeepsie Hotel, 
of which Mr. Rutzer was then the landlord. While the efl'orts to 



222 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

raise money for the railroad were in progress the first ^telegraph office 
in Foughkeepsie was opened, October 19, 1846. This office was of 
peculiar interest to the people of Foughkeepsie because Frof. Samuel 
F. B. Morse, the inventor of the telegraph, lived in the town of Fough- 
keepsie, only two or three mUes south of the village, in the place now 
owned by William H. Young. Frof. Morse was known to every resi- 
dent of the village and was an officer in the Fresbyterian Church. In 
1850, besides its first railroad, the village also had its first gas lights 
and 1852 saw the establishment of its first daily newspaper, the Press. 

THE CITY OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

The City of Foughkeepsie was incorporated by the act of the Legis- 
lature, March 28, 1854, and the first city election was held the follow- 
ing April, when James Emott, Jr., became the first Mayor. He re- 
signed in 1856 to become a Justice of the Supreme Court, as his 
father had been before him. One of the early aldermen was Henry 
W. Shaw (Josh Billings). The second mayor was Charles W. Swift. 
Apart from some notable political meetings on Forbus Hill, the space 
which remained open for many years between Union and Church streets, 
back of the Forbus House, nothing of great importance took place 
in Foughkeepsie down to the Civil War. In October, 1856, fifteen 
steamboats ran excursions to bring people to a great Democratic rally 
on Forbus Hill. In the same month a cavalcade of eight hundred 
horsemen came into town to attend a Republican rally. The cam- 
paign of 1860 was even more memorable, when the Wide Awakes and 
Little Giants paraded the town night after night. 

The outbreak of the Civil War, of course, caused intense excitement 
in Foughkeepsie and there were many war meetings to aid the re- 
cruiting. After the first companies had gone and the enthusiasm to 
volunteer had worn away the city voted large sums of money and in- 
curred considerable debt for bounties. The story of the regiments is 
told elsewhere in the military history of the county. During the war 
a scarcity of small change occurred in this city, as elsewhere, and the 

1. The telegraph line was laid from Buffalo to Foughkeepsie before It was extended 
to New York City, as Is shown from the following Item found In a Foughkeepsie paper of 
the date of May 1, 1850, by Theodore W. Davis : "The office of the Magnetic Telegraph will 
be removed this day from Its former location In Garden street to rooms over the store of 
Mr. Adam Henderson, corner of Main and Market streets. Wires are now stretched from 
Buffalo to this place and will soon be completed to New York. Mr. Curtlss Is the op- 
erator." It Is said that messages were sent from Buffalo to Foughkeepsie for a. while 
and were here put Into the mall for New York. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 223 

city issued its own shinplasters, as did also a number of business firms, 
until they were forbidden to do so by law. One of the leading events 
of the war years was a Sanitary Fair, held at 178-180 Main street, 
then an unoccupied building owned by Matthew Vassar, March 15 to 
19, 1865. The whole city was interested in it and the net proceeds 
were more than $16,000. The close of the war brought celebrations 
over the return of the soldiers and a great throng of students to East- 
man College, which added much to the prosperity of the city. Harvey 
G. Eastman soon became a leading citizen and in 1865 purchased and 
beautified the property which became known as Eastman Park and has 
just been purchased (February, 1909,) by the city to become a per- 
manent city park. Vassar College, opened in September, 1865, 
brought at first but 853 students, but was destinednto become a most 
important factor in the life of the city. It had grown to 1,000 soon 
after the close of the century. More will be found about these insti- 
tutions under the heading of "Schools." 

Before 1870 the second great period of growth, comparable to that 
of the days of the old improvement party between 1830 and 1837, was 
in fuU sway. This later period of improvement included the building 
of the new water works, pumping from the Hudson river with sand 
filtration, the installation of a complete sewerage system, the Fall- 
kill improvement by which the old mill ponds on the kill were abohshed 
and the stream was walled in, the Poughkeepsie & Eastern Railroad, 
the building of the city railroad and the beginning of the Pough- 
keepsie Bridge. Harvey G. Eastman, George Innis, Mark D. Wilbur 
and George P. Pelton were leaders in this latter improvement era. 
The Poughkeepsie & Eastern Railroad had been long advocated by the 
Eagle and at one time, just before the war, there seemed a chance of 
its construction. Whatever chance there was, however, was destroyed 
by the panic of 1857 and the project was not again taken up until 
after the war. The railroad was finished to the Connecticut hne in 
1872, but the difficulty of procuring capital was so great that it could 
not be completed until the city had added $600,000 to its own in- 
debtedness to push the work through. The waterworks and the Fall- 
kill improvement together with the P. & E. bonds and the bounty bonds 
increased the debt of the city to about two million dollars, which at 
seven per cent interest imposed a burden so great that almost a quar- 
ter of a century was to elapse before the people felt free to go ahead 
with needed improvements again. 



224 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The sand filter beds installed with the new water system in 1872 
were the first successfiil sand filters in the country and are still in use, 
though rebuilt and much enlarged. 

The most important and far reaching enterprise of the period suc- 
ceeding the Civil War was the Poughkeepsie Bridge, and it stands 
to-day a monument to the energy and perseverance of Harvey G. 
Eastman and John I. Piatt. In the earlier movement Eastman was 
the leader. He was both mayor and member of Assembly and ob- 
tained the legislation necessary to allow the placing of piers in the 
river. John I. Piatt obtained from tlie Pennsylvania Railroad presi- 
dent, J. Edgar Thompson, the necessary financial backing and the 
cornerstone was laid with great ceremony December 17, 1873. The 
panic of that year had already occurred, however, and the death of 
Mr. Thompson caused the Pennsylvania Railroad to repudiate its 
subscription. After that nothing could be done for a long period but 
keep the charter alive and wait for better times, and meanwhile, in 
1878, Mr. Eastman died. The bulk of the work then fell upon Mr. Piatt, 
who became member of Assembly in 1886. He obtained the charter 
extensions necessary and succeeded in defeating the rival Storm King 
project, and also in enlisting new financial support from New Eng- 
land and from Philadelphia. A group of Philadelphia capitalists 
finally financed the enterprise to completion and the first train crossed 
the bridge in December, 1888. The ideas of its promoters, however, 
that it was to become a great link between the coal fields of Pennsyl- 
vania and the factories of New England and that it would make a 
large city of Poughkeepsie, hardly began to be realized for another 
twenty years. 

The capitalists who furnished the money for the building of the 
bridge were unable to make satisfactory arrangements for the pur- 
chase of the Poughkeepsie & Eastern Railroad and consequently built 
a line paralleling it and connecting with the Hartford & Connecticut 
Western Railroad. On the west side of the river a railroad was built 
to Campbell Hall, where it made connections with the Ontario & West- 
ern and the Erie, and soon afterwards a connection was made there 
also with the Lehigh. After several financial vissicitudes and re- 
organizations the bridge and its connecting railroads, against which 
the irunk lines of the country seemed to combine, became known as 
the Central New England system, and in 1904< came into possession 



POUGHKEEPSIE, 22? 

of the powerful New York, New Haven & Hartford system. Mean- 
time, soon after the completion of the bridge a railroad was built from 
Poughkeepsie to Hopewell Junction, connecting the bridge with the 
Highland division of the New York, New Haven & Hartford, pre- 
viously the New York and New England Railroad. It is this branch 
which now carries the bulk of the business. One of the first results 
of the consoUdation with the New Haven road was the running of the 
Highland division passenger trains to Poughkeepsie instead of Fish- 
kill Landing, and the abandonment of the car ferry freight transfer 
at Fishkill Landing followed. In 1907, the old Poughkeepsie & East- 
ern having passed through a number of bankruptcies, was purchased 
by the New York, New Haven & Hartford and joined with the Central 
New England, a system which now includes all railroads reaching 
the Hudson from the east in Dutchess County. In 1907 the bridge 
was strengthened by the addition of a central girder, which in- 
volved almost a rebuilding. The first indication of increased business 
came in 1908, when a large amount of freight, previously trans- 
ferred by car ferry through the East River and New York Harbor, 
was routed, by the New Haven road via the Poughkeepsie Bridge. 

Plans were then made to double track the railroad from Hope- 
well Junction to Poughkeepsie and from Poughkeepsie westward to 
Campbell HaU, and the work is now (March, 1909,) actively in prog- 
ress. Meanwhile, the bridge lines have already furnished locations 
for most of the new factories that have been brought to Poughkeepsie 
and have taken all but one or two of the lumber and coal firms away 
from the river front. Largely through the efforts of an active 
Chamber of Commerce, the city appears to be entering upon a new 
period of growth and the bridge furnishes the central impetus. The 
prediction of Eastman that we should some time have a population of 
fifty thousand seems likely to be verified. 

The expansion of municipal activity incident to the improvements 
inaugurated before 1873 and the great debt accumulated led to an 
important revision of the City Charter in 1874, by which the present 
system of government by boards was fully established, with a common 
council having supervisory power over all expenditures through sub- 
mission to it of the estimates of each board. This Charter also 
abolished the spring election, which had been in existence from the 
time the village of Poughkeepsie was incorporated. The revision of 



226 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1874 was made as the result of a number of meetings organized by 
a committee from the wards, appointed by Judge Barnard and Judge 
Taylor, and the Charter itself was largely the work of John I. Piatt 
and Allard Anthony. The city boards were aU elected by the people 
until 1883, when the mayor was given power to appoint the water 
board and also a police board, then created. In 1896 the water board 
was abolished and a board of public works was created to have charge 
of the streets and parks as well as the water and sewer systems. Its 
members were elected until 1901, when the centralization of all power 
in the hands of the mayor was completed and he was given authority 
to appoint aU boards and executive officers. In 1902 the offices of 
recorder and justice of the peace were abolished and a city court was 
established with Joseph Morschauser as its first judge. Since that 
time the only important Charter change was one made in 1906, giving 
authority to place all wires under ground on the main streets. 

EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. 

In view of the fact that Poughkeepsie has so long been known as a 
city of schools it is interesting to record that the first state law "for 
the encouragement of schools" was passed in 1796 at a legislative 
session held in Poughkeepsie. This act was passed in response to a 
recommendation from Gov. George Clinton and became the foundation 
of the state system of aid to schools and of the state regents. It did 
not give rise at once to a pubhc school system in the modern sense, 
meaning free schools, and aid was extended mostly to incorporated 
schools or academies, though there were also a few schools of lower 
grade that may have received aid. The Dutchess County Academy 
was already well established in Poughkeepsie when the act was passed. 
This long famous institution had been originally founded at Fishkill 
and it is said that the frame work of the building was removed to 
Poughkeepsie in 1792, when it was erected on the southwest comer 
of Cannon and Academy streets, giving Academy street its name. The 
lot, 130% feet on Academy street and 112% on Cannon, extended 
westward to that on which the Young Women's Christian Association 
building now stands. The old building is still in part in existence, as 
it was removed in 1837 to the northeast corner of North Clinton and 
Thompson streets, where it still remains, though much altered from its 
original appearance. A large new building had been erected in 1836 
on South Hamilton street, corner of Montgomery, the same building 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 227 

which is now the Old Ladies' Home. Many well-known men and women 
obtained their education in the Dutchess County Academy. Its sec- 
ond record book, beginning with 1840 is preserved in the Adriance 
Memorial Library and begins with a report of the trustees to the 
regents for the year ending October 9, 1839. The first pages con- 
tain a description of the new building and property, which was valued 
as follows: 

Value of lot for Academy Building $ 2,000.00 

" " building thereon 11,128.15 

library 169.00 

Philosophical Apparatus 167.60 

" Academy Furniture 800.00 



cc ei 
(C « 



• 



Total $13,758.65 

There was a debt of $5,540.51 for the payment of which, with in- 
terest and insurance, a fund of $400 was set apart from the receipts 
each year, while the balance went to the principal, who paid from it 
the assistant teachers. That the principal made no great fortune 
from the arrangement is evident from the statement that the receipts 
for the year amounted to $1,514.12. There were all together five 
teachers during the year, but only four at any one time. R. E. Rob- 
erts, a graduate of the University of Cambridge, England, taught 
languages. For the first three months he received $66. "For the 
next six months his compensation was $200 for five hours' service each 
day. About two weeks from the close of the term Mr. Roberts was 
removed from the Academy by his death in the twenty-seventh year 
of his age. He had been a teacher about two years." Ansel H. Tobey, 
aged thirty-one, taught penmanship and natural sciences. He re- 
ceived $125 per term of twenty-two weeks and had been a teacher 
about five years. Darwin Canfield, aged twenty-two, taught English 
and Arithmetic and received $400 a year. Luther Northrup, forty- 
three, taught history and geography and was paid $400 a year for 
teaching one-half of the hours. William Jenney, the principal, was a 
graduate of New York University, twenty-nine years of age, and of 
fours years experience. He was the first principal in the new build- 
ing. One of the last in the old building was Eliphas Fay and he and 
William MacGeorge were perhaps the most notable of the principals 



228 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

of the Academy. Fay afterwards conducted a private school in Union 
street. Following were the rates of tuition in the Academy in 1839- 
1840, per quarter: 

The Common Branches, including reading, spelling, writing, gram- 
mar and arithmetic $4.50 

The Common Branches with history 5.00 

The above with chemistry, book keeping, philosophy and Algebra 6.00 

The higher branches of Mathematics 7-00 

Greek and Latin 8.00 

French and Drawing, extra per quarter 5.00 

The terms were of twenty-three weeks and began the first Wednes- 
days of May and November, each preceded by a vacation of three 
weeks. Board in the family of the principal, including stationery and 
aU necessary expenses, was $90 a term, and it was stated that good 
board in families in the vicinity of the Academy could be obtained at 
$3.00 a week. The report was adopted by A. G. Storm, John Brush, 
Alexander Forbus, Thomas L. Davies, Richard D. Davis, Peter P. 
Hayes, Frederick Barnard and Leonard Maison, trustees. The 
Academy finally had to be given up on account of the progress made 
by the High School. In 1866 the Academy building was rented to 
the city, and the High School, after having been discontinued a year, 
was re-opened there. It is a matter of some regret that the city 
authorities did not see fit to continue it in the old building, but a more 
central location was demanded and in 1870 the building was sold 
to Jonathan Warner, founder of the Old Ladies' Home, and the money 
received was donated by the Academy trustees to the Board of Edu- 
cation to be used in the construction of the present High School. 

The reputation of being "the City of Schools" came to Pough- 
keepsie mostly through the institutions founded during the improve- 
ment party's best days, and the Poughkeepsie Collegiate School, 
founded in 1835, was the greatest of them and has left the most con- 
spicuous monument — the Grecian temple which still crowns College 
Hill. This school was opened in 1836 with Charles Bartlett as prin- 
cipal and it was soon attracting boys from aU parts of the state and 
nation. Mr. Bartlett ranked as a leading educator of his time 
and, the Collegiate School was regarded in its day as quite as impor- 
tant and quite as much an object of local pride as Vassar College is 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 229 

to-day. Charles Bartlett died in 1857 and the school was continued 
by Otis Bisbee and Charles B. Warring, who had been among his lead- 
ing teachers. Soon after the outbreak of the Civil War Mr. Bisbee 
and Mr. Warring dissolved partnership and the latter erected a build- 
ing on Smith street and opened the Poughkeepsie Military Institute, 
the first military school in Poughkeepsie. Mr. Bisbee introduced the 
military drill on College Hill a year or two later and remained there 
until 1867, when the property was sold to settle the estate of Charles 
Bartlett. He then erected the present Riverview Academy in the 
southwest part of the town and it has continued an excellent and popu- 
lar school under the management of his son, Joseph Bartlett Bisbee. 
The Warring School continued for a considerable number of years 
and its building is now a public school. R,iver\Bew is the only sur- 
vivor of the institutions of the Improvement Party, but Lyndon Hall 
dates almost to their time. It was organized in 1848 as the Pough- 
keepsie Female Collegiate Institute by Dr. Charles H. P. McCleUan, 
who conducted it for about ten years. His successor was Rev. C. D. 
Rice. Prof. G. W. Cook bought the property in 1870 when the school 
became known as Cook's Collegiate Institute, a name which it retained 
until purchased by its present principal, Samuel Wells Buck, who 
christened it Lyndon Hall. 

The Poughkeepsie Female Academy, one of the most important in- 
stitutions of the improvement party, erected the large building on 
Cannon street, now owned by the Women's Christian Temperance 
Union. This academy was founded in 1836 and was for many years 
the largest of the boarding schools for girls in the city. The last 
principal was Rev. D. G. Wright, who discontinued the school in 1885. 

There have been probably not less than fifty private schools at 
various times in Poughkeepsie, some of them rather large institutions. 
The Cottage Hill Seminary, on the east side of Garden street where 
the Shwartz block now stands, was an important school for girls for 
many years and the building was last used as a boys' school under 
the principalship of John Miley for a few years in the early eighties. 
Lydia Booth, a step niece of Matthew Vassar, was one of the early 
proprietors of the girls' school there. A school of some renown was 
conducted by the Friends for a number of years in a building still 
standing on Mansion Square. It was one of the places visited by 
Henry Clay when he came to Poughkeepsie in 1839. The present 



230 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Putnam Hall School for girls occupies a building erected soon after 
the war by Mr. and Mrs. Edward White. It was for a long time 
known as Brooks Seminary. Space will permit only mere mention of 
other private schools long since gone, like the Pelham Institute, Bish- 
op's or Leslie's for boys. Miss Bosworth's School, Butler's and 
Bockee's for girls and the Quincy, the latter only recently given up. 

An institution of much importance for a time was the "State and 
National Law School," brought to Poughkeepsie from Ballston in 
December, 1852. Its president was John W. Fowler, a man of con- 
siderable prominence as a lecturer, and was located in the building 
at 233-235 Main street. A good many lawyers of wide reputation 
were educated there, including several who became prominent on the 
bench. Judge Conklin, of Utica, father of Roscoe Conklin, Judge 
Henry Booth, of Chicago, and Matthew Hale were for a time among 
its professors. This institution was crippled by the Civil War and 
soon closed. 

Eastman College was started in a very small way by Harvey G. 
Eastman in the autumn of 1859. Its first quarters were in the same 
Main street building, then called the Library Building, where the law 
school was located. Eastman was a wonderfully clever advertiser and 
soon drew students, although he had almost no equipment. He made 
a specialty of reaching the young men whose terms of enlistment were 
expiring in the army and at the close of the Civil War so many of 
them had come here that they taxed his abihty and the resources of 
the city to care for them. Two or three old churches, the upper 
floor of the City Hall and all the unoccupied rooms that could be ob- 
tained were rented and fitted with desks, and the 1,800 students were 
scattered all over town wherever they could find a place to board. 
Though his equipment was scanty, Eastman infused some of his own 
energy into his students and brought the most eminent men of the 
day here to lecture to them. The number of students never again 
approached the crowd that came here following the war, but the 
college has always been a most important institution and seldom has 
less than four or five hundred students. After Mr. Eastman's death 
it was conducted by Ezra White, who erected the present college build- 
ing on Washington street. Clement Carrington Gaines has been the 
president since 1884 and has considerably widened the course of study. 

Away back before 1830 Poughkeepsie had a Lyceum Association 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 231 

and a Mechanics' Literary and Benevolent Association. The latter 
had a library of about 270 volumes and a cabinet of minerals. These 
Associations were united and incorporated in 1838 as the Pough- 
keepsie Lyceum of Literature, Science and Mechanic Arts." The Ly- 
ceum Association was for many years a very active and important 
educational force. It did not attempt to make money and the price 
of the lectures was put so low as to be in the reach of nearly every- 
body, but it brought here many of the leading men of the times. It 
is still in existence, though its lecture course was given up in 1889 
and its annual income, now about $126, is devoted to the purchase of 
books for the City Library. 

The Public Library, which brought together the books of this older 
Association and of earlier circulating libraries, was moved into what 
was called the Library Building, already mentioned, 23S-235 Main 
street, early in December, 1852. The Library had been formed under 
the school district library law in 1835. With the exception of a year 
or two in the court house, it remained there until the Library and 
High School building was erected in 1872 and gradually grew to be 
a large library. In October, 1898, it was removed to the beautiful 
Adriance Memorial Library building, which had been erected and pre- 
sented to the city by the children of John P. Adriance as a memorial 
to their father and mother. The Library soon afterwards was taken 
out of the control of the board of education and given to a board of 
library trustees, first appointed in 1899. In 1872 the Library con- 
tained not quite 5,000 volumes and the number of books loaned was 
less than 20,000 per year. In 1908 the number of volumes was 44,577 
and the number loaned about 112,000. 

The public schools are now, of course, the schools in which the citi- 
zens are most interested, but they were not among the first. There 
was a school of some kind in Poughkeepsie certainly as early as the 
Revolution, and on a map made in 1790 the Church street lot, on 
which public school No. 2 now stands, is marked "the school house 
lot." A school building has been located there ever since. It was the 
site for many years of the Lancaster School, founded in 1811, a 
school which in a sense was the forerunner of our present public school 
system, though it was only partly a free school. A few free pupils 
were educated in the Dutchess County Academy and in the other 
incorporated schools and there were at an early date what were 



232 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

called "common schools," partly supported by subscription. The free 
public schools of Poughkeepsie, entirely supported by taxation, date 
from 184S, when the first board of education was created by act of 
the Legislature. David L. Starr, Ira Armstrong, Thomas Austin, 
Benjamin Gile, Isaac Piatt, Egbert B. KiUey, George C. Marshall, 
Bamett Hawkins, James Reynolds, Jr., William P. Gibbons, Christo- 
pher Appleton and Matthew J. Myers constituted the first board. 
They were given authority to borrow $12,000 and to raise $6,000 by 
taxation. On January 29th, 1844, the first grammar school for boys 
was finished and opened on the corner of Mill and Bridge streets. 
Josiah I. Underbill was its principal. The public school system de- 
veloped slowly, the private schools and academies receiving for many 
years most of the patronage of those who were able to pay. Until 
the incorporation of the city in 1854 the village constituted only a 
single school district and received but small share of the state money. 
The collection of school taxes up to that time remained with the 
town authorities. Under the city administration the High School 
made a beginning in 1859, but it was moved about to several locations 
until the sale of the Dutchess County Academy when the present High 
School building was erected in 1872. The central Grammar School 
addition was made to the building in 1899. New school buildings 
have since been erected on Lincoln avenue, on Delafield street and in 
place of the old No. 1 school on Mill street. Important improve- 
ments have been made in the courses of study and the High School 
some years ago was made a college preparatory school. 

A few words should be said about what was widely known as the 
"Poughkeepsie plan." This had reference to two school buildings 
erected by the Roman Catholics for parochial schools. They were 
taken by the city at nominal rental. The teachers in them were nearly 
all members of religious orders, but were paid by the city. Outside 
of school hours the buildings were used for religious services. The 
plan worked well enough during most of the long and able pastorate 
of the Rev. James Nilan at St. Peter's Church, but was finally given 
up in 1898, at a time when there was much turmoil in the school 
board. For a few years after this one of the buildings was rented 
to the city for $1,000, but has recently again been made a parochial 
school. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 233 

VASSAE COLLEGE. 

Vassar College, the first of woman's colleges, founded by Matthew 
Vassar, was chartered by the Legislature, January 18, 1861. There 
were twenty-eight trustees, of whom about half were residents of 
Poughkeepsie. Benson J. Lossing and others have so fully written 
the history of the college that it is unnecessary to go into details 
here. Matthew Vassar at the beginning gave the site, about two hun- 
dred acres of land, part of which had once been a race track, and he 
added some $400,000. James Renwlck, Jr., was the architect of the 
main building and William Harloe, of Poughkeepsie, the contractor. 
As the work of construction was done during the war, at constantly 
rising prices, Mr. Harloe lost heavily by his venture. The college 
was opened in September, 1865, with 353 students. There were no 
college preparatory schools for girls at that time and these first 
students were of all grades, a few of them pretty well advanced, but 
by far the greater number not qualified to enter according to the 
present standards. It took most of the first year to clasify them, 
and when the second catalogue came out, 1866-1867, four had been 
found fit to rank as seniors and they constituted the class of 1867, 
the first class to graduate at Vassar. Even in that catalogue seventy- 
eight students were put down as unclassified and 189 as "specials." 
During that year, however, the preparatory department was organ- 
ized and it numbered seventy-five students in the third catalogue. The 
fact that Vassar maintained a preparatory department won her the 
enmity for a number of years of all the proprietors of higher grade 
collegiate and classical schools for girls. It was deemed necessary, 
however, to maintain the department and it was not abolished until 
1887, the year after President James M. Taylor took charge. Under 
his vigorous management the growth of the college has been con- 
tinuous, until in 1905 the trustees found it necessary to limit the 
number of students for a term of five years to one thousand. That 
number has been several times slightly exceeded. The college has 
been almost completly transformed, so that the early graduates hardly 
know it when they return to reunions. Five new dormitories, a chapel, 
library, recitation hall, infirmary and two science buildings have been 
erected during Dr. Taylor's term. The death of Matthew Vassar 
occurred in June, 1868, when he was addressing an annual meeting of 
the trustees. His nephews, Matthew Vassar, Jr., and John Guy Vas- 



234 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

sar, continued his interest in the institution. The former died in 1881 
and the latter in 1888. Both left the college considerable sums of 
money and John Guy Vassar made it one of his residuary legatees. 
His estate was in litigation until 1891, when the college obtained a 
large addition to its endowment. Others came forward to take the 
place of the Vassars, and John D. Rockefeller and Frederick F. 
Thompson have been large benefactors. The new chapel, erected in 
1904, was the gift of two graduates, Mrs. Mary Thaw Thompson, 
'77, and Mrs. Mary Morris Pratt, '80. The magnificent library is 
the gift of the widow of Frederick F. Thompson, the infirmary of 
Mrs. Edward S. Atwater, of Poughkeepsie, the New England Build- 
ing of the New England Alvmmae and the latest building completed in 
February, 1909, is the Sanders Memorial Laboratory for Chemistry, 
given by Henry M. Sanders, one of the trustees, in memory of his wife. 

TEADING AND KANUFACTUEING. 

Soon after the incorporation of the Village of Poughkeepsie there 
was considerable activity on the part of the town authorities in laying 
out new roads and streets. Main street was extended through to the 
river "at or near the place commonly called Caul Rock Landing." 
Li 1800, and in 1802 the eastern end of the street, beginning at the 
court house, was surveyed as a part of the new Dutchess Turnpike, 
leading to the eastern boundary of the county. The maps made by 
the turnpike surveyors are still in existence. About 1806 the Post 
Road north and south was re-surveyed and its location changed in 
many places as the Highland Turnpike. It continued as a turnpike 
until 1838 and there was once a toUgate on the South Road, about 
at the present city limits. The Dutchess Turnpike became at once 
a most important stage route from Connecticut, bringing much trade 
to Poughkeepsie. Great loads of country produce were brought here 
for shipment to New York and the freighting business on the river 
made much progress. In 1813 eight sloops were sailing weekly to 
New York from Poughkeepsie and three steamboats also landed each 
week at the foot of Main street. In 1814 Poughkeepsie became a 
steamboat terminal, the Firefly, the smallest boat of the Fulton and 
Livingston fleet, sailing three times a week from "Pardee's dock" at 
the foot of Main street. The Main street landing seems to have been 
called by several names, but most of the land around it had been pur- 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 235 

chased in 1800 by William Davies. The upper landing had been the 
site of a mill since the first settlements, as we have seen, and the ferry- 
was estabUshed there as early as 1798. A group of industries grew 
up about the neighborhood soon after 1800. The Oakley, Hoffman, 
Reynolds and Innis famihes were engaged in freighting, milling and 
manufacturing there and the mills afterwards became the Gifford, 
Sherman and Innis Dyewood Mills, one of the most important of the 
city's industries, but discontinued some fifteen years ago. The Ferry 
Company was incorporated in 1819 and at that time the old periauger, 
or sail ferry, was superseded by a "team ferry," or horse boat, which 
in turn gave place to a steamboat in 1830. The ferry landing was 
moved to Main street in 1879, by which time the upper landing had 
lost most of its business. Two of the old Dyewood,buildings remain, 
one of them in use as a chair factory. The mill itself was sold to the 
railroad company and was torn down. The old wooden building, 
originally Oakley's nail factory and afterwards for many years Ar- 
nold's chair factory, was burned in 1908 and replaced by a brick 
building. The power house of the electric lighting company was 
erected on the site of one of the old upper landing storehouses in 1894. 
The lower landing, foot of Pine street, and the Union landing, foot 
of Union street, were for many years very busy places, particularly 
the former, and there was also in early days a landing still further 
south, in the neighborhood of the Separator Works, called John Reed's 
Landing and later Holthuysen's. Sloops ran from all of these for the 
first quarter of the nineteenth century, when they began to be super- 
seded by "towboats," or barges, towed to New York by steamboats. 
The New York and Albany steamboats selected Main street as their 
point of call from the first and gradually drew business from the other 
landings. As time went on, however, lines of steamboats were es- 
tablished with their headquarters at the upper, lower and Main street 
landings, and there was at one time also a steamboat from the foot 
of Union street. The lower landing was abandoned as a terminus in 
1872 and the upper landing in 1873 by a consolidation of the various 
local freighting interests. The Union street landing in 1848 had 
passed into the hands of the Poughkeepsie Iron Company, when the 
first local blast furnace was erected there. William Bushnell, Joseph 
Tuckerman and Edward Beck were early proprietors of this furnace, 
with Albert E. Tower as superintendent. The ores were brought 



236 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

from Sylvan Lake, in Dutchess County, and fluxed with Barnegat 
limestone. Mr. Tower afterwards became owner of the furnace, which 
was long called the Lower Furnace. The Upper Furnace, still stand- 
ing, was built in 1859, near the old Whale Docks. The lower fur- 
nace was dismantled in 1885 and the Poughkeepsie Yacht Club House 
now stands on its once busy wharf, in old times piled high with coal, 
limestone and pig iron. 

The Fall Kill for many years was an important factor in the 
business development of Poughkeepsie. The first large mill pond was 
that above Smith street, known as the Red Mill pond, and known in later 
years as Winnikee Pond. Possibly the first dam was constructed 
there as early as 1730 by Frans LeRoy, though there seems to be no 
definite record of it until it came under the ownership of Bartholomew 
CranneU, as shown on a map made in 1770. There was a small mill 
pond above the falls, near the mouth of the stream before 1800, but 
the first large storage reservoir there was built by George Booth about 
1803. This was later known as Pelton's Pond and was the last sur- 
vivor of the Fall Kill mill ponds. This dam was finally taken down 
in 1899. Booth is said to have brought from England the first wool 
carding machinery used in this country. He conducted a woolen fac- 
tory also near Wappingers Falls. Not far above Booth's pond on the 
Fall Kill a cotton factory was established about 1811 by David and 
Benjamin Arnold, and just beyond the Post Road bridge was Ellison's 
miU, afterwards Parker's. There were a number of cotton and woolen 
factories in the town of Poughkeepsie down to the close of the war 
of 1812, but most of them were ruined by the period of free trade that 
followed the declaration of peace, in 1815. Spafford's Gazateer says 
that there were also fifty looms in families producing 20,000 yards 
of cloth, and says there were fourteen ^grain mills in the town at that 
time. Not more than four or five of these mills could have been in the 
village. One Was at the mouth of the Spacken Kill and is still stand- 
ing; several were on the Caspar Kill and most of the rest probably 
on the Wappingers, though very small streams like the one flowing 
through Vassar College Lake turned mills in those days. 



1. Spafford speaks of the success of Dutchess County agriculture as due largely to the 
fact that this county was one of the first to use gypsum as a fertilizer. Old residents 
say.that the gypsum was Imported In rock form from Nova Scotia and ground in the 
same mills that ground grain, the mills grinding the rock for "land plaster" part of the 
year, then cleaning out and grinding grain later In the season. 




JOHN E. MACK. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 237 

There was an iron foundry in Poughkeepsie as early as 1814, 
located on the corner of Main and Washington streets, and opposite, 
on the west corner, was Ebenezer Badger's tannery. Later foundries 
were established from time to time further up Main street, and one 
of them, started in 1831 by Solomon B. Frost and Benjamin Vail, 
survives to-day as the Poughkeepsie Foundry and Machine Company, 
with a large new plant north of the Central New England Railroad. 

The first Vassar Brewery was built about 1802 by James Vassar 
and was burned in 1811. A larger building took its place and the 
management fell to James Vassar's son, Matthew Vassar. This brew- 
ery was on the site of Vassar Institute, but extending through to 
Bridge street. By 1830 it had become a very profitable industry, 
occupying a group of buildings, and in 1836 the brewery at the river, 
still standing, was erected. It was here that most of the fortune was 
accumulated that went to the founding of Vassar College. The for- 
tunes of Matthew Vassar, Jr., and John Guy Vassar, nephews of 
Matthew Vassar, were only partly made in the brewing business, most 
of them resulting from fortunate investments in outside enterprises. 

The improvement party founded a number of large industries, most 
important of which were the whaling companies and the silk factory. 
The Poughkeepsie Whaling Company was incorporated in 1832 and 
the Dutchess Whaling Company a year later. James Hooker was 
president and Alexander Forbus treasurer of the former and Isaac 
Merritt and George P. Oakley held similar ofllces in the latter. These 
two companies in 1841 owned as many as seven ships, which went on 
long cruises, some of them almost around the world. They brought 
men here from New Bedford, Mass., and other New England whaling 
ports, built ships, storehouses, cooperages, candle factories, etc. The 
Dutchess Company located at the neighborhood still sometimes called 
the Whale Dock, foot of Dutchess avenue, and had the largest estab- 
lishment. Apparently the losses of ships as well as the increasing 
scarcity of whales caused the failure of these companies. Other towns 
on the river, notably Hudson, were engaged in the whaling industry 
at about the same time. The Poughkeepsie Glass Works, started in 
1879, occupies the site of the Dutchess Whaling Company's buildings. 

Just north of the whale dock the improvement party started an 
enterprise that might have been of great importance, if it had not 
been so far ahead of the times. It was a locomotive factory, founded 



238 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

just after the panic of 1837, but twelve years before there was any 
railroad in this neighborhood. It was described by Benson J. Loss- 
ing, who made a woodcut of the building for the FamAy Magazvne, 
as "Much the most extensive of the kind in America," and is said to 
have cost almost $100,000. One locomotive was built there and was 
shipped away by boat. It should be said that a railroad across the 
county was projected at that time, but the project was little more 
than a dream until after the Civil War. The locomotive factory 
building was used as a chemical factory for a while, but stood empty 
much of the time and was torn down in 1859, when the upper furnace 
was built. The silk factory, above mentioned, incorporated in 1835, 
erected the building on lower Mill street, which in 1850 came into the 
possession of Charles M. Pelton and was used for many years as a 
carpet factory. The promoters of the silk factory purchased several 
farms on which it is said they intended to raise silk worms. The enter- 
prise proved an early failure. Carpet manufacturing and also pin 
making were carried on in 1840 by several firms in Poughkeepsie. 

Among the industries that flourished for many years was ship build- 
ing, which was conducted at several points along the water front, 
notably at the Whale Dock, after the abandonment of the whaling 
business. Several large steamboats, including the Reliance and the 
propeller Joseph F. Barnard, were built here before the war. Wagon 
and carriage manufacturing were carried on by several firms until 
recent times. The tanning industry flourished from an early date up 
to the last quarter of the nineteenth century and brought several well- 
known families to Poughkeepsie, including the Southwicks and Boyds. 

The manufacturing industry by which Poughkeepsie is best known 
to-day, that of the Adriance harvesting machinery, had its beginnings 
somewhere about 1850, when John Adriance became interested in the 
inventions of mowing machines. He had been in the iron foundry 
and hardware business and had begun to build on a small scale a mow- 
ing machine called the Forbush. His son, John P. Adriance, who was 
in the hardware business in New York, saw the possibilities of the new 
machines and investigated several of them, spending a number of years 
in Worcester, Mass., where he was interested in the manufactureing 
of one of them. In 1859 he returned to Poughkeepsie and leased the 
factory buildings at the Red Mills, comer of Smith and Mill streets, 
having accumulated patents and rights to use the essential features of 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 239 

a successful mower, the Adriance Buckeye. Thomas S. Brown had 
been associated with Mr. Adriance before this and had much to do 
with the development of the machine. In 1865 the company removed 
to its present location on the river, where it has continued to expand 
year by year. In 1892 the general offices of the company were 
brought here from New York and since then several large buildings 
have been added to the plant. A recent improvement was the in- 
stallation of a factory railroad, connecting all buildings and depart- 
ments. A complete machine is turned out now every five minutes. The 
factory of Adriance, Piatt & Company is the largest and most im- 
portant in the city, but the DeLaval Separator plant is a close second. 
This is a branch of an industry whose original factory was in Stock- 
holm, Sweden, and was brought here in 1892 by offer of a subscrip- 
tion of ten thousand dollars from the citizens fo? the purchase of a 
site. The investment was a good one. The first shop occupied less 
than half an acre, now the factories of the company have five acres 
of floor space and half a mile of water front has been purchased. The 
property now extends to the foot of Pine street, once the site of ex- 
tensive lumber, coal and freighting business. The DeLaval employs 
about seven hundred men in the busy season. 

Several large industries were started soon after the war, includ- 
ing the Eureka Mowing Machine Works, which was not very suc- 
cessful and moved away, the Rolhng Mill, which after a time passed 
into the hands of the Phoenix Horseshoe Company, and Whitehouse's 
Shoe Factory. The latter was very successful for many years, but 
failed in 1891 and its buildings are now used as a cigar factory. The 
Dutchess Manufacturing Company, making trousers, is a large and 
growing concern, built up under the management of the late J. Frank 
Hull. It was originally a consolidation of several smaller clothing 
factories established not long after the war. The present location was 
purchased in 1888. Several underwear factories have recently been 
located in Poughkeepsie by the efforts of the Chamber of Commerce, 
and the Seneca Button Works was brought here in 1907 from Seneca 
Falls. The Anchor Bolt and Nut Company, originally established as 
the Chapinville Wheel Company, on Mill street, has a good sized plant 
on Parker avenue nearly opposite the Central New England Railroad. 

The cooperage business, which was built up to considerable propor- 
tions at the time of the whaling companies, still continues, though on 



240 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

a somewhat smaller scale. This industry brought the Lown family 
to Foughkeepsie. There is one brewery, that of V. Frank's Sons, in 
successful operation. 

BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. 

The first chartered bank in Foughkeepsie was a branch of the 
Manhattan Bank of New York, established at least as early as 1811. 
In that year an act was passed in Albany chartering the Middle Dis- 
trict Bank, which had its main banking house in Foughkeepsie and a 
branch in Kingston. Fourteen of the trustees were required to be 
i-esidents of Dutchess and seven of Ulster. Levi McKean, one of its 
first presidents, was postmaster of Foughkeepsie from 1802 to 1819. 
He was at one time also a private banker, probably before the Middle 
District Bank was opened. Henry Davis conducted a private bank, 
which he called the Exchange Bank, in 1819, and two or thiee notes 
signed by him as president and Walter Cunningham, cashier, are 
stiU in existence. Davis became the first president and Cunningham 
the first cashier of the Dutchess County Bank, chartered April 12, 
1825. This bank occupied the same site as the Merchants' Bank, the 
present cashier of which is Walter Cunningham Fonda. The Dutchess 
County Bank was placed in liquidation at the expiration of its char- 
ter in 1845 and the Merchants' Bank was organized to take its place. 
The old bank had a capital of $600,000, three timies larger than the 
capital of any bank since that organized in Foughkeepsie. Matthew 
J. Myers was the first president of the Merchants' Bank and James 
H. Fonda, cashier. The Middle District Bank failed in 1829 and was 
the only bank that has ever failed in Foughkeepsie. It had a capital 
of $600,000, a majority of which was controlled by Feter Everitt, son 
of Richard Everitt. Note holders and depositors were paid almost 
in full after a long period of liquidation. 

The Foughkeepsie Bank was organized in 1830 with a capital of 
$100,000. Thomas L. Davies was its first president and Reuben 
North was for many years its cashier. The solid old bank building 
with its portico of heavy plastered columns was built the same year 
and stood until 1906, when it was torn down to give place to the build- 
ing of the Foughkeepsie Trust Company, into which the Fough- 
keepsie Bank and the City Bank had previously been merged. The 
Farmers' and Manufacturers' Bank began business in its present 
building, February, 1835. James Hooker was the first president, but 




THE FOURTH COURT HOUSE, POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 

Built in 1809, replaced by present building in 1903. The old "Lawyers' Row" 
of wooden buildings beyond was demolished in 1885 to make room for the present 
Post Office. 

Photograph taken about 1870. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 241 

served only during the organization and when business began Matthew 
Vassar was elected president. James Grant, Jr., was the first cashier, 
but Fred W. Davis served in that capacity longer than anyone else. 
The Poughkeepsie Savings Bank was chartered in 1831 and began 
business in 1833 in what was known as the Burritt Building on Main 
street. Col. Henry A. Livingston was its first president and served 
until 1856. His successors have been John B. Forbus, Henry D. 
Varick, David C. Foster and Edward Elsworth. The Savings Bank 
building was erected in 1871. This bank now has deposits of almost 
twelve million dollars. The Fallkill National Bank began business 
in 1852 in its present building with William C. Sterhng as its first 
president and John F, Hull, cashier. The City Bank was organized 
in 1860 and Joseph F. Barnard, afterwards for so many years justice 
of the Supreme Court, was its first president. The name generally 
associated with this bank is that of Hudson Taylor, who was elected 
president in 1879 and served until the consolidation with the Pough- 
keepsie Bank, prior to the organization of the Trust Company. The 
First National Bank, the last started, owes its name to the fact that 
it was the first bank organized under the national bank act in 1864. 
The older state banks reorganized as national banks about a year 
later, when the law had been amended so that they could retain their 
original names. Harvey G. Eastman and John P. Adriance were 
early directors of this bank. Zebulon Rudd and Frank E. Whipple 
served long terms as cashier and Jacob Corlies as president. 

The Dutchess Insurance Company dates back to 1836, when it was 
chartered as the Dutchess Mutual Insurance Company. James Em- 
mott, father of the first mayor, was its first president. It is one of 
the few old mutuals that have survived all changes and disasters, hav- 
ing been made at comparatively recent period a stock company. Its 
present building was first occupied in 1855. 

POLITICS NEWSPAPEKS PUBLIC MEN. 

As soon as there were political parties in the United States it is 
safe to say that there were parties in the town of Poughkeepsie. As 
nearly as one can tell from the scanty records of early election returns 
and from the names in the civil list. Gov. Clinton controlled the town 
down to the time of the convention which ratified the Constitution in 
1788. Clinton was first an Anti-Federalist and then a Jefi'ersonian 
Republican. Soon after the Constitutional Convention, at which the 



242 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

delegates broke away from his influence, there is evidence that Feder- 
alists were occasionally elected members of Assembly, though the 
Anti-Federalists seem generally to have been successful in electing 
Congressmen and returned Theodorus Bailey, of Poughkeepsie, to the 
National House of Representatives several times. He became a 
United States Senator in 1803, but soon afterwards resigned with De- 
Witt Clinton and became postmaster of New York City. In 1798 
John Jay, Federalist candidate for Governor, carried the town of 
Poughkeepsie by ninety to eighty-two votes and from that time the 
Federahsts appear to have been generally successful. William Emott, 
father of the elder Judge James Emott, Jessie Oakley, James Kent 
and David Brooks were among the prominent Federalists of the day. 
Zephaniah Piatt and Gilbert Livingston were leading Repubhcans and 
continued to be supporters of Clinton, although they voted for the 
ratification of the Constitution. Piatt was judge of the Court of 
Common Pleas, corresponding to our present county court, and left 
Poughkeepsie about 1795 with his brothers to take up lands on Lake 
Champlain, where they became the founders of Plattsburg. 

The first distinctly local paper, the Poughkeepsie Journal, was es- 
tablished in the spring of 1785 by Nicholas Power, who became the 
first postmaster of Poughkeepsie in 1792. Early copies of the Journal 
do not quite give clear evidence of any particular political leanings, 
as communications of all shades of opinion were published, but Power 
appears to have been a Federalist and efforts were made to estabKsh 
opposition papers, evidently in the interest of the party of Jefferson, 
before 1800. The first to obtain a real foothold, as already stated, 
was the Political Barometer, under the able editorship of Isaac Mitch- 
ell. The Barometer, though a pretty good paper, led a rather pre- 
carious existence and changed hands many times. It was sold in 1806 to 
Thomas Nelson and son and again sold in 1811, when its name was 
changed to the Republican Herald. In 1812 Michell returned from Albany 
and re-purchased it, changing the name to the Northern Politician. 
He died a few months later and it became the Republican Herald 
again. There were many factions in the politics of the state of New 
York in the first few years of the nineteenth century and the Republi- 
can Herald represented one of them, and evidently the losing one. It 
wa» in opposition to James Tallmadge, Jr., one of the strongest men 
of the day, and was discontinued in 1823. In 1806 Paraclete Potter 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 243 

obtained an interest in the Poughkeepsie Journal and remained for 
many years the leading editor and one of the leading men of the town 
and county. He conducted a considerable book and job printing es- 
tablishment and also a book store which was long the rallying place 
of the literary lights of the town. In 1815 Charles P. Barnum and 
Richard Nelson established the Dutchess Observer as an organ of one 
of the factions of the Republican (later Democratic) party, and in 
1824 another paper, the Republican Telegraph, was established with 
WiUiam Sands and Isaac Piatt in charge. The Observer and the 
Telegraph were combined in 1828 and the paper has come down to 
the present times as the News-Telegraph, absorbing all rivals repre- 
senting the same party until a recent period. 

The year 1828 was a most important one in the pt)litics of the state. 
It was the first real presidential election, that is, the first election at 
which the people of this state had a right to vote directly for electors, 
and it was the election at which Andrew Jackson, the popular idol, 
was the leading candidate. The Poughkeepsie Journal came out in 
support of Jackson, even before the Telegraph did, and carried most 
of the Federalists with it. That marked the final collapse and break- 
up of the old parties. There were, however, many supporters of John 
Quincy Adams in Dutchess, who believed he should be re-elected, and 
they, of course, needed a newspaper. The result was the establishment 
of the Dutchess Intelligencer, with Isaac Piatt as editor. This paper 
had hard sledding for a number of years, as nearly everywhere the 
people were shouting for Jackson. The Adams men, however, were 
strengthened locally somewhat by the fact that Judge Smith Thomp- 
son, whose home was where the Poughkeepsie Rural Cemetery is now 
located, was their candidate for Governor. He was beaten by Martin 
VanBuren, partly because of the outbreak of the anti-Masonic agita- 
tion in the western part of the state. It is hardly necessary to name 
all of the short lived newspapers of the day, but the opposition to 
Van Buren's Albany regency rule caused the establishment of the 
Dutchess Republican, 1831, by Thomas S. Ranney, and the anti- 
Masons had a paper for a few years called, first, the Dutchess In- 
quirer and afterwards the Anti-Mason. In 1833 Messrs. Piatt and 
Ranney united their papers and finding the Intelligencer-Republican 
too awkward a title, changed it in 1834 to the Poughkeepsie Eagle. 
By that time the opponents of Jackson, who had been calling them- 



244 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

selves National Republicans, were beginning to call themselves Whigs 
under the leadership of Henry Clay, and the Eagle at once came to. 
the front as the organ of the new party, while the Journal had drifted 
into a secondary position as a Democratic organ and did not fully 
support all of Jackson's policies. Egbert B. Killey and Aaron Low 
were publishing the Telegraph at this time, but in 1835 Benson J. 
Lossing bought Mr. Low's interest and became prominent as an editor. 
Leaders among public men of the early part of the century were Gen. 
James TaUmadge, Randall S. Street, James Emott and Thomas J. 
Oakley. Of these the greatest was Gen. TaUmadge, who lived in a 
house which stood on the comer of Garden and Main streets. He was 
a man of national reputation and it was he who offered in the House 
of Representatives in 1819 an amendment to the act for the admission 
to the Union of the State of Missouri prohibiting "the further intro- 
duction of slavery" there. This amendment was adopted by the 
House, but rejected by the Senate and led to the famous Missouri 
Compromise. 

A little later Smith Thompson and Nathaniel P. TaUmadge became 
prominent. The latter was not only a United States Senator but be- 
came widely known as the leader of the Conservatives, a faction of the 
Democratic party that opposed Jackson's bank poUcy. The Pough- 
keepsie Journal supported him and as his attitude gradually led him 
into full union with the Whig party, the Journal became a Whig or- 
gan. Nathaniel P. TaUmadge was much talked of as a candidate for 
Vice President in 1838, and iii 1839 he actually was offered the nomi- 
nation with William Henry Harrison. He had by that time become 
so warm a friend of Henry Clay that he declined because Clay had 
not received the nomination for President. Thus TaUmadge lost his 
chance of becoming President. Walter Cunningham, already many 
times mentioned, was a prominent Whig leader, particularly active in 
conventions and is frequently referred to in Thurlow Weed's Auto- 
biography. Richard D. Davis was one of the most prominent Demo- 
crats and was elected to Congress in 1840 and in 1842. After 
Nathaniel P. TaUmadge had come into the Whig ranks there were 
two Whig papers in Poughkeepsie and it was natural that they should 
combine. Joseph H. Jackson and William Schram were then pub- 
UsMng the Journal and in 1844 Jackson retired and Mr. Schram 
formed a partnership with Isaac Piatt, of the Eagle. The double 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 245 

title, "Journal and Eagle," was retained until 1850, when the name 
Journal was dropped. Mr. Schram continued a partner in the Eagle 
firm until 1865, when he was succeeded by Mr. Piatt's eldest son, 
John I. Piatt. Another son, James B. Piatt, came into the firm in 
1869. The paper is now in control of a third generation of the same 
family. 

In 1839 both Henry Clay and Martin VanBuren visited Pough- 
keepsie. VanBuren lived in Columbia County and had many times 
stopped in Poughkeepsie and his visit in 1839 was chiefly significant 
because he was President at that time and was accorded a big recep- 
tion. Judge Charles H. Buggies, Gen. Leonard Maison and Col. 
Henry Pine were among the prominent local Democrats who welcomed 
him. Henry Clay's visit was only about a month later In the same 
summer. He made an address to the people from* the veranda of the 
Poughkeepsie Hotel, and then was taken to see the sights of the town, 
including College Hill. In 1845 Daniel Webster spent several days 
in Poughkeepsie trying a law case. His summing up was referred 
to in the local papers as a masterpiece of, oratory. 

As every important cause had to have its newspaper, the Temper- 
ance movement of the early forties brought out the Temperance Safe- 
guard, edited by G. K. Lyman, and in 1845 the Native American, or 
Know Nothing movement gave rise to the Poughkeepsie American. 
The last mentioned paper came into the hands successively of Isaac 
Thompkins and of Edward B. Osborne and was made an organ of the 
"hard shell" branch of the Democratic party. Its name was changed 
to the Dutchess Democrat and it was absorbed by the Telegraph, Mr. 
Osborne becoming a partner of Egbert B. Killey, Jr., in 1856. Al- 
bert S. Pease, who edited the Telegraph for a while, purchased the 
Press, the first Poughkeepsie daily, at about the same time. He con- 
tinued it until 1863, when Mr. Osborne brought the Telegraph and 
Press together. The Press had been a morning paper up to Decem- 
ber, 1860, when the Daily Eagle was started, but soon afterwards 
changed to an afternoon paper and so remained until 1883, when 
James W. Hinkley purchased both the Telegraph and the Press and 
combined them with the News. This brings us down to recent times. 
The News had been estabUshed in 1868 as a morning paper by Thomas 
G. Nichols. It had a short career as an independent, then as a Demo- 
cratic paper, and was purchased in 1872 by John O. Whitehouse to 



246 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

support his campaign for Congress. In that year Mr. Nichols es- 
tablished his third paper, the Swnday Courier, now one of the leading 
papers of the city. The Enterprise was started in 1883 after Mr. 
Hinkley had consolidated the Press with the News, leaving the field 
open for an afternoon paper. W. C. Lansing, Edward Van Keuren 
and Derrick Brown were its founders, the two former having pre- 
viously purchased the Dutchess Farmer, an agricultural paper, which 
became the Weekly Enterprise. This paper was independent, with 
Democratic leanings, until about a year ago, when it was purchased 
by a stock company of which Edward E. Perkins is president, and 
was made the oiBcial Democratic organ. The Evening Star dates 
from 1889, but was for a short time called Poughleeepsie. It has 
been independent in politics until the past two or three years, when its 
present editor^ A. A. Parks, made it Republican. 

When the anti-slavery agitation, before the war, brought forth 
the new Republican party, the Eagle at once became its exponent in 
Dutchess County, a position in which it has remained. There were 
some pretty warm times during the progress of the anti-slavery agita- 
tion and Matthew Vassar, Jr., in his diary teUs of the breaking up of 
two meetings at which abolitionists were speakers. The year the Re- 
publican party was organized in Dutchess brought out John Thomp- 
son, of Poughkeepsie, as successful candidate for Congress. B. Piatt 
Carpenter's career began only a year or two later. In the campaign 
of 1860, which has already been referred to as a memorable one, Ste- 
phen Baker was elected to Congress and such men as Alfred B. Smith 
and John I. Piatt were making their first political speeches. Albert 
VanKleeck was political manager of the day. Homer A. Nelson had 
been elected county judge by the Democrats in 1855 and was elected 
to Congress in 1862, Charles Wheaton taking his place as county 
judge. James Bowne and George Innis were mayors of Poughkeepsie 
during the war, the latter serving three terms. Of H. G. Eastman's 
career as a political leader enough has perhaps been said elsewhere. 
The most notable political campaign in Poughkeepsie was the White- 
house campaign in 1872, when Eastman was a candidate for mayor, 
and John H. Ketcham candidate for Congress against Whitehouse. 
Stories are still told of the fabulous sums expended in that campaign, 
which is said to have nearly ruined Mr. Whitehouse, althou^ he was 
successful. He carried Poughkeepsie by 379 majority and the city 




GEORGE H. WILLIAMS. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 247 

came within eleven votes of giving Horace Greely for President a 
majority. This is the nearest the Democrats ever came to carrying 
the city for a presidential candidate. George Morgan was the first 
Democratic mayor of the city, elected in 1869. There have been but four 
since that time — William Harloe, Edward Elsworth, William M. 
Ketcham and John K. Sague. ^, 

CHUKCHilS OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

The first church in Poughkeepsie was, of course, the Dutch Church, 
which was organized October 10, 1716, by Rev. Petrus Vas, pastor 
of the Church at Kingstpn, who installed Michael Parmenter and 
Pieter DuBoise as elders and Elias VanBenschoten and Peter Par- 
menter as deacons. The history of this church has been pretty fully 
written by the late Dr. A. P. Van Gieson, who translated many of the 
Dutch records.^ No complete list of baptismal and marriage records, 
however, has ever been published. Subscription books for the first 
church building were circulated in 1717 and the church was finished 
in 1723 and is said to have been of stone. There are some records 
that make it appear that it was not continliously occupied and was 
allowed to fall considerably out of repair. The first deed in Liber A 
in the Dutchess County Clerk's office is that which conveys the title 
to the lot on which it was built from Jacobus VandenBogert to Cap- 
tain Barendt VanKleeck, Myndert VandenBogert, Peter Velie and 
Johannes VanKleeck. It is dated December 26, 1716, and is copied 
in full in Dr. Van Gieson's book. The ^ first minister was Rev. Cor- 
nelius Van Schie, who came from Hffl:and in 1731 to take charge of 
the congregation both at Fishkill and Poughkeepsie for the princely 
salary of £70 (about $175) of New York money. He was, however, 
furnished also with firewood for summer and winter and was presented 
with a brown horse, which cost £4 and 10 shillings, also a house, 
"three morgens of pasture" and a garden suitably fenced. Dominie 
Van Schie was free to locate either at Poughkeepsie or Fishkill and 
chose Poughkeepsie, and the two congregations jointly purchased the 
land on which the present church stands and built the first parsonage 
about 1732. The first church was located on the southeast corner 
of Main and Market streets and the land around it was used as a 
burying ground and continued to be so used, as is stated in another 



1. First Reformed Church of Poughkeepsie. Rev. A. P. Van Gieson, D.D., 1893. 



248 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

part of this chapter, until 1830. Meanwhile, however, the second 
church was built, somewhere about 1760, land having been purchased 
for it from Gale Yelverton on the north side of East Lane, as Main 
street was then called, opposite the end of Market street. Around 
this church also burials were made and a considerable number of stones 
Are still standing there, in the rear of the Nelson House Annex. The 
church just previous to the erection of the second building had been 
badly divided between the Coetus and Conferentie parties, the first of 
which held that ministers could be ordained in America, while the sec- 
ond maintained that the only authority was in Holland. The fourth 
pastor of the church. Dominie Henricus Schoonmaker, was a member 
of the Coetus party and on his arrival here, in 1764, for ordination, 
he found the church in possession of the opposite party and the ser- 
vices of ordination took place under a tree not far from where the 
present church is located, the officiating minister, Rev. John H. Goet- 
schius, standing in a wagon. The Conferentie party called another 
minister. Rev. Isaac Rysdick, from Holland, and from 1765 to 1772 
the churches had two pastors. Dr. Rysdick left Poughkeepsie to take 
charge of the Fishkill, Hopewell, and New Hackensack churches in 
1773, after which time the Poughkeepsie church always had a pastor 
of its own, separate from Fishkill. Dr. Van Gieson notes that Mr. 
Schoonmaker, who was a most eloquent preacher in the Dutch lan- 
guage, left Poughkeepsie in 1774 chiefly because he could not preach 
well in English. There had been occasional preaching in the Eng- 
lish language in the church ever since 1740, and from that time the 
Dutch lost ground while the English continued to gain. The Dutch 
language was not officially given up until pretty nearly 1800, and its 
long continuance was the cause of considerable losses of the younger 
element in the church. In 1789 the church was incorporated, with 
Henry Hegeman, Peter Tappen, Isaac Romine, John Frear, Myndert 
VanKleeck, Henry Livingston, Jr., Abraham Fort and Benjamin 
Westervelt as elders and deacons. During and just after the Revo- 
lution the church was in charge of Rev. John H. Livingston, after- 
wards president of Rutgers College. At the close of his pastorate 
there was a period of interregnum and there appears to have been a 
time, while the atheistic agitators of the French Revolution were at 
theif height, when religion in America was at a rather low ebb and all 
the churches had some difficulty in maintaining themselves. After 



POUGHKEEPSIE, 249 

the Dutch language had been officially given up the church seems to 
have tried to hold as many of the English speaking people not affiliated 
with the Episcopal Church together as possible and an effort was made 
even to drop the Dutch name, which, however, did not succeed fully 
until much later. The Dutch Church appears to have taken the place 
of the Presbyterian Church in Poughkeepsie, however, for a consider- 
able period. In 1822 the church on the north side of Main street was 
abandoned and a new building was erected upon the site of the pres- 
ent church, then a part of the parsonage lot. A part of the church 
property on the north side of Main street had long before been sold 
and the Poughkeepsie Hotel had been built upon it. The rest was 
then leased for a long term and the Main street frontage was held by 
the church until 1908, when the two properties occupied by Robert 
KnOx's Sons and Drislane as grocery stores were sold and the money 
applied to the purchase of the present parsonage on Mill street. Ill 
1830 the property on the south side of Main street, corner of Market, 
known then as the Dutch Church Cemetery, was leased for one hun- 
dred years, and the Brewster Block was erected. This block has been 
somewhat altered so that the roof lines and fronts do not exactly cor- 
respond as they formerly did, but it is still possible to trace from the 
general character of the buildings the extent of the church property. 
The building of the third church and the leasing of the property on 
Main street for long terms was all done under the able pastorate of 
Rev. Cornelius C. Cuyler one of the notable ministers of the church, 
1809-1833. Another notable minister of the church was Rev. A, L. 
Mann, under whose pastorate, in 1847, the congregation had so in- 
creased that the accommodations of the spacious building appeared to 
be too small and a second church was organized with Tunis Brincker- 
hoff, Charles P. Adriance, Abraham G. Storm and Joseph H. Jack- 
son as elders and James W. Bogardus, Casper D. Smith, Albert Brett 
and John P. Flagler as deacons. They erected the present Second 
Reformed Church on the corner of Mill and Catharine streets and it 
was dedicated on Washington's Birthday in 1849. Its first pastor 
was Rev. Charles Whitehead, installed October 2, 1849. On Sunday, 
January 18, 1857, the first Dutch Church was burned and the fire 
was one of the most memorable events in the history of Poughkeepsie. 
The thermometer, it is stated, was thirteen degrees below zero at noon 
and a strong north wind was blowing which forced it down to twenty 



250 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

degrees before dark, when a fierce snow storm had set in. The fire 
started in the roof of the church just at the close of the Rev. Dr. 
Mann's morning sermon, and was discovered soon after the dismissal 
of the congregation. There are still living a few old firemen who re- 
member the event and they agree in declaring that water froze in the 
air as it left the hose pipes. It is certain that hydrants were frozen 
and that one or two of the old piano box fire engines froze up so that 
they could not be used. The burning of the steeple, according to the 
account in the Poughleeepsie Eagle of the day, "presented a fearful 
column of fire ascending far up toward the clouds." After it had 
fallen the mass of burning material was so great that the entire space 
inside the walls seemed filled with flame until ten o'clock at night, in 
spite of the water the hand engines could pour upon it. The present 
church was erected soon after the fire and was dedicated September 
7, 1858. It had originally a lofty spire, which was condemned and 
taken down in 1878. One of the most notable pastorates of the 
church was that of Rev. Dr. Acmon P. Van Gieson, which began in 
1867 and continued until his deatliSin the spring of 1906. 

The first English Church in Poughkeepsie, the Presbyterian Church, 
was organized as early as 174<9, but failed to maintain itself on a per- 
manent basis or to erect a building. Services were conducted first 
in connection with Fishkill and afterwards in connection with Char- 
lotte precinct, which included Washington Hollow and Pleasant Val- 
ley. After 1772 there appears to have been only occasional sermons 
until some time in the nineteenth century. 

The Church of England, the predecessor of the present Episcopal 
Church, owes its beginning to the missionary work of Rev. Samuel 
Seabury, who occasionally visited Poughkeepsie as early as 1755, 
preaching to the people who belonged to his faith. The church started 
with a vigorous organization in 1766 and erected its first building on 
the corner of Church and Market streets, where the Armory now 
stands. The first church building remained standing until 1883, when 
the old Christ Church, still well remembered, was erected. During 
the Revolution most of the prominent members of Christ Church, in- 
cluding its minister. Rev. John Beardsley, who had come here from 
Groton, Conn., remained loyal to the king and the feeling against 
them»was so great that the church for a time was closed. Mr. Beards- 
ley originally had charge of the Fishkill church as well as the Pough- 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 251 

keepsie church, but like the Dutch dominie, he elected to make his home 
here, and eighty-seven acres of land were purchased for him on th^ 
Filkintown road, where the old Glebe House, now generally known as 
the Fricker House, still stands. A royal charter was granted the 
church March 3, 1773, by King George III and a grant of two hun- 
dred acres of what had previously been regarded as common land was 
added to the Glebe. This land afterwards caused the church consid- 
erable htigation and an attempt was made to confiscate it during the 
Revolution. After the prejudices of the Revolutionary times had 
somewhat softened, the church was reopened and a new rector, bear- 
ing the Dutch name Henry VanDyke, came to take charge m. 1787. 
In 1797 Trinity Church, of New York, assisted it with a gift of five 
hundred pounds for a parsonage house and two years later the house 
still standing on the southeast corner of Cannon and Academy streets 
was purchased for that purpose and used for a short time. The prop- 
erty on Montgomery and Academy streets, where the present church 
stands, and so long known as the old English Burying Ground, was 
purchased in 1828 and remained a cemetery until 1871, when the 
common council forbade further interments there. By that time it 
had grown up into a forest and was for a long time much neglected. 
A high picket fence surrounded the property, but did not prevent the 
small boys in the neighborhood from getting in and creating a cer- 
tain amount of damage to tombstones and the railings which sur- 
rounded many of the plots. When the present beautiful new church 
was built all this was cleared up, many of the graves were removed 
to the Rural Cemetery and the smaller stones which used to be studded 
thickly throughout the whole plot have been mostly laid flat on the 
ground so as not to interfere with the running of a mowing machine. 
The cornerstone of the new church was laid September 25, 1887, and 
it was consecrated May 15, 1888, by Bishop Scarborough, who had 
been the first rector of the Church of the Holy Comforter. Albert 
Tower, proprietor of the iron furnaces which for so many years were 
a leading Poughkeepsie industry, contributed more than half of the 
total cost of the building, which has been stated at $120,000. This 
was during the notable rectorship of Rev. Henry L. Ziegenfuss, who 
served the church from 1874 to 1894. 

The second Episcopal Church in Poughkeepsie, St. Paul's, w;as or- 
ganized in August, 1835, and was built originally of wood in Grecian 



252 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Doric style, in 1837. It was built by the real estate boomers of the 
day as one of the attractions of Mansion Square neighborhood. The 
present church was finished and opened in May, 1872, during the 
rectorship of Rev. S. H. Synnott. 

The Church of the Holy Comforter owes its existence to WiUiam 
A. Davies, who inherited from his father, William Davies, a large 
amount of land, including a part of the Main street dock property. 
He resided in the house nearly opposite the railroad station, after- 
wards the home of Hon. George Innis. William A. and Thomas L. 
Davies gave the church a lot 125 feet square, May 10, 1859, and the 
church was consecrated October 25, 1860, Rev. John Scarborough be- 
coming the first rector. He remained until 1867, when he was suc- 
ceeded by Rev. Robert Fulton Crary, who remained in active service 
until 1907. 

The first new denomination to organize in Poughkeepsie after the 
Revolution was the Methodist. Rev. Freeborn Garettson preached 
the first Methodist sermon hete in 1796 in the Dutch Church. The 
Methodists organized in 1804 and by 1805 were strong enough to 
build their first church, which was located on the east side of Jefferson 
street, a few hundred feet south of Church street, the plot being stiU 
open and one of the oldest of several little abandond graveyards in 
the city. This church, we are told in "Vincent's Methodism in Pough- 
keepsie," was about fifty by forty feet, with galleries, but was left un- 
plastered above the galleries until 1814, when Poughkeepsie became a 
Methodist station with a settled minister, Rev. J. M. Smith. In 1826 
they had outgrown the Jefferson street church and purchased for $650 
a lot on Washington street, where Eastman College now stands, and 
a new church was dedicated on December 27th of that year. It is 
stated that the Methodists at that time had but 182 members and were 
$900 in debt on their old church, but by 1837 they had increased to 
616 and in 1840 they decided to form a second congregation, which 
five years later built the Cannon street Methodist Church at a cost of 
$8,650. This church long remained one of the most prominent in 
the city and the congregation continued to grow until a new building 
became necessary, and in 1892, in the pastorate of Rev. C. H. Gregory, 
the present Trinity Church was dedicated on the corner of South Ham- 
ilton street and Hooker avenue, the old church having been sold to 
the Masons, who extended its front out to the sidewalk and remodeled 




GEORGE V. L. SPRATT. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 253 

it into the present Masonic Temple. Meanwhile, in 1847, a German 
Methodist Church had been organized under Rev. Daniel Duerstein 
and the first building was dedicated September 22, 1850, on the site 
of the present German Methodist Church in South Bridge street. The 
present Washington street Methodist Church, on the corner of Mill 
street, was built in 1858, and a few years later the old church was 
purchased by H. G. Eastman for his growing commercial college. In 
1843 the members of the colored Methodist Church, who had separated 
from the congregation of the first church in 1837, erected a building 
on the site of their present church in Catharine street, and in 1853 
the Methodists sent out still another congregation, when the Hedding 
Church was erected. 

The Quakers, it is said, had established a meeting house somewhere 
on Clover street not long after 1800. The Quakef families had been 
numerous in Dutchess County for some time and had gradually come 
in and settled in the village, many of them becoming very prominent 
citizens. In 1820 they erected a new meeting house on the rear of a 
deep Washington street lot, a part of which is still occupied by the 
Hicksite meeting house, built in 1894, now fronting on Lafayette 
Place. The old meeting house building is still in existence, but has 
been altered into a double dwelling. After the separation of the 
Hicksite and Orthodox Friends the later purchased a lot on the north 
side of Mill street, not far above Garden, and there built a meeting 
house, which was used for a number of years, but finally also was con- 
verted into a dwelling house and now stands on Conklin street. The 
Montgomery street meeting house was built by the Orthodox Friends 
in 1863, being the only church in the city built during the war. It 
has since been enlarged somewhat and considerably changed in ap- 
pearance. 

The Baptists organized in 1807 and their records are complete and 
well preserved, a short, well-written history of the church having been 
published by Rev. Rufus Babcock in 1841. The first building was 
erected on Mill street, not long after the organization, on the site of 
the present Baptist Church, the lot having been donated by Col. James 
Tallmadge, one of the prominent citizens of the day. In 1839 the 
Lafiayette street Baptist Church, now the Polish Catholic, was built 
at a cost of $20,000, one-half of which was donated by Matthew Vas- 
sar, and the old church in Mill street was rented to the new Methodist 



254 THE COTJNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

congregation which afterwards erected the Cannon street church. The 
building of this Lafayette street church was one of the causes of a 
division in the congregation, one of the branches returning to the old 
Mill street church. These remained apart until 1867, when they came 
together in the Lafayette street church until the building of the pres- 
ent church in Mill street in 1879, when the Lafayette street church 
was abandoned. John Guy and Matthew Vassar, Jr., were leading 
contributors to the new building, as their uncle had been to the one 
abandoned, and the church was at the time very much the finest in 
the city. The colored people who had maintained a Baptist congre- 
gation in Poughkeepsie for some ten years erected a building on the 
comer of Winnikee avenue and Smith street, about two years ago, 
known as the Ebenezer Baptist Church. 

The Presbyterians, as we have seen, organized the first English 
speaking congregation in Poughkeepsie long before the Revolution, 
but were unable to maintain themselves. Apparently Scotch inuni- 
gration and immigration from the north of Ireland was mostly into 
the interior of the county rather than to the river towns. It was 
not until 1817 that the Presbyterians were able to form a permanent 
organization in Poughkeepsie, and not until 1826 that they purchased 
the property next west of the original Dutchess County Academy, on 
Cannon street, and built their first church on the lot where now stands 
the Young Women's Christian Association building. There were then 
eighteen members, and Joseph Allen, David Hibbard, William Wil- 
hams and Marquis de Lafayette Phillips were chosen as ruling elders. 
This church stood for a long time and was used for many purposes. 
The Presbyterians gave it up in 1850 and built a new church on the 
corner of Cannon and Hamilton streets in the pastorate of Rev. Henry 
G. Ludlow. This second building in turn, has been superseded by the 
finest and most costly church in the city, dedicated April 5, 1908. 
This beautiful new building cost, with its memorial windows, organ 
and equipment, pretty nearly $200,000, a large part of which was 
donated by William W. Smith and a considerable sum also by Mrs. 
John F. Winslow. At the time the first church was built the contro- 
versy which a few years later divided the denomination into a New 
School and Old School was raging and resulted in 1831 in the or- 
ganijation of the Second Presbyterian Church, which erected a build- 
ing on the corner of Mill and Vassar streets, now the Jewish Syna- 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 255 

gogue. When the Presbyterians built on the corner of Cannon and 
Hamilton streets the original church on Cannon street was sold to the 
Universalists, who maintained services in Poughkeepsie for a number 
of years, but were never very strong. They rented the building as 
a sort of village hall for lectures and entertainments for a considerable 
number of years and later it became and remained for a number of 
years St. Mary's Roman Catholic Church. The history of the Catho- 
hc Churches is written in a separate chapter, so need not be further 
referred to here, except to say that St. Peter's congregation was the 
first organized and dates from about 1839. 

German immigration became important enough to require occa- 
sional services in that language about 1840. The first German church 
organized, as has been already stated, was the Methodist, and the 
Lutherans were not organized until 1856, nor able* to own a place of 
worship until 1858, when they purchased and fitted up what is prob- 
ably the oldest building in town, the old Noxon House, on the east 
side of Market street near the corner of Noxon. The German 
Lutheran Church in Grand street was the first church in the city built 
after the war and was dedicated in 1866. In 1901, so many of the 
second generation of Germans had begun to prefer the English lan- 
guage and were drifting into other churches that an English Lutheran 
Church was organized and purchased property at 176 Church street 
in 1903. 

The Congregational Church, an outgrowth of the Second Presby- 
terian Church, was organized in 1837, and for a time made use of the 
building on the comer of Vassar and Mill streets.. The present Con- 
gregational Church, on Mill street, below Garden, was dedicated June 
5, 1860, and the old church was sold to the Hebrews, who had main- 
tained an organization here under the name of the Children of Israel 
since 1848. A second Hebrew congregation was organized a number 
of years ago with a place of worship on Noxon street. 

T. M. C. A. AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS. 

The Young Men's Christiaa Association was organized August 21, 
1863, with John H. Matthews, president; James S. Case, vice presi- 
dent; Frank L. Stephens, corresponding secretary; John I. Piatt, re- 
cording secretary, and William B. Fox, treasurer. It was an out- 
growth, however, of an older association, organized in 1856, called the 
Young Men's Christian Union, the president of which was Alfred B. 



256 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Smith. The Association held meetings in a room over the City Bank, 
on the corner of Main and Market streets, until in 1872 it felt itself 
strong enough to purchase the present building, then the great place 
of lectures and amusements in the city known as Pine Hall. The build- 
ing was remodelled and has from time to time been improved, until 
last year it was decided to abandon it, as Mr. William W. Smith had 
offered to erect a new building on the site of the old Hooker House on 
Market street. The cornerstone of the new building was laid Novem- 
ber 16th 1908, after the building had already been partly erected. 
It will probably cost in the neighborhood of $200,000. Mr. Smith 
was also the chief donor of the new building for the Young Women's 
Christian Association, erected in 1904, on Cannon street on the site of 
the old church building which served so many denominations. The 
Young Woman's Association was organized in 1881 and incorporated 
in 1884. The Woman's Christian Temperance Union also has a build- 
ing on Cannon street, the old Poughkeepsie Female Academy, pur- 
chased in 1889. This organization was founded in 1873 in aid of 
the Woman's Crusade, then in progress in Ohio. 

The Union Rescue Mission was organized in 1894 and started in 
what was formerly an old saloon at 42 North Clover street. The 
cornerstone of the present building was laid in October, 1896. This 
work has been, since started, under the superintendence of Charles 
H. Madison. During the past year the local board of trustees handed 
it over to the Federation of Rescue Missions, which is now in control. 

CHAEITABLE INSTITUTIONS. 

Poughkeepsie is unusually well provided wjth charitable institutions. 
The oldest of these is the Women's Union Bible and Tract Society, 
which dates back at least to 1840, when its first president was Mrs. 
Frederick W. Hatch, wife of the rector of St. Paul's Church, and it 
seems to have been the successor of organizations formed in the early 
part of the century. It has no building, but employs regular visitors 
who go into the homes of the poor and ascertain their needs. 

The Home for the Friendless on the corner of South Hamilton and 
Franklin streets, was built in 1887, the result of the work of a society 
organized earlier, known originally as the Poughkeepsie Female Guar- 
dian Society. The building of this orphanage has been considerably 
enlarged and it provided a home in 1908 for about fifty children. 

The Old Ladies' Home was founded by Jonathan Warner, who pur- 




DR. H. F. CLARK. 



POUGHKEEPSIE. 257 

chased, in 1870, the building originally erected by the Dutchess 
County Academy. William W. Smith, about 1905, considerably en- 
larged this building and it has been made a very attractive and cheer- 
ful place for those who spend their dechning years there. 

The Vassar Brothers' Home for Aged Men, which occupies the site 
of the residence of Matthew Vassar, corner of Main and Vassar streets, 
was erected by John Guy Vassar and Matthew Vassar, Jr., in 1880. 
This was one of the many benefactions of the Vassar brothers, another 
of which was the Vassar Brothers' Institute, also located on Vassar 
street on the site of the early Vassar Brewery. The Institute has an 
endowment fund and carries on popular lectures and class work in 
arts and crafts, mechanical drawing, etc., during each winter. The 
building was erected in 1882 to provide a home for |wo local societies, 
the Poughkeepsie Literary Club and the Poughkeepsie Society of 
Natural Science, which had been in existence for a number of years 
and had been very successful. They have now, however, practically 
ceased to exist as separate organizations. A second home for old 
men, the Pringle Home, designed for men of literary tastes, was 
founded in 1900 on Academy street in a house formerly the residence 
of Col. O. T. Beard. 

Vassar Brothers' Hospital was founded by Matthew Vassar, Jr., 
and the main building was erected in 1884 in the south part of the 
city overlooking the river. It was made one of the residuary lega- 
tees of the estate of John Guy Vassar and thereby came into the pos- 
session of a large endowment. Additions nearly doubling its capacity 
were built a few years ago and a library and laboratory building was 
erected in 1899. 

There had been an earlier hospital, known as the St. Barnabas, 
using a building on North Clinton street. The St. Barnabas fund is 
still in existence and used for home relief, and there is now talk of 
building with it a new St. Barnabas Hospital for tuberculosis patients. 

The House of Industry was an outgrowth of the Woman's Re- 
lief Associations formed during the Civil War. It was organized in 
the fall of 1865 with Mary Ferris as president. In 1873 it purchased 
its present home on Liberty street. Its aim is to furnish work to 
women who need it. 

Note — See Appendix for list of the farmers and land owners of the town of 
Poughkeepsie who registered cattle brands under the colonial law, and also list of 
Supervisors from 1788 to 1854. Ward and Precinct Supervisors in Chapter "VI. 



258 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE TOWN OF AMENIA. 

By S. R. Fbee. 

THE township in Dutchess County tnown as Amenia, embraces 
something over forty square miles. This territory comprises 
a part of the eastern portion of the tract of land originally 
owned by the Great Nine Partners, and lots numbers 43 to 72 of the 
Oblong. 

It lies on the extreme eastern border of the county, and has for its 
northern limit the town of North East; for the southern, the town 
of Dover; for the western, the towns of Stanford and Washington; 
for the eastern, the towns of Sharon and Kent, in Connecticut. 

Stretching along the entire eastern border of the town are the Ta- 
conic mountains. Near the middle of the town is a broken range 
of hills that extend southward to the Fishkill mountains. 

The valleys skirting these elevations are very fertile and well 
adapted to grain and grass culture. The production of milk is prob- 
ably the largest industry in the town. The principal streams of 
water are Ten Mile River, often called the Weebutook, which was 
the Indian name; the Wassaic Creek; West Brook and their tribu- 
taries. 

For many years the mining of iron ore has been extensively carried 
on in several parts of the town. At this writing, the mines are all 
silent; but interested parties say that the old mine near the village 
of Amenia wiU soon be operated again. 

History and tradition appear to agree in making Richard Sackett 
the first white settler in the Town of Amenia. The old records show 
that on March 11th, 1703, Richard Sackett petitioned the Colonial 
Government for a license to purchase a tract of land in Dutchess 
Coflnty, east of the Hudson River, called "Washiack," now softened 
into Wassaic. 



TOWN OF AMENIA. 259 

The same records tell us that the petition was granted in October 
of the same year. The precise date of Mr. Sackett's entry upon his 
vast domain is not known, but there is tradition to show that within 
three or four years of the above date he built a house near the place 
which has been known since the days of the Revolutionary War as 
the Steel Works, where he lived and died. The old records also show 
that Mr. Sackett was not able to make good his title to said lands, as 
the British sovereign was not willing his possessions in the New World 
should be disposed of without his consent. 

The unfortunate Mr. Sackett died in poverty in 1746, and was 
buried not far from the house he built. Mr. Newton Reed, in his 
valuable history of Amenia, quotes from a manuscript of Barnabas 
Payne, in which the author says he has "several times visited the grave 
of Mr. Sackett at the Steel Works, but at this writing no stone re- 
mains by which the grave can be identified." 

The order of succession by which the town was settled has not been 
well preserved. From about the middle of the eighteenth century 
the town began to fill up rapidly. Mr. Reed has furnished a long 
list of early settlers, which includes the following names : Uldrick 
Winegar and his son Captain Garrett Winegar, Lieut. Samuel Sny- 
der, Henry Nase, Captain Isaac Delamater, Baltus Lot, Adam Show- 
erman, the families of Knickerbocker and Van Deusen, Hezekiah King, 
Abraham Paine, Stephen Kinny, Benjamin Hollister, Peter Klein 
(Cline), Justus Powers, Elijah Park, Joel and Abner GiUett, Cap- 
tain Stephen Hopkins, Abraham Bockee, Captain Thomas Wheeler, 
Col. William Barker, Deacon Moses Barlow and his brother Nathan, 
Daniel C. Bartlett, Zera Beach, Caleb Benton, Silas Belden, Captain 
John Boyd, Lemuel and William Brush, Judah Burton, Ezra Bryan, 
Benjamin Carpenter, Joseph Chamberlain, James Reed, Judah Swift, 
Jeremiah Ingraham, Nathan Conklin, David Collin, Rev. John Corn- 
wall, Jacob Evartson, John Gamsey, Roger Gale, Deacon Asa Hol- 
lister, Samuel Jarvis, Thomas Mygatt and John Balis. 

The sturdy German came from the early settlements along the 
upper Hudson; and the Dutch came from their "New Amsterdam" 
(New York) ; arid the stern Puritan came from Connecticut and Rhode 
Island. A blending of these vigorous elements made up the early 
society of Amenia. 

The Colonial boundaries of the Precinct of Amenia embraced a 



260 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

large part of the present town of North East. The Amenia of to-day 
was determined in the year 1823. 

There are in the town six villages. Amenia, the largest, a station 
on the Harlem railroad has above a hundred dwelling houses. Wassaic, 
the next in size, has above eighty dwellings. Smithfield, Amenia 
Union, South Amenia and LeedsviUe are small, pleasant villages. 

Amenia and Wassaic have both lost and gained since the publication 
of the last history of Dutchess County. From Amenia Village have 
gone the old historic Seminary and the Methodist Episcopal Church; 
but in the place of the Seminary is a well furnished and officered High 
School, with an average attendance of 175 pupils. For the loss of the 
Church there appears to be no substitute. There remain, however, 
three Churches, Presbyterian,, Baptist and Roman Cathohc, with ample 
sittings and a cordial welcome for all who desire to attend religious 
services. 

In a commercial way Amenia has made very substantial gains in the 
last forty years. 

We note first the Willson & Eaton Company, organized in 1878, 
wholesale and retail dealers in lumber, coal, lime, cement, all kinds of 
grain and stock foods. An extensive manufacture of bricks, and a 
wood working plant, well fitted with the most improved machinery for 
the most elaborate architectural designs. When this company was 
organized thirty years ago it did a business amounting to about 
$75,000 a year. Its sales at this writing reach the enormous sum of 
a million five hundred thousand dollars annually. The company em- 
ploys in its varied departments upwards of eighty men. 

Next in the order comes the Iron Foundry, owned and operated by 
Mr. B. H. Fry, a native of Amenia, furnishing employment for forty 
men. 

For the next we have the Shefiield Farms Slosson Decker Company 
for the production of caseine, requiring for the process something 
above ten thousand quarts of milk per day. This enterprising com- 
pany has factories scattered along the Harlem railroad from Hills- 
dale to Patterson. 

Last but not least is the Harlem Valley Brick and Supply Com- 
pany, located here in 1906, for the manufacture of ornamental brick. 
The stiff mud process is used, and the product is a very superior 
article. The present drying capacity is 30,000 brick per day. The 



TOWN OF AMENIA. 261 

main office of the company is located at White Plains, where a large 
business is carried on in the sale of sewer pipe, paving brick, fire 
brick, and ornamental building brick. 

Amenia Village may also boast of a complete water system with 
hydrants located on the principal streets, a well organized fire and 
hose company, an acetylene gas plant which furnishes Hght for the 
streets, the dwellings and the churches, and an imposing granite foun- 
tain, the gift of Mrs. Joseph Guernsey, in memory of her husband, 
who was a native of Amenia. 

Wassaic has lost the old Gridley furnace and the Pendelton sash 
and blind factory, but has gained the Borden condensed milk factory, 
employing about seventy-five men. The village has a graded school, 
and a Presbyterian Church. . 

A modest hamlet lying about three quarters of a mile southeast 
from Wassaic, long known as the Steel Works, demands some notice 
here. A half dozen houses make up the hamlet, yet it can boast a 
carriage making and general repair shop, a sale and exchange stable, 
with all sorts of horse furnishings, and the Smith Stevens & Benton 
Motor Company. So the old historic Steel Works, which maintained 
a forge and worked pig iron into steel for the use of the Colonial 
army, in the war for liberty and independence, bids fair, after the 
sleep of the century, to be heard from again. The villages of South 
Amenia, Amenia Union, Leedsville and Smithfield appear to the casual 
visitor to change but little as the years go by. The inhabitants 
change, but the stately residences, well preserved and set in the midst 
of charming landscapes, seem almost as enduring as the hills that 
surround them. 

Leedsville, once the conunercial center of the township of Amenia, 
is now a quiet hamlet, much appreciated by those who would find 
relief in summer from the noise and heat of the great cities. 

Nestled in a sweeping curve of the Weebotuck, are the vine em- 
bowered cottages once occupied by the Bentons, long famed as poets 
and lovers of art. The Bentons are not there, but the moral and 
intellectual atmosphere which they created still lingers about the 
place and gives it an air of distinction. As late as 1832, when a 
seminary for Amenia was seriously under consideration, many of the 
influential citizens of the town favored Leedsville as the most suitable 



262 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

location. From an address given in Amenia in 1875 by George W. 
Ingraham (now deceased) we quote the following: 

"In 1832 this commvmity became enthusiastic on the subject of education, and 
resolved to have a seminary located somewhere in the town. The three prominent 
places named were Amenia, Leedsville and Amenia Union. For beauty of situa- 
tion Leedsville stood first, and a power was brought in favor of that place which 
was hard to overcome. Two full years were spent in fruitless controversy. How- 
ever, in the month of May, 1834, a committee was appointed, with Rev. Phineas 
Rice as chairman, to determine the location of the prospective seminary. In 
early June the committee rendered a sealed verdict, which was not to be opened for 
twenty-four hours after the conmiittee had left the place. The following day the 
seal was broken, the verdict read, when to the surprise of some and the joy of 
others. Cook's Hill in the Village of Amenia, was named as the favored spot. 
The most active in this new educational movement were George Ingraham, J. 
Williams, Dr. L. W. Stanton of Amenia, Selah North, Joseph D. Hunt and William 
A. Benton of Leedsville, and the whole community of Amenia Union. Work 
was immediately begun on Cook's HiU to construct a foundation for the new 
edifice. This was accomplished by cutting down the Hill some sixteen feet and 
grading the grounds to their present proportions. In the summer of 1835 the 
seminary was built and the school opened in the autumn of that year, with Rev. 

C. K. True as principal." 

In the year 1888 the Amenia Seminary closed its remarkable his- 
tory. During its existence of fifty-three years students were enrolled 
from every State in the Union, and at one time there were students 
from the island of Cuba and South America. The advent of the 
graded schools rendered the existence of such an institution as the 
seminary unnecessary. The vacant and time-worn buildings still stand 
on Cook's HiU, but the halls and class rooms no longer echo with the 
footsteps of young men and maidens in the pursuit of knowledge. 
To the multitude who knew and loved the old seminary there is a 
feeling that the head should be uncovered, and the footsteps be made 
soft and slow, as one passes over these historic remains. 

In the early part of the year 1906 some of the old students ex- 
pressed a desire for a reunion of the Alumni of the once famous insti- 
tution. The 22d day of August, 1906, was the day appointed for 
the event. The day was sultry and threatening, but in spite of heat 
and clouds, fully a thousand people gathered to celebrate the occasion. 
Several persons came who attended the seminary at its opening (1835), 
Tlie exercises opened with an address by the venerable Bishop Cyrus 

D, Foss of Philadelphia, who was an early pupil of the seminary, and 



TOWN OF AMENIA. 263 

later was principal. He was followed by the Hon. G. G. Reynolds 
of Brooklyn, a native of Amenia, in a felicitous address. An original 
poem and short address by Joel Benton, another of Amenia's sons, 
now of Poughkeepsie ; a paper by R. B. Taylor of Brooklyn, and a 
short address by Rev. D. H. Hanaburgh of Carmel, constituted the 
afternoon programme. 

The evening exercises consisted of an address by Prof. S. T. Frost, 
of Mount Vernon, N. Y. Address by Mrs. Mary Mead Clark of 
Amenia. Address by Rev. A. K. Sanford, D. D., Pleasantville, N. Y. 

The Rev. Denis Wortman, D. D., of East Orange, N. J., and The 
Hon. H. C. M. Ingraham were also on the programme, but the hours 
took wings and would not fold them even for our pleasure, New- 
man's orchestra and two soloists. Miss Carrie Newman and Mrs. A. 
F. Conklin added a delightful feature to the occasion. The above 
outlined programme with the addition of two or three extempore 
speeches by Dr. S. G. Cook and Rev. C. S. Harrower, D. D, both of 
New York city made an occasion long to be remembered by the citi- 
zens of Amenia. 

The first movements in the direction of religious organization in 
Amenia are much involved in obscurity. Mr. Reed says, the first 
Church was organized near the center of the town in 1748, and was 
named Carmel in the Nine Partners. Ten years later we discover a 
more distinct historic trail in the erection of the old "Red Meeting 
House." We have a very complete record of this early institution to- 
gether with a hst of its membership and the cost of the house of wor- 
ship. Reliable tradition determines the exact spot where the old his- 
toric church was erected. About fifteen rods north of the "Old 
iBurying Ground," on land now owned by Mrs. Cora Morgan once 
stood the famous old "Red Meeting House." 

This church organization appears to have been undenominational. 
Men and women of all faiths made up its membership; and preachers 
from the several protestant denominations at various times dispensed 
the gospel message. Tradition says that the celebrated George 
Whitefield preached in the old "Red Meeting House" in the summer 
of 1770 to a vast crowd gathered from all parts of the country. 

The great war which was waged to decide the liberty of the Colon- 
ists drew sharp lines of distinction in the social order. Men who had 



264 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

fought and suffered for liberty could not easily tolerate those who had 
been lukewarm and indifferent. 

Then too, as the spirit of personal liberty increased among the 
people, dogmatic questions of a religious character soon began to 
agitate the popular mind. 

In 1790 the Baptists organized a separate society, and about the 
same time the Methodists took up the same role. 

The Baptist people erected their house of worship nearly opposite 
the Red Meeting House, on land now belonging to John Haskins, and 
the Methodists built further north on land then belonging to Thomas 
Ingraham, now best known as the Frost estate. The building was 
erected almost directly opposite the dwelling now owned and occupied 
by Mr. I. N. Bristol. Some fragment of broken brick and mortar 
stiU remain to mark the site of the first Methodist Episcopal Church 
in Amenia. 

The separation of the Baptists and Methodists from the parent 
society greatly weakened it ; but there is evidence to show that regular 
services were maintained in the old Red Meeting House for some 
years thereafter. 

In the year 18S3 the Presbyterian element in the Society of the Red 
Meeting House built a house of worship on east Main street in the 
village of Amenia. Between thirty and forty years later the society found 
a generous friend in the Hon. A. W. Palmer, who donated a beautiful 
site for a church and parsonage on North street. On this site the 
society built and dedicated their new house of worship in the month 
of June, 1867. This society has of late found a friend in the person 
of Mrs. H. S. Chapman, formerly of Amenia now of Glen Ridge, N. J., 
who in the summer of 1903 sent her check of several hundred! dollars 
to be used in the building of an addition to the lecture room. 

In the year 1851 the Baptist society pulled down the old structure 
that stood about a mile north of the village, and converted whatever 
was useful into a new church building which they located on South 
street. This house has been repaired, enlarged and beautified from 
time to time, and is today, with the adjoining parsonage, one of the 
attractive features of the village. 

The Methodists also came down from the north, and worked the old 
ma^rial into a new church, which they located on west Main street in 
the year 1845. For many years this church was very prosperous, but 



TOWN OF AMENIA. 265 

with the decline of the Seminary its mission seemed to be ended. The 
property was finally sold, and the few remaining members united with 
other churches, or were removed by that power that shapes all human 
ends. 

If one inclines to country hfe Amenia offers as many attractive 
features as any town in the county. In the first place the land is 
very fertile and the scenery is unsurpassed. The drive from Amenia 
village around the mountain via. Wassaic, South Amenia, Amenia 
Union and Leedsville, a distance of ten miles, can hardly be equaled 
in the Harlem valley. In summer the fields are strikingly green, the 
streams clear and pebbly, and the air, fresh from the mountains, very 
invigorating. Another highway is Ukewise noteworthy, viz. from 
Amenia village over De Lavergne Hill and thence to Wassaic via. 
^'Turkey Hollow." This drive, for wildness of iScenery is not sur- 
passed by anything we have seen in the far-famed Berkshire Hills of 
Mass. The highway follows a stream that leaps and plunges, roars 
and dashes, foams and splashes like Southey's cataract that came 
down so mightily from Lodore. Good roads also add greatly to the 
comfort of country life. 

The roads in Amenia are not perfect, but they are being much im- 
proved and are likely to be much more improved in the near future. 
A movement has been recently inaugurated to put down stone or con- 
crete sidewalks in the village of Amenia, and a considerable sum of 
money has already been secured for this purpose. 

Amenia has its full complement of stores, a hve weekly newspaper, 
a National bank,^ and two first-class hotels. These together with an 
enterprising and intelligent people should insure future prosperity. 

The names of the Precinct Supervisors wiU be found in Chapter 
iVI, The succession of Town Supervisors since its organization in 
1788 has been as follows : 



1T87— '93 


Barnabas Paine 


1809 


Isaac Smith 


1794r- '97 


Edmund Perlee 


1810 


Benajah Thompson 


1798— 1800 


Cyrenus Crosby- 


1811— '18 Elisha Barlow 


1801— '02 


Philip Spencer, Jr. 


1819 


Abraham Bockee 


1803 


Elisha Barlow 


1820 


Joel Benton, Jr. 


1804 


Benjamin Herrick 


1821 


Thomas Barlow 


1805— '08 


Benajah Thompson 


1822 


Abraham Bockee 



See Part II of this work. 



266 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1833 




Joel Benton 


1865 




John H. Cline 


1824 




David Nye 


1866— 


'67 


Milo F. Winchester 


1825— 


'27 


Tabor Belden 


1868 




Isaac H. Conklin 


18S8 




Joel Brown 


1869 




Charles M. Benjamin 


1829 




Joseph D. Hunt 


1870 




Isaac H. Conklin 


1830— 


'31 


Philo Cline 


1871 




Charles M. Benjamin 


1832 




Walter Perlee 


1872— 


'73 


Hiram Cooper 


1833— 


'35 


Philo Cline 


1874— 


'75 


George Williams 


1836— 


'37 


William A. Benton 


1876 




Ambrose Mygatt 


1838— 


'40 


Philo Cline 


1877— 


•78 


John W. Putnam 


1841 




John K. Mead 


1879 




Milo P. Winchester 


1842— 


'43 


William N. Merritt 


1880 




John W. Putnam 


1844^ 


'45 


Hiram VaU 


1881— 


'82 


MUo F. Winchester 


1846— 


'47 


Noah Gridley 


1883— 


'84 


William H. Tanner 


1848— 


'49 


John H. Perlee 


1885— 


'86 


Albert Cline 


18S0 




Philo CUne 


1887— 


'88 


Isaac H. Conklin 


1851— 


'52 


George H. Swift 


1889— 


'90 


William H. Bartlett 


1853— 


'54 


John C. Paine 


1891 




William H. Tanner 


1855— 


'56 


Robert Grant 


1892 




James S. Chaffee 


1857— 


•58 


Judah Swift 


1893 




William B. Nelson 


1859- 


'60 


Walter P. Perlee 


1894— 


'96 


William A. Sherman 


1861 




MUo F. Winchester 


1896— 


•97 


James S. Chaffee 


1862 




Charles E. Bostwick 


1898— 


•05 


Miles K. Lewis 


1863 




William H. Grant 


1906— 


•09 


Henry N. Winchester 


1864 




Benj. F. Carpenter 









Mr. Newton Reed published in 1875 an excellent little local history of Amenia 
containing much valuable information respecting the early history of the town and 
of its people, the original settlers and their descendants. 

It is not within the scope of this History of Dutchess Coimty to go into the 
local histories of the various towns with the particularity that in a special town 
history would be appropriate and expected. 

If one desires more intimate information of Amenia and its people than can be 
found in the foregoing article, he is referred to "Early History of Amenia by 
Newton Reed, Amenia, DeLacey & Wiley, Printers, 1876." 

The book can be found in the public library of Poughkeepsie in the Adriance 
Memorial Library Building. — (EniroB.) 



TOWN OF BEEKMAN. 267 



CHAPTER XVII. 
THE TOWN OF BEEKMAN. 

THIS is one of the southern tier towns of Dutchess, its southern 
angle extending almost to the north line of Putnam county. 
It is bounded on the north by Union Vale; on the east by 
Pawling and Dover; on the west by East Fishkill, and for a short 
distance on the northwest by La Grange. The present area is placed 
at 18,162 acres. 

The surface of the town is generally hilly and in the southern 
angle mountainous. In the central portion is a good agricultural 
region, and directly northward are found extensive deposits of hema- 
tite ore, which have been mined considerably. The streams are mere 
creeks, tributaries to the Fishkill which flows southwesterly through 
the center of the town. Near the western border is Sylvan Lake, a 
beautiful sheet of water, covering over one hundred acres. 

The name of the town is derived from Col. Henry Beekman, who, 
in 1697, obtained a grant of all the land east of Rombout's Patent 
to the Oblong. This embraced the present towns of Beekman, Union 
Vale, a portion of La Grange, and nearly aU of Pawling and Dover 
with the exception of a strip along their eastern border. For this 
grant Col. Beekman was obliged to pay to the Crown of England an 
annual rental of forty shillings. He therefore surrendered the patent 
and petitioned for a new grant to the same property on more favor- 
able terms. The new patent was issued June 26, 1703. 

By Colonial Act of December 16, 1737, Beekman's Precinct was 
formed, the territory corresponding with that embraced in the patent. 
An act was passed May 20, 1769, by which Beekman's was divided 
into two precincts, the second to be called Pawling's, which included 
the present towns of Pawling and Dover. March 7, 1788, Beek- 
man became one of the original eight towns in the county. This was 
practically a continuation of the precinct^ the territory remaining 



268 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the same until 1821, when the town of Freedom (now La Grange) was 
set off. Beekman was further reduced in 1827 by the erection of 
the town of Union Vale. 

Settlements within the present town limits are supposed to have 
been made early in the eighteenth century, but records relating thereto 
have been lost or destroyed. A man by the name of De Long is 
credited with keeping an inn near the present village of Green Haven 
as early as 1725, but his name does not appear in the list of free- 
holders of 1740. The location of the tavern on Colles map of 1789 
places it about a mile and a half southeast(tof Sylvan Lake. James 
De Long, who was town clerk in 1802-'03, is said to have been a 
descendant of the settler of that name. The families of Carman, 
Brill, Noxon, Baker, Pleas, Uhls from Germany, Cary, Dennis, Hax- 
tun. Sweet and Gardner, were among the earliest known settlers. John 
Carman represented the precinct at Supervisors' meetings from 1739 
to '42. His name appears in the official record of Supervisors in 
1754, and that of Bartholomew Noxon in 1761. William Humphrey 
held this office in 1763. 

The town records contain proceedings of precinct meetings from 
April 7, 1772, to the formation of the town in 1788. The following 
officers were elected in 1772: Joshua Carman, Supervisor; Maurice 
Pleas, Town Clerk; Samuel Dorland, James Vanderburgh, Assessors; 
Simeon Noxon, Constable and Collector; Thomas Clements and 
Maurice Pleas, Lispectors of Litestate Estates. 

Additional records of Beekman Precinct will be found in Chapter 
VI. 

The Highland Division of the N. Y., N. H. & H. Railroad, run- 
ning east and west through the central part of the town, has stations 
at Green Haven and Poughquag. 

The Clove Branch Railroad Company was chartered November 
21, 1868, with a capital of $150,000, to construct a road from Clove 
Branch Junction, on the Newburgh, Dutchess & Connecticut Rail- 
road, to Sylvan Lake, a distance of 4.25 miles, which was built and 
opened in 1869. April 28, 1870, the company was allowed to extend 
its road by a branch to any of the iron mines in the surrounding 
towns. A branch was accordingly opened in 1877, from Sylvan 
Lake«to Clove Valley, a distance of 4.01 miles. This enterprise in- 
creased mining operations in northern Beekman, but with the abandon- 




CHARLES H. SLOCUM. 



TOWN OF BEEKMAN. 269' 

ment of the mines in 1883, the railroad service in the course of a few 
years also ceased. 

There are no incorporated villages in the town. Poughquag, Green 
Haven, Clove Valley and Beekmanville are hamlets. 

Poughquag, which derives its name from "A-po-qua-gue," the Indian 
name for Sylvan Lake, is a pretty little village with a population of 
about two hundred. It contains a Methodist church, a district school, 
and the stores of Charles Brill and GrifBn Miller. Mr. Miller is the 
present postmaster, succeeding, in 1908, John H. Draper, who was 
appointed in 1894. Other merchants of this village in times past,, 
were Hamilton ColweU, F. S. Merwin, Charles F. RasseU and Charles 
H. Slocum, the present County Treasurer, Nearby is the grist mill 
of William A. Murphy, town clerk, who bought the, property in 1898, 
effecting many improvements. 

The edifice of the Methodist Society here was erected in 1839, and 
dedicated January 15, 1840, the Rev. Mr. Cochran officiating. The 
present pastor is Rev. Charles Sager. 

A short distance northeast of Poughquag was the home of Col. 
Vanderburgh, an officer of some prominence in the Revolution. He 
enjoyed the friendship and confidence of Washington, who in his diary 
mentions stopping with him to take dinner, when on a hasty visit to 
Hartford. 

The village of Green Haven, near the southwestern border, con- 
tains the store of Irving Dutcher, who is also postmaster and Super- 
visor. In Revolutionary times there was a grist mill here conducted 
by one Vincent. The Bogarts from Holland were among the early 
settlers in this neighborhood, and in precinct records is found the 
name of Richmore Bogart, Justice of the Peace. 

At Clove Valley is the store and creamery of David V. Moore, who 
has held the office of postmaster since 1895. In 1831 the firm of 
Elisha Sterling & Co. built here a charcoal furnace, and the locality 
is famiHarly known as "Beekman Furnace." The charcoal furnace 
had a capacity of about twelve tons per day, and the iron made wa& 
of superior quality. The Clove Spring Iron Works was organized in 
1873. This company, in addition to operating the charcoal fur- 
nace, erected an anthracite furnace, with a capacity of some twenty- 
five tons per day. The industry gave employment to many men, and 
for several years Clove Valley had a population exceeding two hun- 



270 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

dred; but the enterprise did not prove a financial success and in 1883 
was discontinued. 

At the hamlet of Beekmanville is located the Baptist church, which 
was bmlt in 1839, and dedicated December 25th of that jear, by 
Rev. Daniel T. HiU, who remained as its pastor three years. The 
edifice cost $3,000 and was paid for largely through the efiForts of 
Nicholas German and Abner Osbom. The pulpit is now supplied 
from Pawling. 

May 11th, 1861, Beekmanville was the scene of a large gathering 
of patriotic citizens who assembled to formulate plans for the enlist- 
ment of volunteers in defense of the Union cause. The meeting was 
addressed by District Attorney Allard Anthony of Poughkeepsie, 
Rev. Mr. King of Yonkers, and Mr. Benson J. Lossing, who was a 
native of the town, and whose speech on this occasion was prophetic 
of the ultimate triumph of the Union arms. During the Rebellion 
the town of Beekman raised and expended nearly $35,000 for volun- 
teers and substitutes. 

The Beekman Iron Mine in this neighborhood was discovered in 
1846 by William E. Haxtun. It was opened in 1869 by Albert Tower, 
who owned and operated it for many years, giving employment to 
thirty hands. 

Another ore mine nearby, owned by the Sylvan Lake Ore and Iron 
Company, was also extensively worked, but these mines, like the fur- 
naces at Clove Valley, have long been abandoned. 

Dr. Clark A. Nicholson, for several decades the only resident phy- 
sician of the town, located in Beekmanville in 1847, and became largely 
interested in the development and sale of the adjoining iron mines. 
He died in 1885, and was succeeded by Dr. D. C. Tripp. 

Roman Catholic churches are situated at Sylvan Lake and Clove 
Valley, an account of which appears in another chapter. 

The Supervisors from the organization of the town in 1788, have 
been as follows : 



1788— '91 


Jonathan Dennis 


1830 


John Wilkinson 


1793— '96 


Jesse Oakley 


1831— '32 


Egbert Gary 


1797— '04 


Ebenezer Gary 


1833— '34 


Thomas Lee 


1805— '13 


Samuel A. Barker 


1825— '36 


Egbert Gary 


181« 


Thomas Flagler 


1827— '38 


John Gooper 


181S 


Samuel A. Barker 


1829— '31 


Egbert Gary 


1816— '19 


Egbert Gary 


1832— '33 


James De Long 



TOWN OF BEEKMAN. 



271 



1834. 


Egbert Gary 


1869 


William W. Haxtun 


1836— '39 


Elnathan Haxtun 


1870— '72 


George T. Doughty 


1840 


Egbert Gary 


1873— '74 


James E. Dutcher 


1841— '42 


James H. Denton 


1876 


David Ludington 


1843 


Egbert Gary 


1876— '77 


John H. Draper 


1844 


Gilbert B.^Noxon 


1878 


Edwin L. Williams 


1845 


Joseph C. Doughty 


1879— '80 


Joseph H. Storm 


1846 


Gilbert B. Noxon 


1881 


Isaac "Vail 


1847 


Joseph C. Doughty 


1882 


Daniel Luddington 


1848— "49 


Wilson B. Sheldon 


1883— '84 


John Jones 


18S0— 'SI 


William A. Holmes 


1885 


Gharles H. Slocum 


1862— '53 


James F. Dakin 


1886 


John Van Wyck 


1864r-'56 


Elnathan Haxtun 


1887— '88 


Daniel Luddington 


1866— '67 


Wilson B. Sheldon 


1889 


James H. Russell 


1858— '69 


Smith Gronk 


1890— '91 


Kromline Andrews 


I860— '61 


De Witt C. Gary 


1892— '93 


David*V. Moore 


1862— '66 


Jeremiah Sheldon 


1894— '96 


Wilson B. Storm 


1866— '67 


WiUiam W. Haxtun 


1896— '06 


David V. Moore 


1868 


George Tabor 


1906— '09 


Irving Dutcher 



272 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XVni. 
THE TOWN OF CLINTON. 

THIS town, which was named for Governor George Clinton, 
originally extended westward to the Hudson, and as far south 
as the northern boundaries of the present towns of Pough- 
keepsie and La Grange, comprising over 66,000 acres, with a popu- 
lation according to the Federal Census of 1790, of 4,607. 

The division of the county into precincts in 1737, created Crom 
Elbow, which passed into Charlotte in 1762. Clinton was formed 
from the precincts of Charlotte and Rhinebeck, on the 13th day of 
March, 1786, two years prior to the civil reorganization of the 
county, whereby precincts became towns. Cornelius Humphrey, who 
had served as Supervisor of Charlotte in 1773 and '75, was elected 
Supervisor of the new town, and in 1787 was succeeded by Richard de 
Cantillon. 

The territory of Clinton was reduced January 26, 1821, by the cre- 
ation of the towns of Hyde Park and Pleasant Valley, to its present 
area of 23,4!87 acres, bounded as follows: On the north by Milan; 
east by Stanford and Washington; south by Pleasant Valley, and 
west by Rhinebeck and Hyde Park. 

There are four small lakes within its borders, of which Long Pond 
is the largest. Little Wappinger creek flows southerly through the 
center of the town. Schultz Mountain, the principal elevation, rises 
780 feet above the tide. The town contains no village of commercial 
importance. Clinton Comers, Clinton Hollow, Schultzville and Pleas- 
ant Plains are hamlets. 

The precinct records shed some light upon the names of the first 
dwellers in the original town. Among those recorded from 1748 to 
1756 are Nathan Bull, Moses Harris, Isaac Germond, Dirck Van 
Vliet, Jacob Spricor, John Earll, Lieut. Lewis, Jonathan Lyon, Isaiah 
Sherman. The earliest settlers within the present town limits were the 
families of Van Vliet, Schultz, Sleight, Garrison, Cookingham and 



TOWN OF CLINTON. 273 

Traver, some of whose descendants reside upon the ancestral acres. 
Further reference to these families will be found in Part II of this work. 
Inscribed on field stones in the old cemetery near the Presbyterian 
Church at Pleasant Plains have been deciphered the names of Geritj^e 
Masten Van Vliet, wife of Aurie Van Vliet, and Capt. Joost Garrison 
and Magdalena his wife, buried in the year 1779. 

"^^ Henry Sleight, a native of Long Island, is credited with being the 
first innkeeper. He built his tavern, which is still standing, about 
the year 1768, on the A. C. Briggs farm. 

Another early innkeeper and merchant was Abel Peters of Clinton 
Corners. His tavern and store were erected during the Revolution, 
and in 1792 he built a brick residence ; the brick was manufactured on 
the premises, the materials being thrown togethw in a mass, and 
mixed by means of oxen treading in it. 

The grist mill at Pleasant Plains, which has been operated by water 
power over one hundred and thirty years, is an interesting landmark. 
It was built in 1775 by John De Witt, son of Captain Petrus and 
Rachel (Radclifi^) De Witt. It later became the property of John 
LeRoy, who with his son Abraham, ran it for upwards of forty years. 
It was afterwards owned by George Cookingham, Harris & LeRoy, 
Frost & Cookinghom, and since 1877 by J. Z. Frost. It is a frame 
building S5 by 55 feet, three stories high, and cost about $8,000. 

John De Witt was a prominent man in the official affairs of Dutchess 
County. He was a member of the State Convention which adopted the 
Federal Constitution in 1788 ; and Sheriff of the county from 1785 
to '89 and from 1794 to '97. He also represented the county in the 
Assembly in 1786 '88 and '89, and again in 1793 and '94. 

Clinton has sent many of her townsmen to the Assembly, including 
Isaac Bloom, Morgan Lewis, Ebenezer Mott, John M. Thurston, Wil- 
liam D. Williams, Tobias L. Stoutenburgh, John Beadle, Samuel Mott, 
Israel Shadboldt, Gilbert Bentley and Wesley Butts. Their years of 
service will be found in Chapter VII, devoted to the Civil List. 

Hon. John H. Otis of Clinton Corners was also a resident of the 
town during his term of office in the State Senate, 1852 and '53. 

The earliest physician in the town was Dr. Nathaniel Marvin, who 
located at Pleasant Plains in 1794. He was succeeded by Dr. John 
Dodge about 1820. A sketch of Dr. Edwin Barnes^ who began prac- 



274 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

tice here in 1866, and was active in the councils of the Medical Society, 
wiU be found elsewhere in this work. 

A landmark of pioneer times is the Quaker Meeting House at CUn- 
ton Comers, built in 1777, in which year the Society was organized. 
Among the first members are found the names of George Harris, Isaac 
HaUock and Paul Upton. A separation in the Society occurred 
in 1828, owing to the dissension of EUas Hicks. Those who. did not 
adhere to him were termed Orthodox Quakers. They formed a new 
Society, and in 1829 built a church nearby the original stone meeting 
house. 

In the "Book of Records of the Trustees for Providence Society, 
in Charlotte Precinct," is found the earliest recorded effort for the 
establishment and maintenance of religious worship within the origi- 
nal town. A deed bearing date of September 15, 1784, reads 
in part: "In consideration of the good will and affection he bears 
unto the inhabitants in this neighborhood of Lot No. 4 of the small 
division of the Great Nine Partners, in Dutchess County, for the 
encouragement of reUgion and vital piety, and for the encouragement 
of education, Richard Alsop, of Newtown, Queens County, New York, 
gave, granted, conveyed and confirmed unto Timothy Doughty, Henry 
Humphrey, and John De Witt, Trustees for a Society of the Reformed 
Church of Holland, as now constituted in America, or, agreeably, to 
the constitution of the Kirk of Scotland, to them and their successors 
forever, trustees of said Society, in this neighborhood of said Lot No. 
4, for the express purpose of having a house erected for the worship 
of Almighty God, and a school house for the education of youth on 
the premises — a certain parcel of land, being part of said Lot No. 
4, to contain two acres." 

Over a year elapsed before any definite action was taken by the 
above mentioned trustees to avail themselves of the provision of Mr. 
Alsop. At a meeting held December 5, 1785, an organization was 
formed to be known as "The Trustees of the Presbyterian Society," 
of which the following persons were elected trustees: John Lawrence, 
Cornelius Van Vliet, David Knapp, John De Witt, Jesse Bell and 
Timothy Doughty. 

Some difficulty was encountered in securing from the County Pres- 
bytery a stated supply for one quarter of his time. It was not until 
1787 that an arrangement was made' whereby the Rev. Wheeler Case 



TOWN OF CLINTON. 275 

was to devote one-^third of his time to this Society, beginning July 
1st of that year, in consideration of the annual payment of £23, 7s. 
The Society evidently did not prosper and was terminated, according 
tb the. records, in October, 1789. 

Divine services were continued, however, at the residence of John 
LeRoy and' in the school house, then on the site of the present Pres- 
byterian Church, as often as a supply could be obtained. 

The recordfe in connection with the present church state that the 
Presbyterian Church of Pleasant Plains was organized on the 28th 
day of March, 1837, by Rev. Alonzo Welton of Poughkeepsie, and 
consisted of the following thirteen persons, viz. : John LeRoy, Isaiah 
Van Keuren, John Piatt, William Odell, Stephen LeRoy, Thomas De- 
Witt LeRoy, Hannah LeRoy, Gertrude Van Keuren, Malinda LeRoy, 
Welthy LeRoy, Jane M. Odtell and Phebe Ann McAvery. These per- 
sons were formerly members of the Presbyterian Church of Pleasant 
Valley. 

The church began its organization with twenty-one members, and 
secured Rev. William N. Sayre for its first stated supply. The present 
building was erected in 1837 and enlarged in 1859. The parsonage 
was built in 1866. The Rev. Sherman Hoyt was the first' settled pas- 
tor. He was called in 1843, and remained eighteen years. His min- 
istry is represented as having been one of great power, and the mem- 
bership of the church rapidly increased. 

At Schultzville is located the First Christian Church of Clinton, 
organized in the spring of 1863. Christian services were held in the 
hamlet as early as 1846, at which the Rev. Philetus Roberts officiated. 
David H. Schultz, Benjamin Conger, Dr. Peter Denny, Edward Pultz 
and Smith J. Gildersleeve were active members of the congregation. 
In 1866 the present church building was erected on land donated by 
Theodore A. Schultz, who also contributed $3^000 towards the cost 
of the edifice. In 1869, during the pastorate of Rev. J. Q. Evans, 
the parsonage was built. 

Theodore A. Schultz also donated funds for the purpose of pur- 
chasing a site and erecting a hall at Schultzville for Warren Lodge, 
F. & A. M. This is one of the oldest lodges in the State, an interest- 
ing account of which appears in the chapter devoted to the Masonic 
fraternity. 

Extensive slate deposits in Schultz Mountain, a short distance west 



276 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



of SchultzvLUe, have at diflFerent times afforded considerable industrial 
activity. In 1798 slate was quarried here for roofing the house of 
Mrs. Richard Montgomery of Rhinebeck. Operations were continued 
successfully for about twenty-five years, when it was discovered that 
the grade of slate was too heavy for durable roofing purposes, and the 
quarries were abandoned. Slate from this mountain which had been' 
placed on the roof of the cotton mill at Pleasant Valley in 1815, had 
to be removed in 1845, and the building recovered with Vermont slate. 
In 1866 the industry was revived by a Mr. Smith from Vermont. Sev- 
eral buildings were erected, and about thirty men given employment. 
Efforts were made to utilize the product both for roofing and mantel 
purposes, but in neither instance was the result satisfactory, and since 
1874 these quarries have been in idleness. 

The official records of the town have been carefully preserved, and 
are in the possession of the town clerk, together with some of the pre- 
cinct records, beginning with the year 1771, at which time Wilham 
Doughty was clerk. Subsequent clerks were Peter Germond, 1772; 
John Allen, 1792; David Traver, 1796; Jonathan Owen, 1799 to 
1805; Koert Dubois, 1808 and '09, and Henry Vanderburgh, 1811 to 
'1'5. John De Witt was Supervisor from 1800 to 1802. 

The succession of Supervisors since the organization of the town 
in 1821 has been as follows:^ 



1821— '32 


John F. Schultz 


1850 


Stephen H. Smith 


182a— '25 


John Dodge 


1851 


Fred C. Filkins 


1826— '27 


John Wooley 


1852 


Gilbert Bentley 


1828— '29 


John Dodge 


1853— '54 


Robert D. Cornell 


1830 


John Wooley 


1856— '56 


Jonathan P. Sheldon 


1831— '33 


Welcome Arnold 


1857— '58 


John G. Halstead 


1834— '35 


Alanson Wildey 


1859— '60 


Fred B. Schultz 


1836— '38 


Alfred Duell 


1861 


Wilson Hicks 


1839— '40 


Daniel H. Schtdtz 


1862— '63 


John S. Wing 


1841— '42 


Daniel Sands 


1864 


Egbert C. Butler 


1843 


David Curtis 


1865 


J. F. S. Stoutenburgh 


1844— '45 


Isaac I. Piatt 


1866 


Philip Cookingham 


1846 


TiUey Grouse 


1867— '69 


David B. Haight 


1847 


EInathan Gazley 


1870— '71 


Jacob Z. Frost 


1848 


Wesley Butts 


1872— '73 


Henry R. Van Vliet 


1849 


Daniel H. Schultz 


1874— '76 


John H. Otis ; 



ir Obtained through Mr. George S. Tan VUet of Pleasant Plains, together with many 
other Interesting facts concerning the town's history. 



TOWN OF CLINTON, 



27.7 



1877 


Mandeville Burger 


1878 


Timothyr'G. Palmer 


1879 


Duane Story 


1880 


Smith Sherman 


1881 


Duane Story 


1882 


Henry R. Van Vliet 


1883 


Charles B. Doughty 


1884 


Hiram Stoutenburgh 


1885— '87 


Rowland W. Hicks 



1888 John J. Rymph 

1889— '90 Edward Herrick 

1891— '92 Llewellyn Lent 

1893 Jacob Z. Frost 

1894— '97 Pedro Sweet 

1898— '99 Duane Story 

1900— '01 George B. Welch 

1902— '07 Charles W. Carpenter 

1908— '09 Charles "W. Wright 



278 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE TOWN OF DOVER. 

By Richakd Fkancis Mahek. 

THE Town of Dover lies on the southeastern border of the 
county. It is bounded on the north by Amenia and Wash- 
ington ; on the south by Pawling ; on the east by Connecticut, 
and on the west by Union Vale and Beekman. The town abounds in 
wild and beautiful scenery. On the eastern and western borders are 
ranges of hiUs almost mountainous in their dimensions, while the center 
forms a valley, some four hundred feet above tidewater, containing 
thrifty farms and pleasant villages. The principle streams are Ten 
Mile River and Swamp River. 

Dover was formed as a town from Pawling, February 20, 1807. 
It is not definitely known by whom the town was first settled, but it 
is supposed that the first settlements were made by the Dutch who 
came here from the vicinity of Hudson's River. Among the early 
home makers in this region we find the old Dutch names of Ouster- 
hout, Van Dusen, Dutcher and Knickerbocker. It is said that the 
first named — ^the Ousterhouts — and the Wilcoxes, Dutchers and Ben- 
sons were the first settlers, and that they located under the East 
Mountain; but there are no dates accessible to define the time of their 
incoming. 

In the cemetery at Dover Plains are a considerable number of moss 
covered tombstones, fast hastening to decay, on which are inscribed 
the names of those who were undoubtedly among the earliest to seek 
a home in this pleasant valley. The inscriptions, nearly obliterated, 
read: 

"In memory of Mr. John Ousterhout, who died Jan'y 39, 1759. . 55 years." 

"In memory of Denton Woolsey, who died May 30, 1777, in the 36th year of 

his age." 

"^p memory of Deborah, wife to Nathaniel Gray, died June 13, 1770, . 31." 

"In memory of Ephriam Wheeler, who departed this life May 10, 1808, in the 

100th year of Ws age." 




RICHARD F. MAKER. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 279 

"Capt. Valentine Wheeler, died Aug. 11, 1T82. 43 years." 

"Matthew Van Dusen, died Sept. S, 1806. 65." 

*♦ Jemima Burlinggame, wife of Benjamin Burlinggame, died June 8, 1790, in the 
*lst year of her age." 

"Hanna:h, wife of William Taber, died June 9tl), 1792. 81." 

"Hannah, wife of Job Tabor, died May 1, 1800. 57." 

"Silas Balding, died April 6, 1786. 69." 

"Elizabeth, wife of Gabriel Dutcher, died April 23, 1793, 73." 

"In memory of Mrs. Hannah French, wife of Mr. Jeremiah French, who de- 
parted this life Oct. 39, 1776. 61." 

Other early settlers were: Hans Hufcut and Martin Preston, who 
settled on what is known as Preston Mountain, and the latter is said 
to have been the first settler on the "Equivalent Land," or the Ob- 
long. Thomas and Alice Casey, from Rhode Island, emigrated here 
about 1750, and located on what is now known as Chestnut Ridge. 
Derrick Dutcher and Jacob VanCamp came here previous to 1731, 
and located near Plymouth Hill. 

One^pf the first mills in this section of the country was that known 
as the Preston Mill, which in early days had an extensive reputation. 
" The original structure has long since passed away, and the building 
which now occupies its site was built about a hundred years ago. 
Ebenezer Preston built three grist mills on Ten Mile River. The 
present oi^e is now owned by William A. Sheldon, at South Dover. 
Previous to the erection of the town the annual meetings were held in 
the tfivern of Jackson Wing, grandfather to Sheldon Wing. The 
name of Dover was given to the town at the Wing Tavern in 1807. 

DovEH Plains: This village is the most important settlement of 
the town and contains a population of 721. It is situated in the 
midst of charming scenery and has in its immediate vicinity natural 
curiosities which have attracted thousands of visitors. One of these, 
a rocky ravine, worn deep in the mountain west of the village, whose 
arched opening resembles the entrance to some cathedral of mediaeval 
times, is known as the "Dover Stone Qhurch." Within this entrance 
is a somewhat spacious cavern, roofed and walled by massive rocks, 
while beyond, pierced deep in the mountain, stretches a mile or two 
of picturesque ravine. The vicinity looks as though there had been 
at some time a great convulsion of nature which had lifted the rocks 
and hurled them into their present fantastic and suggestive shapes. 
It is claimed, however, that the conformation is due wholly to the 



280 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

action of water, which, even now, in a goodly stream courses down the 
gully. History tells us that Sassacus, sachem of the Pequod tribe, 
with many of his followers, found refuge in this watery cavern when 
he encountered a band of Mohegan hunters upon the site of the village 
of Dover Plains. He had fled from Connecticut, following the defeat 
of his army by English troops under command of Captain Mason. 

In 1802 the village contained less than a dozen buildings, and 
among the few residents at that time were Cornelius Dutcher, Jona- 
than Mabbett and James Ketcham. Among the first merchants in 
this vicinity — if not the pioneers in business — ^were Stephen, Justus 
and Uriah Gregory. They rented from Lawrence Belding a piece of 
ground some eight rods square, at the foot of Plymouth HiU, upon 
which they erected a store and blacksmith shop. For this ground 
they paid a yearly rental of forty shillings, their lease — ^which was 
dated April 1, 1790 — ^to continue five years. From this place they 
removed and commenced business in Pawlingstown, now Dover Plains. 
Not long after the removal, Stephen Gregory withdrew, and Justus 
and Uriah M. conducted the business some time and failed, and with 
their brothers, Ebenezer and EUas, moved to Sand Lake, Rensselaer 
County. 

Luther HoUey succeeded the Gregorys in the business, and for 
some years was a successful merchant. He removed to Salisbury, 
Conn. James Ketcham, Lawrence and Joseph Belding were the next 
merchants, beginning as partners, first in the store of the Gregorys, 
and then in Holley's store, where for eight years they did a prosperous 
business. 

James Ketcham was for many years a prominent man of the town. 
He was bom July 31, 1777, at Little Rest, in the town of Washing- 
ton, this county. In his infancy his parents removed to Hunting, 
L. I., where his father kept a small country store. In 1789, the famih' 
returned to the town of Washington, locating near the farm of the 
late Judge Isaac Smith, where the elder Ketcham opened a small 
store. In 1790, the father died, and James was placed in the store. 
He had some advantages of a common school education, and after his 
father's death worked for a time on the farms of WiUiam Cornwall 
and a Mr. Pugsley, for the sum of one shilling per day. His father, 
however, had expressed a wish to have him engage in mercantile pur- 
suits. His uncles, Titus and Jonathan Mabbett, were merchants. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 281 

fl,nd built the house now owned by Walter Haight, in which they had 
a store. Justus and Uriah Gregory had a store near Lawrence Bel- 
ding's, and, failing about this time, the Mabbetts hired the store of 
Lawrence Belding and installed James Ketcham as their clerk. In 
1797 Lawrence and Joseph Belding purchased the stock of Jonathan 
Mabbett, — ^who had previously purchased the interest of Titus Mab- 
bett, — and James Ketcham became one of the firm of Lawrence Bel- 
ding & Co. In 1797 he married Lois Belding, and on May 6, 1799, 
Lawrence Belding bought from Luther HoUey the house and store at 
Dover Plains, to which they removed their stock, and where a pros- 
perous business was done up to 1806. Afterwards Jonathan Mab- 
bett purchased with James Ketcham the interest of the Beldings, and 
the firm became Mabbett & Ketcham, remaining ag such to 1810. In 
that year John Mabbett retired from business, and James Ketcham 
became sole proprietor. When the town of Dover was formed from 
-Pawling he was chosen first town clerk. George Casey became the 
first postmaster. The mail was carried on horseback once a week. 
After Mr. Casey left the town, James Ketcham was appointed post- 
master, and held the oflSce for thirty successive years. Under the 
administration of Polk he was removed, and Joshua Rodgers was ap- 
pointed in his stead, holding the office four years. Mr. Ketcham 
afterward held the office four years. He was a soldier in the war of 
1812, supervisor of the town five years, and a member of the State 
Legislature in 1814. He was a merchant up to 1827. He died Sat- 
urday, November 11, 1871. 

General John H. Ketcham, late Member of Congress from this 
district, was a grandson of James Ketcham. General Ketcham died 
in 1907. William S. Ketcham, the old Democratic war horse of east- 
«m Dutchess, is another grandson. 

The Dover Plains Hotel was built by Belden Dutcher about 1848, 
by whom it was kept a number of years. The present proprietor is 
William T. Elliott. Preston's Hotel was also built in 1848 by George 
Robson. The property is now owned by the heirs of George H. Losee, 
who died November 25, 1881. WiUiam Whalen is the proprietor. 

Reed's Block (Masonic Hall Building) was built by Mrs. David B. 
Reed, of New York, in 1868. 

David Maher, the proprietor of the Dover Plains Marble Works, 



282 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

has been in business here since 1867. He was born in Ireland in 
1845, and came to Dover Plains in 1862. 

Among the early physicians was Dr. Thomas Hammond, who began 
his practice here in 1824, and continued it to 1869. He was a sur- 
geon in the war of 1812. He died in Port Huron, Mich., in ]\Iay, 
1880. Previous to him a Dr. Delavan was a practitioner of the town 
for a number of years. Dr. Hooker was also an early physician, in 
the south part .of the town, contemporaneous with Dr. Hammond. 
Dr. Thomas Hammond, Jr., began to practice here in 1844, and con- 
tinued in the profession until 1869, when he entered the mercantile 
business, in which he remained three years. He then resumed his 
medical practice, which he continued three years, and again entered 
the mercantile business under the firm name of Belding & Hammond. 

The physicians now practicing are Dr. C. F. Roberts, Dr. Cook and 
Dr. C. L. Fletcher. 

George Hufcut was admitted to practice in 1848, and followed his 
profession here for some forty years. He died in Dover Plains in 
May, 1880. 

Horace D. Hufcut, a native of Dover, was born October 12, 18S6. 
He received his education at Poughkeepsie and in the Amenia Semi- 
nary, studied law with his father, George Hufcut, and was admitted 
to the bar in 1860. He died in 190S. 

The village had one newspaper, the Dover Press, which was es- 
tablished by S. B. Shaw, editor and proprietor, in 1878. The first 
number was issued November 29th of that year. It was a weekly, 
pubUshed every Friday for a year or two. 

Seth Deacon started a paper here ten years ago, the "Dover Plains. 
Review." It only ran about a year. 

The Dover Plains Bank was organized in 1857 as a State Bank. 
The officers were: David L. Belding, President; John H. Ketcham, 
Vice President; George T. Ross, Cashier. In 1865 the bank was re- 
organized as a National Bank with the following officers: David L. 
Belding, President ; John H. Ketcham, Vice President ; W. S. Morgan, 
Cashier. The present officers are: George W^. Ketcham, President; 
Edward Vincent, Vice President ; E. J. Reynolds, Cashier. The capi- 
tal of the bank is $100,000; surplus $35,000. The bank building 
was erected in 1867. 

The Military School at Dover Plains was established by Arthur E. 
Bangs in 1880. 




"CM' 4|M«4. 



--<«»> 1 



4 



H ^ 



'^ 



"STONE CHURCH," DOVER PLAINS, N. Y. 
Hiding place of Sassacus, Sachem of the Pequod tribe, 1637. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 283 

The Dover Plains Library was established ten years ago and is in 
a prosperous condition. About one thousand volumes are on its 
shelves, comprising historical works, classical works, and fiction. The 
entertainments given from time to time are the social events in this 
section. Mr. Seeley A. Johnson is the Librarian. The officers are: 
Mrs. A. H. Cook, President ; Mrs. D. B. Haight, Vice President ; Mrs. 
Irving Wheeler, Secretary ; Miss Rebecca Chapman, Treasurer. The 
Trustees: George B. Chapman, M.D., Richard F. Maher, Mrs. Hora- 
tio Benson, Mrs. Seeley Johnson. Book Committee: Mrs. A. H. Cook, 
Mrs. H. S. Benson, Richard F. Maher, Seeley A. Johnson. 

A new Union Free School at Dover Plains was established March 
19, 1908. The building will cost about $10,000 and the land, pur- 
chased from Mr. Hanna and Mr. Wing, about $1200, with $1500 
voted for furnishing. In naming the members of the Board of Edu- 
cation, we take the following from the impartial columns of the 
Amenia Times: 

The members of the board are well known, and as they will go down in town history 
as the first Board of Education established in Dover Plains we give a short notice 
of each member. George B. Chapman, M.D., was Dover's leading physician until 
a few years ago, when he retired and took up scientific farming. He owns the 
Midfield Dairy Farm, one of the most successful certified milk plants in the State. 
Dr. Chapman was recently appointed health officer of the town. Mr. Edward 
G. Reynolds, cashier of the Dover Plains Bank, is a native of Amenia and al- 
though a new member of the community, his friends recognize in him sound, prac- 
tical business ideas. Mr. David Maher, proprietor .of the marble and granite 
works, is a lifelong resident of Dover, and his election to the board was conceded 
to he a compliment to his ability, honesty and fitness to serve the interests of the 
public. Mr. John Dutcher is a retired locomotive engineer, and at all times a 
kindly, affable, pleasant gentleman, who has the welfare of the village at heart. 
Mr. John A. Hanna is as widely known as any man in Dutchess 'County, and his 
varied experience in the Assembly, Board of Supervisors, and as postmaster and 
merchant makes him a valuable member of the educational board. Mr. Charles 
Wyman, owner of the electric light plant and the coal and feed business, is re- 
garded as a thorough and satisfactory business man and upright in all dealings. 
Mr. Thomas P. Whalen is well known locally, having held town office for upward 
of twenty years. He is the present Commissioner of Highways and takes a deep 
interest in the success of the town. Dr. Chapman recently resigned and Mr. J. 
Edwin Benson was appointed in his place. Professor H. S. Benson is Principal. 

The J. H. Ketcham Hose Co. was organized July 20, 190S, and 
the following were the first officers: J. A. Hanna, Chief; Edward 
Blanshan, Foreman ; G. W. Polhemus, First Assistant Foreman ; 



284 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

George T. Record, Second Assistant Foreman; Horatio S. Benson, 
Secretary ; R. P. Ketcham, Treasurer ; Charles Wyman, Steward. The 
company comprises about sixty, members ; they are uniformed and 
have a fine meeting room. 

The McDermott Milk Co. have a large factory here, handling about 
100 cans of milk per day. 

Hall & Ferguson's large cold storage plant is located here. Dur- 
ing the warm months of summer the machinery at this plant is covered 
with a white frost. They have a capacity of 15,000 barrels of fruit. 
Mr. George W. PoUiemus is the buyer of the fruit and also general 
manager of the building and refrigerating plant. 

The Elm Stock Farm, located about one-half mile east of Dover 
Plains, is owned by Horatio N. Bain, proprietor of the Nelson House, 
Poughkeepsie. The farm consists of 250 acres of land and the build- 
ings are commodious and extensive. Mr. Bain has 100 head on this 
farm, comprising trotters, pacers, brood mares and colts. 

The Dover Plains Lodge, F. & A. M., was organized August 13th, 
1867. It has a membership, according to the last report, of 116. 

The Dover Plains Lodge, I. O. G. T., was organized November 
17, 1881. The Lodge disbanded a few years ago. 

Dover Plains contains four churches, the Baptist, Methodist, Catho- 
lic, and Episcopal, organized in the order named. In 1774 a Society 
of Friends was organized in the town, and was known as the Branch 
Preparative Meeting. It was an offspring of the Friends Society at 
what is now known as Quaker Hill. A small church edifice was erected 
soon after the organization. The society is nearly if not quite extinct. 

The Second Dover Baptist Church was organized in 1794. In 
the old burial ground at South Dover may be found an old time 
worn tombstone with the following inscription: 

"Samuel Waldo, Died Sept. 10, 1793. Aged 62 years." 

To this man, perhaps more than to any other, belongs the credit 
of stimulating the people of the Baptist persuasion, then living in 
this section, to organize as a church. The earliest records known of 
this society are dated April 21, 1794. At that date the following 
persons signed and presented a petition to the Baptist Church of 
Patelingstown, now known as the South Dover, or First Dover Church: 
Edward Southworth, David Simmons, Joseph Belding, Benjamin Allis, 



TOWN OF DOVER. 285 

Moses Haight, Reuben Allen, Caleb Barnum, Mary Talman, Freelove 
Crandell, Mary Haight, Eliphalet Belding, Dorcas Gregory, Lydia 
Benson, Jerusha Simmonds, Samuel Elliott, Alse Casey, Elizabeth 
Koon, Hannah Benson, Jerusha Woolcut, Susanna Benson, Catie 
ElHott. 

The early meetings of this society were held in a house situated in 
what is now the Valley View Cemetery, which was built previous to 
the Revolution for the Dutch Reformers, and by them deserted before 
its completion. In this house all denominations met for worship. It 
was badly out of repair, with rough slabs for seats, and with no 
facilities for heat, or light at night. The frame of this building was 
torn down some years since. A Union Church was built on the same 
ground about 1844!, which has since been taken dc^wn and converted 
into a blacksmith and wheelwright shop, now standing on Mill street 
in this village. 

On the 17th of December, 1832, a subscription paper was circu- 
lated to raise $2,500 with which to build a suitable church edifice. 
The desired amount was raised, and James Ketcham, Ebenezer Stevens 
and Thomas Hammond were appointed a Building Committee, and 
the building of the present house was begun. It was finished at a 
cost of nearly $6,000, Mr. Ketcham and Mr. Stevens meeting the 
deficiency. The church was dedicated in December, 1833, by Elder 
Perkins, who had become the pastor. He remained with the church 
until 1835, when, through internal dissensions, he resigned the pas- 
torate, and was succeeded by Elder P. Roberts. Elder Roberts' min- 
istry lasted but one year. The present pastor is Rev. Mr. Ringrose. 

The Methodist Episcopal Church of Dover Plains was organized 
in 1852. The board of trustees consisted of the following persons: 
William H. Belding, Darius B. Talhnan, Will McKoy, William Sands, 
Samuel H. Tompkins, J. P. H. Tallman, James G. DeForest, David 
L. Belding, Darius Tallman. The erection of the church was begun 
and completed under the pastorate of Rev. William Ostrander in 1853, 
at a cost of $5,500. The church then numbered about forty persons. 
The present number is about one hundred. A convenient parsonage, 
costing about $2,500, is owned by the church, and the entire property 
is free from debt. 

A sketch of the Roman Catholic Church will be found in another 
chapter. 



286 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

St. James' Episcoparl Church was built in 1904. Previous to the 
erection of the church the EpiscopaUans held their meetings in the 
hall. Rev. Alexander Hamilton was the rector who built the church. 
The present pastor is the Rev. William Harris. Other ministers who 
have been in charge of the mission were as follows: Rev. Albert Bur- 
dick, Rev. Mr. Wayne and Rev. Mr. Ashton. The congregation 
numbers about forty. 

Three miles west of Dover Plains, on an elevation known as Chest- 
nut Ridge, is another Methodist Church, which was organized some 
years previous to 184J91 The church edifice was erected in that year. 
Among the early members were Robert Van Wyck and wife, James 
McCord and wife, Catharine Shears (now White) , George Van Wyck 
and wife, Mariette Hustus, Catharine Tompkins, Isaac Benton. The 
pastors, as a rule, have ministered to this church from Verbank and 
Dover Plains. 

Chestnut Ridge was also the home of Benson J. Lossing, the his- 
torian, who owned here an excellent farm of some three hundred' and 
fifty acres. Mr. Lossing was a native of Beekman, born February 
12, 181S. At an early age he was left an orphan and was compelled 
to rely upon his own resources. A dweller in a rural district, he 
naturally gravitated to farm work, doing for a year or so such labor 
as a boy was capable of performing. At the age of thirteen he went 
to Poughkeepsie to learn the trade of a watchmaker, and in 1833 en- 
tered into • partnership in that business with his former employer. But 
the mind of Mr. Lossing was bent in a different direction. He had 
early imbibed a taste for literature, a taste gleaned from stolen inter- 
views with a scanty stock of books ; and in 1835 he became part owner 
of the "Poughkeepsie Telegraph," and entered upon his career as a 
literary man. The next year, in company with E. B. Killey, he began 
the publication of a semi-monthly paper, more in unison with his tastes. 
This was the "Poughkeepsie Casket," in the management of which he 
first essayed the art of wood engraving, in order to illustrate his work. 

In 1838 he became editor of the "Family Magazine," the first illus- 
trated work of that kind ever published in this country. His first 
historical venture was "An Outline History of the Fine Arts," in 
1840-41. His next work, "Seventeen Hundred and Seventy-six: or 
The War for Independence," was written in 1846-47. The works on 
which his fame chiefly rests are the "Field-book of the Revolution" 




SHELDON WING. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 287 

and "Our Country." The former was published in series by Harper 
& Bros., from June 1, 1850, to December, 1852, and had an extensive 
sale. Mr. Lossing died in 1891. 

Dover Furnace: To the south of Dover Plains, on the Harlem 
Railroad, lies the station of Dover Furnace. Here are located the 
ruins of the works of the South Boston Iron Company, established in 
February, 1881. The buildings of the company were erected in the 
summer of that year, and the principal business done was the manu- 
facture of iron for government cannon. 

Wm. B. Cutler is the only merchant. He conducts a general store 
that was built by Preston & Coyle, 1881. Edwin Vincent, the largest 
land owner in the town, resides at Dover Furnace. His son, Charles 
W. Vincent, is a graduate of Columbia School of I^ines and a mem- 
ber of the present town board. Other old residents of Dover Furnace 
are Charles Cutler, Frank Cutler, Gilbert Tabor, Eleazer Cutler. 

Shapparoon Lake, noted for pike,, perch and pickerel, is west of the 
station. 

South Dover: The hamlet of South Dover lies in the southern 
part of the town, on the Harlem Raili-oad. The depot at this point 
is known as Wing's Station, and the settlement here consists of the 
station, one hotel, two stores, postoffice and a few dwellings. 

The postoffice was established about 1852. The merchants are 
J. S. Wing, and Oscar Hasbrouck, of whom further notice will be 
found in Part H of this work. 

The hotel at Wingdale was built in 1858 by John Cornwell, who 
died in 1864. It is now conducted by Egbert Slocum. 

South Dover proper lies to the east of the station some two miles. 
This is also a hamlet of but few inhabitants, and is quite picturesquely 
located. The postoffice was established here about 1828, and the first 
postmaster is said to have been Mott Titus. John Ragan is the pro- 
prietor of a grist mill and the only merchant is George Trowbridge, 
who has been in business here three years. He had previously been 
engaged in business at Webatuck six years. 

Webatuck, or, as it is often spelled, Webotuck, is a small settlement 
about three miles distant from Wingdale. William C. Camp con- 
ducted a store here for several years, and in 1881 was appointed post- 
master. Cleveland Titus was his successor from 1885 to 1906, when 
the postoffice was discontinued. 



288 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Jacob Harrington, it is said, was about the first settler in the 
locality of South Dover. A house which he built had in it a stone 
marked 1763. In that year his wife died, whose tombstone yet stands 
in the cemetery. His house was torn down some fifty years ago, and 
the residence of the late Alfred Wing stands on its site. The Wings, 
the Prestons, the Rosses and Sheldons were also early settlers here, and 
the Deuels were pioneer settlers in the hollow which bears the family 
name. 

South Dover has two churches, the Baptist and the Methodist Epis- 
copal. The society of the latter denomination was organized some 
years previous to 1855 ; but there exists no records to show the precise 
date of its origin or to shed light upon its progress. The church 
edifice was erected in 1855. 

For some years the society worshipped in the Union Church, which 
stood where the Baptist Church now stands. The succession of pas- 
tors previous to 1854 is unknown. 

The First Baptist Church of Dover was organized in 1757, and is 
the oldest church in the town. On the 9th of November, 1757, Mr. 
William Marsh, from the Philadelphia Baptist Association, visited 
South Dover, by request, and explained to the people of the Baptist 
persuasion who met with him the nature of a covenant, to which, "in 
the most solemn manner," a number subscribed, and were by him con- 
stituted into a church. On the first of December, 1757, Ebenezer 
Cole was chosen as clerk of the church. On the 4th of January, 1758, 
Samuel Waldo was chosen as pastor and was ordained by Elders 
Marsh and Willard. At a conference meeting held September 3, 1758, 
it was voted to build a meeting house thirty by forty feet. To see 
to the accomplishment of this work, Peletiah Ward, Manasseh Martin, 
Benjamin Seeley, Ebenezer Cole and Eliab Wilcox were appointed a 
building committee. That building was for many years the only place 
of worship in the town of Dover. From 1757 to 1794, during the 
pastorate of Elder Waldo, there were about 250 members admitted by 
letter and baptism. From 1794 to 1885 other pastors were Elders 
Freeman Hopkins, Detherick Elisha Booth, Job Foss, Elijah Baldwin, 
Nehemiah Johnson, Johnson Howard, John Howard, T. W. Jones, 
William G. Hoben, G. F. Hendrickson, William P. Decker, Rev. Isaac 
N.»HiIl and Rev. Edward S. Merwin. Rev. J. G. Dyer is the present 
pastor. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 289 

The march of progress, aided by natural decay, is fast sweeping 
away all architectural traces of our forefathers, whose pioneer homes 
in this locality were constructed first of logs, and later when it became 
possible, of rough timber and boards, which could be had for the 
cutting. 

Foremost of the noted hostelries in the county during the Revolu- 
tion was the "Morehouse Tavern" at Webatuck. It was located on 
the then chief highway from Hartford to Fishkill. Under its roof 
many of the general officers of the Continental army slept. There 
Washington, Putnam, Arnold, LaFayette and other distinguished 
leaders have been entertained, and there Rochambeau and his officers 
have lodged. An interesting account of the sojourn of the Marquis 
de ChasteUaux at this tavern will be found in Chapter XIII, Bene- 
dict Arnold had his last friendly talk with his Commander-in-Chief at 
the Morehouse Tavern before he attempted to betray the American 
cause. 

The Red Lion Inn, another notable tavern, was located at Weba- 
tuck, and part of the original building still stands. 

The old house north of Phihp Hoag's was built in 1751, as shown 
by date on chimney, by Hendrick Dutcher. When Washington evacu- 
ated Boston he passed with a portion of his command, so tradition 
says, by the road leading west from Wing's Station. His troops 
encamped for the night on the hill across the brook, west from Philip 
Hoag's, on both sides of the road. Washington took up his head- 
quarters in the old house just mentioned. Elder Waldo, a Baptist 
preacher, lived at that time where the Misses Hoag now reside. He 
carried all the milk produced by several cows into camp, together with 
other provisions, and distributed the articles among the soldiers. He 
invited them to come to his house and get whatever they wanted to 
eat. Many of them did so and partook of his generosity, and, to 
their credit be it said, nothing about the premises was in the least 
disturbed by them. A family by the name of Elliott lived on the 
place now occupied by Frank Hoag. They were less free with their 
provisions than Waldo and went to the officers with the request that 
the soldiers be entirely kept off their grounds. The result was that 
not a chicken or scarcely any other eatable was left about the premises, 
the troops making a clean sweep of everything the Elliotts possessed, 
and, notwithstanding their earnest entreaties, the officers paid no heed 
to their complaints. 



290 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS, 



In the year 1821 the New York and Sharon Canal was projected. 
Many enterprising men took a lively interest in it, though some looked 
upon it as a visionary scheme. The canal was proposed to be con- 
structed from Sharon Valley down by the Ten Mile River, and by the 
Swamp River to the sources of the Croton in Pawling, and by the 
Croton either to the Hudson or to the Harlem River. The pre- 
liminary survey was made and sixty thousand dollars contributed. 
The money was deposited with a broker in New York, who failed, and 
the project was abandoned. In 1826 the project was renewed and a 
report of the Canal Commissioners was made to the Legislature. The 
estimated cost of the canal to the Hudson was $599,232, and by the 
route to the Harlem it was $1,232,169. This included the whole ex- 
pense of locks, excavation, aqueducts, . bridges and everything essen- 
tial to the completion of the work. There is no record of the project 
after this. The projectors were': Cyrus Swan of Sharon, Joel Ben- 
ton and Thomas Barlow of Amenia, William Tabor of Pawhng, and 
Mark Spencer of Amenia. 

The Harlem Railroad, which traverses very nearly the proposed 
canal route, was built through the town of Dover in 1849. 

VaUey View Cemetery was dedicated October 7th, 1871. It con- 
sists of twenty acres of beautiful, undulating meadow. The grounds 
were laid out by Mr. J. I. Wanzer. The first directors: John H. 
Ketcham, G. T. Belding, J. K. Mabbett, George, Allerton, Thomas 
Hammond, M. D., Joseph Belden and Horace D. Hufcut. 

The succession of Supervisors from the erection of the town in 
1807,, are as follows: 

1840 John M. Ketcham 

1841 Egbert Sheldon 

1842 William Hooker 

1843 J. W. Bowdish 
1844— '45 David Vincent 
1846— '47 Edgar Vincent 

1848 Ebenezer A. Preston 

1849 S. Wheeler 
1850— 'SI Edward B. Somers 

1852 John M. Tabor 

1853 George Hufcut, Jr. 
1854— '55 John H. Ketcham 

1856 WiUiam Hufcut 

1857 John B. Dutcher 



1807 


George Crary 


1808— '10 


Andrew Pray 


1811— 'IS 


James Ketcham 


1816— '30 


James Grant 


1821 


William Hooker 


1822 


James Grant 


1823— '28 


Absalom Vincent 


1829 


William Hooker 


1830— '33 


John M. Ketcham 


1834 


William Hooker 


1835 


Joel Hoag 


1836— '37 


John M. Ketcham 


1888 


Absalom Vincent 


1839 


Egbert Sheldon 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^BfT "'"""^f^^St V 


H 


^^^^^^^^B^K^ ^H^k 


^HB 


^^^^^B sH 


1 "■ 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^m '^W ,^^E£^^*^B^^^^^H^H 


I 


^^^^^^|H||^ffiB[vJP'^^ ^^ 


^^^^^^^^^k. 




PJK""",'-'/!l!i!'r"- '^^^^BtK^Bjl^^ 


^^^K^^^^^^^^^^^Kf^JUf^-^c M ^^^I^^^^H^^':^^' 


■^^m 


^^^■^^ 


H^H 


^^^^^l^^i 


W^^K^^S^^^^^^^M 




(.. -^ W|»ii| JT^'^^'ilT^W^^^B 



JOHN A. HANNA. 



TOWN OF DOVER. 



291 



18S8 


Thomas Hammond, Jr. 


1880 


Edwin Vincent 


1S59 


Wm. S. Ketcham 


1881 


Andris Brant 


1860 


AUen H. Dutcher 


1883— '83 


Albert Fry 


1861— '63 


Obed Wing 


1884 


George T. Belding 


1863 


Baldwin Stevens 


188S 


Ebenezer Preston 


1864— '65 


Edwin Vincent 


1886 


Geo. T. Belding 


1866— '67 


Wm. S. Ketcham 


1887 


Charles W. Vincent 


1868 


Cyrus Stark 


1888 


William Record 


1869 


Horace D. Hufcut 


1889— '90 


Sheldon Wing 


1870 


George W. Ketcham 


1891 


John A. Hanna 


1871 


Edwin Vincent 


1893— '93 


Theo. Buckingham 


1873 


Obed Wing 


1894— '95 


John A. Hanna 


1873 


Myron Edmunds 


1896— '97 


Roselle Mead 


1874 


Cyrus Stark 


1898— '99 


Myron Edmonds 


187&— '76 


Myron Edmonds 


1900 


Wilson Sheldon 


1877 


Andris Brant 


1901— '03 


Edward A^ Brush 


1878 


William H. Boyce 


1904— '07 


George V. Benson 


1879 


George T. Belding 


1908— '09 


Edward A. Brush 



292 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XX. 
THE TOWN OF EAST FISHKILL. 

THE historical account of the early settlement of the land and 
of the title to the soil now included in the town of East Fish- 
kiU is embodied in the succeeding chapter devoted to Fishkill, 
of which this town was originally a part, and from which it was set 
off as a separate town. 

The division was effected November 29, 1849, by act passed by the 
Board of Supervisors, under authority of a previous act of the Legis- 
lature. The survey of the new town was made by Elnathan Hasten 
of Beekman, and John Ferris of Pawling. Benjamin H. Strang, 
Janjes A. Emans, Garrett Deboise and Hasbrook Deboise were chain 
and flag-bearers. J. Wesley Stark of Pawling, Wilson B. Sheldon of 
Beekm9,n, and Alexander Hasbrook of Fishkill, Supervisors of the three 
towns, were a committee to superintend the survey. The land set off 
embraced about 33,000 acres, and formed the second largest town 
territorially in the county, being exceeded only by the town of Wash- 
ington. It is bounded on the north by La Grange ; east by Beekman ; 
south by Putnam County, and west by Fishkill and Wappinger. 

The first town meeting was held at the house of Jacob Tompkins, in 
Stormville, on the last Tuesday in March, 1850, at which the follow- 
ing officers were elected: Supervisor, Benjamin Hopkins; Clerk, Wil- 
liam Hasbrook; Justice, Morgan Emigh, John S. Emans, Rushmore 
G. Horton and William Homan; Collector, Orry N. Sprague; Com- 
missioners of Highways, John Anderson, Charles Ogden and George 
Van Nostram; Assessor, Lewis Seaman; Sealer, Jacob Wiltsie; Over- 
seers of the Poor, Abraham Pullings and Abraham Adriance; Con- 
stables, Daniel Weeks, Jacob Wiltsie, John Van Vlack; Inspectors of 
Election, David Knapp, Orson H. Tappan, John K. Vermilyea, Peter 
Adriance, William B. Ashley and Abraham S. Storm. 
, Hopewell Junction is the only village of importance in the town. 
About the middle of the eighteenth century, Aaron Stockholm, a native 



TOWN OF EAST FISHKILL, 293 

of Long Island, settled on a farm in this neighborhood, and previous 
to the Revolution built a grist mill at Hopewell. Thomas Storm, one 
of the county's leading business men, was for many years engaged in 
trade here. He was a member of the Precinct Committee of Safety 
in 1777, and in 1781-'82-'83 and '84 was elected to the Assembly, 

When the railroad extending from Dutchess Junction to Pine Plains 
was completed in 1869, a hamlet sprang up near Hopewell station, 
and when the New England road was built, intersecting the Dutchess & 
Connecticut at this point, the hamlet was called Hopewell Junction, 
As a natural consequence the Junction has become the business center 
of the town. A coal and lumber yard was established in 1869 by R. 
C. Horton, and the following year Lawrence C. Rapelje built a hotel, 
which he leased to Edward Lasher, The village cfntains several 
stores, mechanical shops, and the Borden creamery. 

Settlement at Stormville, a hamlet near the east border of the town, 
was begun as early as 17S9. Derick Storm was the first to take up 
land here, and was soon followed by Isaac, George and Thomas Storm, 
whose descendants are stiU to be found upon the lands thus early pur- 
chased. The Carmans and Arkles settled near them, about the year 
1758, and to the north, Isaac Adriance, "of Nassau Island, Queens 
County," purchased two hundred and fifty acres of land in May, 1743, 
and shortly thereafter George and Abraham Adriance purchased and 
settled. 

During the Revolution an American force was encamped for a short 
time just north of Stormville, This force was one of many that was 
posted back of the river to oppose the suspected inland march of the 
British to the upper Hudson, 

Theodorus Van Wyck was an early purchaser of land now included 
in this township, settling at Fishkill Hook, He was a true patriot, 
and being greatly molested by Tory neighbors, he removed, in 1775, 
to New York, where he was elected a delegate to the Second Pro- 
vincial Congress, As the patriots became more aggressive, he re- 
turned to his farm in the early part of 1776, and was again elected 
to Congress in that year from Dutchess County. In 1801 he was one 
of the ten delegates representing Dutchess in the State Constitutional 
Convention. 

Aaron Van Vlackren was the pioneer settler in the neighborhood of 
Gayhead. He was a native of Holland and removed to this county 



294 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

from Long Island, purchasing several hundred acres from Madam 
Brett. His son, Tunis Van Vlackren, built the first mill at Gayhead 
about 1768. Like all grist mills of that period, it lacked a "bolting 
cloth," and the ingenuity of the housewife was taxed to separate the 
flour from the bran, which was done, in a new country, by either a 
fine splitit sieve, or a very coarse cloth, through which the flour was 
pressed by the hand. 

The Emans family were early settlers in this town, and several of 
their descendants have been identified with public affairs of the county. 
James Emans obtained a grant of 137 acres of land from Madam 
Brett, near the present hamlet of East Fishkill. His grandson, John 
S. Emans, who was born in 1824, represented the town repeatedly in 
the county board of Supervisors. Li political views he was a Demo- 
crat, and was elected to the State Legislature in 1852 and '53. Al- 
bert Emans was elected to the Assembly in 1855, and again in 1858. 
Storm Emans was also elected Member of Assembly in 1883, and from 
1891 to 1894 held the office of Clerk of Dutchess County. 

In the list of iijhabitants of the county in 1740 are found the names 
of Jacobus, Rudolphus, Barnardus and Abraham Swartwout. This 
family was the first to settle in the vicinity of Johnsvillej and was con- 
spicuous in the early days of this county from an official point of 
view. Jacobus was Member of Assembly from 1777 to '83, and State 
Senator from 1784 to '95. 

Johnsville was the birthplace and home of Henry D. B. Bailey, 
author of "Historical Sketches of Dutchess County." He was bom 
in 1813, and commenced his literary labors in 1855. His grandfather, 
Nathan Bailey, was bom in Fishkill in 1738, a son of John Bailey, 
a native of Westchester County. 

The Montfort family were early settlers in the vicinity of Fishkill 
Plains. In the preciact records from 1738 to 1760, the name bears 
a variety of spelling. Peter Montfort bought 370 acres of land here 
in 1735. His son, Peter, was a soldier in the Revolutionary War, and 
the family was active in the establishment of the Reformed Churches' 
at Hackensack and Hopewell. 

The oldest monument to the faith and energy of the pioneer settlers 
in this town is the Reformed organization of Hopewell, which dates 
back to the year 1757. They had previously attended divine service 
at Fishkill and Poughkeepsie. For seven years the new church had 




S A.M'atrii isu. I^ubli^A bj-. 



TOWN OF EAST FISHKILL. 295 

no building for public worship, and no settled pastor. Services were 
held in private houses and in the large barn of Jacob Monfort, says 
the Rev. Addison C. Bird, the present pastor, to whose researches 
We are indebted for the historical data concerning this organization. 
In 1762 the congregation decided to build a church, and Garrett 
Storm, Johannes Wiltsie, Isaac Lent, Henry Rosecrans, Joseph Har- 
ris and Aaron Van Vlackren were appointed a building committee. 
Mr. Lent declined to serve, and Johannes Schult filled his place. The 
first church building, which was partly on the present site, was a 
wooden structure 40 by 50 feet. Seats were made by placing boards 
upon the ends of timbers around the church. Services were held twice 
on Sabbath, with only a half hour's intermission. Singing was con- 
ducted by the clerk, and this office was filled for mqjiy years by Isaac 
Adriance, father of CoL Isaac Adriance. Cornelius Van Wyck was 
also clerk for several years. Interments were usually made to the 
east and southeast of the church. Near the east wall, in 1768, were 
laid the remains of Englebert Huff, a Norwegian, who was once a 
member of the life guard of William Prince of Orange, King William 
III of England. During his residence in Rombout Precinct, he be- 
came identified with the Fishkill church. He died at the advanced 
age of 128 years. 

A few years after the erection of the church edifice, pews and gal- 
leries were built in. Among the pew holders are found the names of 
Stockholm, Luyster, Montfort, Flagler, Rapelje, Bogardus, and Col. 
Derick BrinckerhofF. Col. Brinckerhoff' was a member of the Colonial 
Assembly and of the First Provincial Congress. 

This organization was the recipient of several bequests in early 
times, one of which was ten acres of land, from Samuel Verplanck, 
bearing date of March 23, 1779. 

A congregational meeting to consider the erection of a new house 
of worship was held February 12, 1833. Jacob Swartwout was called 
to the chair, and John Storm was appointed secretary. It was re- 
solved that a substantial brick building be erected, and that the com- 
mittee for that purpose consist of the following gentlemen: H. D. 
Stockholm, Abram Adriance, Abram D. Van Wyck, Jacob Horton and 
Jacob Montfort. The building was finished in 1834! during the pas- 
torate of Rev. Charles B. Whitehead, and is the dignified church edifice 
of the present day. 



296 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In 1765 Hopewell church received its first pastor, the Rev. Isaac 
Rysdyck. He came from HoUand to take charge of the congrega- 
tions of Poughkeepsie, Fishkill, New Hackensack and Hopewell. He 
was a thorough scholar, an able theologian, and a very effective 
preacher. It was said that he could write in Greek and Latin equally 
AS well as in his native Dutch; and with Hebrew he was as much at 
liome as in his mother tongue. He kept the records of Hopewell church 
an Dutch exclusively until 1781, and exclusively in English after 1784. 
He was probably the first Dutch minister to begin using the English 
language. During the greater part of his ministry he hved in Fish- 
kill, but later he moved to New Hackensack. In 1790 he resigned 
from the pastorate on account of the infirmities of old age. In about 
a year he died, and was buried beneath the New Hackensack church. 

The Rev. Isaac Blauvelt, who assisted Dr. Rysdyck in the last few 
years of his ministry, became the second pastor at Hopewell. It 
was under his pastorate that the church was incorporated according 
to the laws of the State of New York. Rev. Blauvelt remained but 
a short time, accepting a call to another field. 

The church was without a pastor for one year ; then it called the 
Rev. Nicholas Van Vranken. As he spoke Dutch and English fluently, 
preaching was conducted in both languages. He died in 1804, after 
a pastorate of only thirteen years. He was the last pastor of the 
associated churches. The classis dissolved the relationship, and Fish- 
kill became a separate charge. 

Rev. John Barkalo succeeded the Rev. Van Vranken. He resigned 
after a pastorate of five years. 

In 1812 the Rev. Dr. Thomas De Witt was called to the charge of 
Hopewell and New Hackensack churches. During his pastorate these 
churches, in 1825, became separate and independent congregations. 
For fifteen years he continued his ministrations at Hopewell, during 
which time the recently sold parsonage was built. Dr. De Witt re- 
moved to New York City in response to a call from the Middle Colle- 
giate Church. He was elected a trustee of Rutgers College in 1840; 
and for twelve years was editor of the Christian Intelligencer. He 
died May 18, 1874. 

From 1828 to 1835, Rev. Charles B. Whitehead was pastor of this 
church; and from 1835 to 1857, the Rev. Abraham PoUiemus, D.D., 
officiated. Both pastors were much beloved by their congregations. 




CHARLES A. HOPKINS. 



TOWN OF EAST FISHKILL. 297 

Rev. Dr. Oliver Cobb was then called, and remained fifteen years. 
He was followed by the Rev. Graham Taylor, who left Hopewell in 
1880, and is now Professor of Sociology in Chicago University. He 
is also the founder and resident warden of the social settlement known 
as the Chicago Commons. 

Rev. Cornelius H. Polhemus, who was called in 1881, continued ten 
years. A call was then extended to the Rev. Ernest Clapp, who re- 
mained until 1903. 

The present cemetery of the Reformed Church of Hopewell is not 
as ancient as the church. Neighborhood burying grounds were in use 
before the church was organized. The oldest tombstone inscription 
in the present cemetery is in Dutch, and reads as follows: 

"Heir Leydt Begraven Her Lichhaam Van Lutisha Van \C*yck huis Vrouw, Van 
Isaac Adriance, Oveleden Den 6. Dagh Van December Anno Dom 1763. Oudt 
Zynde 33 laar 10 Maande en 37 Daagen." 

Other early burials here are those of Cornelia, relict of Benjamin 
Moore, Sr., died June 8th, 1781 ; Catharine, wife of John Boughbum, 
died 1785; Francis Hasbrook, died 1789; Tunis Brinkerhoof and 
Gorus Storm, died 1790 ; Abraham Hasbrook and John Adriance, died 
1792 ; Thomas, son of John and Elizabeth Walden, died 1794 ; Sarah, 
wife of Thomas Humphrey, died 1794 ; Anna Montfort John M. Shear 
and Rem Adriance, died 1795; Jacob Horton, died 1793; George 
Brinkerhoof, died December, 1797, aged 71 years; Isaac Adriance, 
died 1797, aged 76 years; Gilbert, son of Francis Hasbrook, died 
April 15th, 1798; Burgune Van Alst, died 1803; Catharine Herren, 
died 1807, aged 78 years ; Nicholas Bogart and his wife Alida Ritz- 
ma, daughter of Rev. Johannis Ritzma. Nicholas was born in New 
York in 1729, and died in 1811. Alida was born in Holland in 1742, 
and died in 1813. 

Another early church organization in the town was the Baptist 
Church of Fishkill Plains, which bears the date of 1782. It was an 
offshoot of the Pleasant Valley Church, and early in the nineteenth 
century had a live and earnest working congregation. The pulpit 
was supplied for a long term of years by Pleasant Valley and Beek- 
man. As most of the families of the early settlers were strict adher- 
ents to the Reformed faith, the growth of this church was retarded. 
Services were finally discontinued and the church property sold some 
fifteen years ago. 



298 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



The Methodist Church of Johnsville was organized in 1826, through 
the labors of James Taylor, William, Samuel, Jacob and Oliver Ladue 
and Cornelius Ostrander. Its first pastors were Revs. Hunt, Selleck 
and Collins. In this locality, as in other sections of the country, the 
Methodists were very active in promulgating the Gospel, through the 
mcessant labors of their "circuit riders" and local preachers, and the 
Johnsville Church has accordingly prospered. 

The Bethel Baptist Church at Shenandoah, over which the Rev. Mr. 
Bastain has presided for the past five years, was dedicated in Decem- 
ber, 1835, and the church duly incorporated in 1837. Elder George 
Horton was in charge of the services from 1835 to '41. The records 
contain no account of the cost of erecting the building, but Abram 
Pulling and Isaac Knapp are given credit for contributing generously. 

The Episcopal Church at Hopewell Junction was built in 1888. 
There is also a Roman Catholic and a Pentecostal Church in this 
village. Stormville and Fishkill Plains contain chapels. 

The following list contains the names of those who have been elected 
to the office of Supervisor: 



1850— 'SI 


Benjamin Hopkins 


1878 


Charles W. Horton 


18S3— 'S3 


John V. Storm 


1879 


Peter A. Baldwin 


18S4^'SS 


Nicholas H. Stripple 


1880 


Charles W. Horton 


1856 


Benjamin Seaman 


1881— '82 


Storm Emans 


18S7 


Edmund Luyster 


1883 


Leonard V. Pierce 


1858 


John V. Storm 


1884r-'8S 


Lawrence C. Rapelje 


1859— '60 


Benjamin Hopkins 


1886— '87 


Storm Bmans 


1861— '62 


Lawrence C. Rapelje 


1888 


Francis S. Van Nostrand 


1863— '64 


John S. Emans 


1889— '90 


Isaac S. Genung 


186S— '67 


Benjamin Hopkins 


1891— '92 


Lawrence C. Rapelje 


1868— '69 


Nicholas H. Stripple 


1893 


Adriance Barton 


1870 


John S. Emans 


1894— '97 


J. Wesley Van Tassell 


1871— '73 


Charles W. Horton 


] 898— '03 


Prank Fowler 


1874— '7S 


Peter A. Baldwin 


1904— '09 


Lewis H. Wright 


1876— '77 


John S. Emans 







TOWN OF nSHKILL. 299 



CHAPTER XXL 

THE TOWN OF FISHKH^L. 

By William E. Vekplanck. 

THE Town of Fishkill as constituted to-day is situated at the 
southwesterly corner of the county, ajd extends along the 
river northward from the tunnel at Breakneck mountain to 
a point about half a mile south of the village of Chelsea^ — ^the southerly 
boundary of the present town of Wappinger; thence the township 
extends eastward to the westerly boundary of the town of East Fish- 
kill; and it is bounded on the south by Putnam County. 

At one time the town of Fishkill included the towns of Wappinger 
and East Fishkill, or in other words the whole of the territory cov- 
ered by the Romboudt Patent. This territory was called Romboudt 
Precinct, as the towns of the State were formerly known. 

The area of the town was afterwards enlarged when Putnam County 
was established, in 1812, by cutting off all that part of the township 
of Philhpstown which lay north of Breakneck and west of the moun- 
tains and adding it to FishkiU. This change of territory in the 
vicinity of what is now Dutchess Junction, was made for the con- 
venience of the early settlers — Van Amburgh, Du Bois, Cromwell, 
B'rinckerhoff and other families. 

The title to such land south of the Romboudt Patent, in the town of 
Fishkill, was derived from deeds made by the Commissioners of For- 
feiture in the proceedings against Col. Beverly Robinson, whose wife 
was one of the heirs of the Phillipse Patent. Samuel Dodge and Daniel 
Graham were such Commissioners for the "Middle District," appointed 
in pursuance of an act of the Legislature of the said State, entitled, 
"an act for the forfeiture and sale of the estates of persons who have 
adhered to the enemies of this State and for declaring the sovereignty 
of the people of this State in respect to all property within the same." 

In 1788 an act was passed by the State of New York for dividing 



300 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the counties of the State into towns. Under this act Romboudt Pre- 
cinct became known as the town of Fishkill. This was really the re- 
vival of the old Dutch name, and of this we have evidence from an old 
tombstone in the yard of the Dutch Church at Fishkill. The inscrip- 
tion is on the tombstone of the Rev. Jacobus Van Neste, who was the 
pastor until his death, April 10th, 1761, and reads as follows : 

"Hier Leydt Her Lighaam Van Jacobus Van Neste Bedienaar Des Heylige 
Evangelum Op Pochkeepsie En De Viskil In Dutches Comity Zynde In De Heere 
Geiust de 10 April 1761— Oudt Zynde 26 Jaar 2 Maad En 3 Daage." 

The Romboudt Patent above mentioned was a grant made by James 
n, in 1685, confirming the deed of the land made to Francis Rom- 
boudt and Gulian Verplanck by the Wappinger Indians in 1683. 

At the time of the cession of New Netherland by the Dutch to the 
English in 1664, aU the land hereabouts was in the possession of the 
Wappinger Indians. This tribe was part of the confederacy of the 
Five Nations, and had its home along the east bank of the Hudson, 
extending from RoelofF Jansen's creek (now in Columbia County) as 
far south as Manhattan Island, and eastward to what is now Con- 
necticut. Throughout this region the Wappingers roamed and hunted 
unmolested, so that all that the Dutch government actually ceded to 
the English was the bare sovereignty. Dutchess County and other 
political divisions were yet to be. 

Not long after the English occupation, Francis Romboudt, or Rom- 
bout,^ as the Dutch and English called him, a man of French extrac- 
tion, who was a merchant in New Amsterdam, with his partner, Gulian 
Verplanck, who were engaged in fur trading, conceived the idea of 
getting possession of land, for many people of influence with the Eng- 
lish , governors were taking up land freely, and on easy terms. Rom- 
boudt and Verplanck, following the law of the colony, obtained from 
the government, a license to purchase from the Indians (the original 
of which is still preserved among the State Archives at Albany), with 
a view of obtaining a patent from the Crown confirming the same. 
Whereupon the partners met the Indian Chiefs and came to an agree- 
ment with them as to the value of the land, and obtained a deed of 
conveyance, in 1683, which the chiefs signed and sealed, or at least 

1. He signed his name Francois Bombouts. 




JOHN PETER DE WINT. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 



301 



they affixed their totem marks to it/ A copy of this document which 
sets forth the consideration, boundaries, etc., will be found in Chap- 
ter IV. 

Before the patent was issued in 1685, Verplanck had died and Jaco- 
bus Kip married his widow, and became co-patentee with Francis Rom- 
boudt and Stephanus Van Cortlandt. Van Cortlandt had advanced 
one-third of the consideration money given to the Indians, and was 
therefore entitled in equity to one-third interest. 

The territory comprised in the patent was to a great extent a for- 
est, as an old map drawn on parchment, in the possession of the writer 
shows. Indeed it was looked upon by its owners as merely a place for 
trapping beavers and other fur bearing animals, and it was many 
years before- it was opened to settlers. The trappers were Indians, 
whose huts could be found in the neighborhood of Stormville until 
comparatively recent times. The above mentioned map was made in 
1689 by one Holwell, a surveyor and his affidavit" made before one of 
the aldermen in New York, in 1689, indorsed on the original map, 
establishes the identity of the old document beyond question. 

The only white man living on the patent at the time was "Ye French- 
man" whose house, according to the old map, stood near the mouth of 
Wappinger creek. Local historians assert that this man was either 
Nicholas Emigh or Amout Viele. 

By authorization of the Supreme Court a partition was made, in 
1708, of the lands embraced in the Rombout patent lying between 
the Fishkill and Wappinger creeks. While this lands to the north and 



1. Facslmilies of the signa- 
tures of Verplanck and Eomlioudt 
on the deed from the Wappinger 
Indians to them In 1683. 







2. "New Tort, 20th day of April, 1689. Then appeared hefore me Paiilus Richard 

Alderman, Mr. Jno. Holwell Surveyor who took Oath upon the Holy Evangelists 

that this Map or Draught on the other Side is according to his hest Skill and Capacity 
ye true Draught or Map of a certain tract of Land, lying on ye East side of Hudson's 
Elver above ye High Lands so as ye same is described ( ?) • and sett forth in a Patent 
granted by ye late Governor Coll. Thomas Dongan to Stephanus Van Cortlandt, Francis 
Kombouts and Jacobus Kipp trustee etc. ^Dated October 17th ye first year of His 



Majestys Eeign being ye year of our Lord 1685. 
•This word is not entirely legible. 



Paul Richard, Al'dn." 



302 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

south of these streams respectively were left to be held in common by 
the patentees or their representatives or heirs. In this division the 
southern third fell to the lot of Catharine, wife of Roger Brett, the 
daughter and only child of Francis Romboudt; the intermediate third 
to the children of Guhan Verplanck; and the northern third to Ger' 
trude, widow of Stephanus Van Cortlandt. 

In 1709 Roger Brett and his wife built the house now standing 
in Matteawan on the south side of Main street, since known as the 
Teller House, and now occupied by their descendants. Dr. and Mrs. 
Robert Fulton Crary. Not long after building this house Roger 
Brett was drowned from a sloop. He was buried in a small cemetery 
at BymesviUe, near the Newhn homestead. He left the entire care 
of his estate consisting of many thousand acres to his widow, who 
subsequently became known as "Madam Brett." She proved equal to 
the task, and set about establishing mills, and inviting settlers from 
Long Island and elsewhere, to come upon her land and develop it. 
Madam Brett had three sons, Francis, Robert and Rivery. Rivery 
was named from the fact that he was bom on the river while his mother 
was on the way from New York on the sloop. He died at the age of 
seventeen. 

Madam Brett died at an advanced age and her body lies buried 
under the pulpit of the Dutch Church at Fishkill. A few years ago 
a beautiful stained glass window, made by Tiffany & Co., of New York, 
was placed in her memory in the church by the Brett family and others 
interested in the history of Fishkill. 

Madam Brett's will was proved before the Court of Common Pleas 
of Dutchess County, March I*, 1763. She bequeathed to her eldest 
son, Francis, the major portion of her estate, including the Frank- 
ford storehouse and five farms containing two hundred acres each. To 
her son Robert's five children she bequeathed each a farm of two hun- 
dred acres. 

Among the families that came in response to Madam Brett's invita- 
tion to settlers were the Van Wyck, Brinckerhoff, Swartwout, Wiltse, 
Hasbrouck, Ter Bos (Terbush), Adriance (originally Adriaense), 
Van Voorhis and DuBois. Madam Brett also established the first 
mill — a grist mill. It stood near the mouth of the Fishkill creek, 
aboul^ on the site now occupied by the Tompkins Hat Factory at 
Tioronda. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 303 

In 1743 the farming and milling industries of the precinct having 
largely increased, Madam Brett in company with about twenty other 
persons, entered into an agreement for the building of what after- 
wards became known as the Frankfort Store House, which stood close 
to the water at what was formerly known as the "Lower Landing," 
north of Denning's Point, where the old Wiltse houses are now stand- 
ing. This was the origin of river freighting. 

The old contract or agreement between Madam Brett and her asso- 
ciates is in the possession of one of her descendants. Miss Kathleen 
MacKinnon of New York, and is in a fair state of preservation. A 
facsimile of the signatures to the document appears on a subsequent 
page. The contract reads as follows: 

"To all Christian people to whome tlus present Writing %aU or may Concern, 
Catharine Brett, James Duncan, Theodorus VanWydi, Cornelis Van Wyck, Cor- 
nells Wiltse, John Brinkerhof, John Carman, Joshua Carman, Jun'r, Benjamin 
Haesbrook, Theodorus Van Wyck Son of Cornelis, Abraham Blom, Hendrik Ter- 
bush, Isaac Brinkerhof, Lawrence Locy, Jacob Brinckerhof, Joris Adriaense, John 
Van Vlockeren, Abraham Adriaense and Isaac Adriaense, all of Dutchess County 
in ye province of New York, Abraham Van Wyck and Joris Brinkerhof of the 
Citty of New York and Thomas Storm of West Chester County and Province afore- 
^id. Sends Greeting, Whereas the persons above Named have Jointly purchased 
from Francis Brett a Certain Lott or parcell of Land Scituate on the East Side 
of Hudsons River Adjoining to other Land of ye said Brett between Johanis Van 
Voorhees and Mathewes DuBois in w'ch purchase Every mans Share & proportion 
thereof is particularly Expressed, as by the deed of Conveyance may fully and at 
Large appear on which said Land the partners above named have built & Erected 
a Com'ys Store house and Dwelling house and for the better Convenience of all the 
parties Concerned they have agreed & Concluded to Divide the Same into Twenty 
Separate rooms or Divisions Equall to the rights and Number of whole Shares, for 
which there were Lotts fairly drawn. * * * At all times for Ever here- 
after. The, major part of the owners & Possessors of the Said Lands & prem- 
ises according to the Number of their Severall rights & Shares, Shall have the 
power to manage order & direct all the affairs relating to the Same (so as not 
Designedly to hurt or Damage any one of the partys Concerned) and to make & 
Establish such rules & Regulations as they Shall Judge beneficial for using & 
Improving the Same, And When Ever the Said Majority Shall Judge it proper & 
beneficial to make further Division or to Sell & Dispose of any part thereof, We 
do hereby Give & Grant unto them full power so to do. And Such Division or 
Divisions, or Deed of Conveyance by them made & Lawfully Executed, Shall be 
good and Valid in the law to all Intents and purposes whatsoever. And we & 
Each of us our heirs and assigns Shall be thereof & Therefrom for Ever Debarred 
& Excluded, and the moneys arising by such Sale to be accounted for when re- 
quired. And it is further Agreed that in all Cases the Majority of Votes Shall be 



304 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

reconed According to Each of their Several rights and Shares in ye Lands & prem- 
ises aforesaid that is to say that Every one who hath or hereafter shall have one 
two or more Whole Shares Shall have as many Votes, those who have one Share to 
have one Vote & where two or more are Joined or Concerned in one Share, Each 
of their Votes to be reconed according to their Several rights; and if it so happen 
that any of the partners be at a great Distance when any Vote or Regulation is 
to be made Every Such absent person Shall be allowed to give his Vote in Writing 
& the same with all other Transactions shall be Entered into a book to be kept for 
that purpose which Vote so given in Writing Shall be taken & allowed as good as 
if the person was there present 

In addition to the above document there is preserved a small account 
book giving the transactions of the company from its organization in 
1743 up to 1790. The business was then being conducted as usual, 
but how much longer it lasted cannot now be ascertained. The first 
part of the book is given up to financial transactions with the share- 
holders, the rest of it with the records of the annual meetings. Here 
are the minutes of an annual meeting in 1763 : 

"January ye 14th, then chose Abraham Adriance for Clarck for Franckfords 
store at the meeting at Richard Van Wyck's for the insuing year. Daniel ter 
Bush boatman for the year sixty three tiU the first of may in the year sixty four 
at twelve pounds and keep the Store House, Dock and Dwelling House in sufficient 
Repair, and the said Daniel ter Bush is to fence the orchard land and bringh in 
a, just account and the said Bush is to receive his pay out of the Rent Don by 
major voat, and the said Bush is to frate as useyd and find salt as useyel Chosen 
managers for the Insuing year — ^Theodores Van Wyck and Col. John Brincker- 
hoff to manige and rectiphy all affairs, and to Demand the Land that peter Bo- 
gardus has in possession. By major voat. The meeting to be at Richard Van 
Wyck the first day of January if Sunday then the next Day." 

There are no minutes of the proprietors between January S, 1776, 
and January 1, 1781, as there were probably no meetings because 
of the interruption of business and the disturbed conditions due to the 
Revolutionary War, although at the annual meeting in January, 1776, 
the proprietors resolved to meet in the following year after having ap- 
pointed Richard Van Wyck, clerk, and Daniel Ter Boss, boatman for 
the ensuing year. The following is a transcript of the meeting in 
1781: 

"Dutchess County, Jan? 1st, 1781. "Att a Meeting of the Majority of the 
proprietors of Frankfort Store House — ^Voted that Theod" Van Wyck be Clerk of 
sA Meeting. Voted also That Major Terbos Continue in possession of said Estate 
to "the first of May 1783 att Twenty pounds p" Annum, Voted also that Major 
Terbos pay for the Said Estate from the year 1777 to the year 1780 Sixteen 













w ''6iu!i''^ ^ ^ "^^;'-- 



r/^./'-^^:^:;^'';^'^:.) 






















c^^ 

1^^ Jori^ti/0^4^ 



-m 



(^jtu^t^i 



'^%' 



.%s:ti in 



^. 






JmcrfJrr^fyC^. 







•9091 










t^ aruiVaf^S^f;^ 



h^<!rej ' 



FACSIMILE OF THE SIGNATURES TO THE CONTRACT FOR BUILDING 
THE FRANKFORT STORE HOUSE, FISHKILL, 1743. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 305 

pounds pr yeaiv-Voted also that Theod™ Van Wyck and John Adriance be a 
Committee from this Meeting to go to Major Terbos's and settle all the Accompts 
appertaining to the said Estate up to this day, and if said Committee should 
judge and Repairs Necessary, they are hereby authorised, to Employ persons to 
do the same & the proprietors to be accountable to pay the Cost thereof. Voted 
also that the next meeting be on the iirst day Jany next, or the next if the first 
day be a Sunday at the House of Col. Griffin." 

The Revolutionary War had closed when the annual meeting of the 
"Proprietors of the Frankford Store House" was held on January 1, 
1788. It was then 

"Voted that Major Daniel Terbos continue in possession of said estate until the 
first day of May, which wUl be in the year 1784, at £30 per annum, in case there 
is a peace concluded between America and Great Britain by the first day of next 
June, and on the contrary, that no peace takes place by thaijt day, the said Terbos 
to pay £20 pr. annum." 

The prices for freighting may be interesting to some readers. At 
the meeting in 1784 it was voted that 

"The said Terboss shall freight for the said proprietors after the following man- 
ner: Flour at 9 pence per cask; pork or beef at one shilling per barrel; salt at 
3 pence per bushel; wheat or other grain at 3 pence per bushel; a passenger at 
3 shillings and six pence, and all other things in proportion." 

The Frankfort Store House stood until 1826 and the business re- 
mained in the descendants of Madam Brett, conducted by the Brett 
and Wiltse families. The first Martin Wiltse was a Swede, who came 
to this country before the death of Madam Brett. He married a Miss 
Humphrey of New York and built the old homestead which is still 
standing at the "Lower Landing." Their children were James, Mar- 
tin, William, and Mary who married Theodorus Brett, the grand- 
father of Mrs. James W. Andrews, late of Matteawan, who has con- 
tributed much valuable information concerning the early history of 
the town. James Wiltse, the youngest son, succeeded his father at 
the Frankfort Store House. He sailed one of the packet sloops which 
then pUed from the adjacent wharf. He married a Miss Van Voorhis. 
Martin, the other son married twice — ^namely the two daughters of 
Henrx_§chenck, and built the house now standing at the Upper Land- 
ing, at the foot of Main street. Martin Wiltse, the elder son, estab- 
lished a ferry to the opposite shore and about this time there were 
three such enterprises, one from the Lower Landing to New Windsor 
by a periauger. (A periauger by the way was a two-masted vessel with- 



306 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

out a bowsprit or head-sail; in other words, a schooner without a jib.) 
The word is probably a corruption of the French pirogite. Later 
Martin, Jr., put on a ferry boat propelled by horse power, which he 
ran from the Upper Landings, and this lasted until 1819. The third 
ferry was from the Long Dock and was established by one Lawrence. 
He, however, failed after spending upwards of $20,000 in building the 
Long Dock. The house where Mr. Lawrence lived is still standing 
(much altered) on North Avenue opposite the old entrance to the De- 
Wint homestead, now known as Tompkins avenue. Mr. Lawrence 
married a Bogardus, who was a descendant of the famous Anneke 
Jans, whose descendants unsuccessfully claimed aU the land now owned 
by Trinity Church in New York, and gave rise to a great lawsuit 
which vexed the courts for many years. 

As the population of the Rombout Patent increased, communica- 
tion with Newburgh on the opposite bank became more frequent, so 
that other ferries naturally sprung up. Accordingly Alexander 
Colden, of the same family as CadwaUader Golden, who was at one 
time Surveyor General of the Province of New York, and afterwards 
Lieutenant Governor, secured a patent for land from George H in 
the year 1743, covering the site of the present City of Newburgh, 
and as an appurtenance thereto, he obtained the privilege to establish 
a ferry. The land covered by the patent was then in Ulster County, 
for Orange County did not then extend so far northward on the river 
as it now does, its northern boundary then being Quassaick creek. 
Colden street in Newburgh still perpetuates the name of the patentee. 
From old documents in the possession of the descendants of Martin 
Wiltse the following extracts are taken, being the recitals in an old 
deed, and quoted in the opinion of Thomas Addis Emmett, referred to 
below. They are as follows: 

"Whereas Oeorge the gecond formerly King of Great Britain, did, by certain 
Letters Patent duly issued under the Great Seal of the (late) Province of New 
York, bearing date on the twenty fifth day of June in the year One thousEind seven 
hundred and forty-three, and Recorded in the ofSce of the Secretary of the State 
of New York, in Lib: Pat: No. 12 Page 221 &c. and made to Alexander Colden 
then of Ulster County in said Province, Gentlemen, grant, ratify and confirm unto 
said Alexander Colden (among other things). All the Ground of Hudsons River 
lying and being under the water of the same river One hundred feet into the same 
from high-water mark. The whole length of the land held by said Alexander Col- 
den in a certain tract of Two thousand One hundred and ninety acres of Land 



TOWN OF nSHKILL. 307 

in Ulster County, formerly gmnted to Andries Volk and Jacob Webbers and 
known as the New Burgh Patent; Beginning on the North side of Quassaic Creek 
and extending Northerly up Hudsons river upon a straight line Two hwndred and 
nineteen Ghainf, together with all and singular the benefits, liberties, ways, waters, 
easements, hereditaments and appurtenances thereunto belonging or in any wise 
appertaining, or that are necessary or convenient to be had, used or enjoyed there- 
with. And also the sole and full liberty and power of setting up, establishing, 
keeping, using and employing at all times forever thereafter, a good and sufScient 
Ferry to be duly kept and attended for the conveniency of passing and repassing 
with passengers, horses, cattle and all manner of goods, wares and merchandises 
whatsoever from any part of the aforesaid patented Lands to said Volk and 
Webber lying and being in Ulster County aforesaid then commonly called New 
Burgh Patent, to any part of the Easterly side of said River, the length of Two 
hundred and nineteen chains along the said liver and so opposite to said Land so 
granted to said Volk and Webbers, that is to say, from such place on the Easterly 
side of said River where a due East course from the North«slde of Quasaick Creek 
across the said River, shall strike the Easterly side thereof, the length of Two 
hundred and nineteen Chains Northerly up the said river; and from the Easterly 
side of said river to any part of the said patented Lands to said Volk and Web- 
bers and to and from and between any and every the places aforesaid; and also the 
full and free liberty to ask demand and take for ferriage at and for such fer- 
riage certain fees therein mentioned and epecifled. ***** 

And whereas said Leonard Carpenter and Jacob Carpenter for themselves, their 
heirs and assigns by deed bearing date on the eighth day of February One Thou- 
sand and eight hundred and five, made and executed by and between said Leonard 
and Jacob Carpenter of one part, and said party of the first part and Peter Bo- 
gardus of the second part, granted and conveyed unto said party of the first part 
(by said name and style of Martin Wiltse Junior) and to said Peter Bogardus, 
their heirs and assigns forever, a full liberty at all times thereafter, to land with 
their Ferry-Boats, and the goods brought therein, on any of the wharves or ferry- 
stairs of said Leonard and Jacob Carpenter their heirs or Assigns, at said town of 
New-Burgh without and hindrance or molestation whatever. And in consideration 
thereof said part of the first part and said Peter Bogardus, granted and conveyed 
the same liberty to said Leonard and Jacob Carpenter their heirs and assigns for- 
ever, and it was thereby mutually covenanted (amongst other things) that no new 
Ferry should be established from Fishkill Landing to said New Burgh as by said 
Deed will, reference thereto being had, more fully appear." 

The Quassaick Creek, wMch was the southern boundary of the pat- 
ent, empties into the Hudson between Newburgh and New Windsor, 
and it is at that point whence the 219 chains were to be measured north- 
ward, as well as from the point on the opposite shore, i. e., the end of 
Denning's Point. Within that space of about two miles no other 
ferry might be set up. By reference to the Patent we learn that the 
ferry charges were as follows : 



308 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

"And also full & free liberty to ask, demand & take for ferriage at & for such 
ferriage as aforesaid, the several & respective fees hereinafter mentioned & so 
approved of by our said Council as aforesaid, to wit: for every man & Horse Two 
shillings and six pence, but if three or more together for each man & horse two 
shillings; for a single Person only one shilling for each footman, if three or more 
together nine pence; for every single Horse or Beast one shilling & Six pence, 
but if three or more together for each one shilling & three pence; for every Calf 
or Hog six pence, for every Sheep or Lamb four pence, for every full Barrell one 
shilling, for every pail of Butter three pence, for every firkin or Tub of Butter 
six pence, for every BusheU of Salt or Grain three pence, for every hundred 
weight of Iron, Lead &c., nine pence, for every chaise, Hilterin or Sleigh four 
shillings; for every waggon or Cart six shillings, & so in proportion for all other 
things for which no Provision is hereby made, according to their Bulk or weight." 

By the Constitution of 1777 — ^the first one ratified by the State of 
New York — all royal charters were recognized and continued in force. 
The Colden ferry charter, however, had been operated so irregularly 
and at such long intervals that it was the opinion of some lawyers that 
it had lapsed by non-user. 

About the year 1812, John Peter DeWint, having built the Long 
Dock for his business of freighting on the river, took out a Hcense 
from the County Court, then called the Court of Common Pleas, to 
operate a ferry to and from his wharf and Newburgh, whereupon 
Martin Wiltse, who claimed the exclusive right under the Colden 
charter to ferriage from the Fishkill shore, consulted Thomas Addis 
Emmet, a celebrated member of the New York Bar at that time, as 
to his rights and the remedy. The opinion of Emmet, with his 
autograph attached is still well preserved. It is dated New York, 
Sept. 16, 1816, and reads as follows: 

"Opinion to Martin Wiltse, Jr., of Fishkill Landing on the rights to the Ferry 
from Fishkill shore to Newburgh. 

Case.-^SSth June, 1743, Alexander Colden obtained a Patent for the sole and 
full liberty to keep a ferry from the West to the East and from the East to the 
West side of the River opposite Newburgh. This right by some conveyances for 
» valuable consideration became vested in Jacob & Leonard Carpenter, of New- 
burgh. 

Under the allegation of non-user under the Patent and of long continued pos- 
session in themselves, Peter Bogardus & Mr. Wiltse contested the Patent right to 
the ferry on the East side, and by way of strengthening their title took «. license 
for a. Ferry from the Court of Common Pleas of Dutchess County (vid 2 N. Rev. 
laws 210). 

Thffe controversy was compromised and on the 8th Feby 1805 Articles of Agrees 
ment were made between the Carpenters of the first part, Martin Wiltse Junr & 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 309 

Peter Bogardus of Fiahkill Landing of the 2nd part granted and conveyed to the 
parties of the 2nd part in fee a full liberty to land with their ferry boats &cc. on 
any of their wharves or ferrystairs at Newburgh — & the Parties of the 2nd part 
granted & conveyed in fee the same liberty to the parties of the first. It was by 
the said articles agreed between the parties that no new ferry should be set up or 
established at the said Fishkill landings to any part of the said Newburgh, by 
either of the parties to the said agreement, and that none of the ferries from the 
said Fishkill landing should take any ferriage from the wharves of Newburgh 
without consent of the Carpenters — & that no ferryboat from Newburgh should 
take ferriage from any of the landings or wharves of the said Fishkills landings. 

On the 28th August, 180S, a deed of conveyance was made between the Carpen- 
ters of the first part and Martin Wiltse & Martin Wiltse, Junr. & Peter Bogardus 
of the town of FishkiU of the second part. By it the parties of the first part 
bargained, sold & conveyed to the parties of the second part in fee all their right, 
title, interest & claim to the ferry on the E. side of the Hudson River which was 
granted to Colden, they the parties of the 2nd part for eter after fulfilling and 
performing the duties required by the grant. They have ever since been regularly 
performed and Mr. Wiltse and Bogardus kept a ferry from Wiltses landing. 
John P. DeWint having made a new and long wharf on the Fishkill side, he and 
Thomas Lawrence set up a, ferry from it in 1812; having applied to the Court of 
Common Pleas of Dutchess County for a license under the existing law (2N. Rev. 
Laws 210) which was granted; but without intending to prejudice the patent. 
DeWint and Lawrence in order to strengthen themselves have contrived to asso- 
ciate with them the Carpenters & as it is supposed Peter Bogardus — and the new 
Team Boat set up by them runs not only under the license, but also imder the 
title of the ferrying from DeWints long wharf — ^while Mr. Wiltse stiU ferries from 
his old accustomed Wharf, but is materially injured by the competition. Ques- 
tion — Has Mr. Wiltse any remedy for the injury he is suffering and what, and 
against whom?" 

Then follows the argument, which being quite long and technical, 
is here omitted. The conclusion reached by Emmet was that Martin 
Wiltse was virtually without remedy. 

Not long afterwards Thomas PoweU of Newburgh acquired all the 
adverse claims to the Colden ferry charter and other rights to fer- 
riage, thereby obtaining complete title to the ferry, which he operated 
until his death. Afterwards his son-in-law, Homer Ramsdell, Esq., 
operated the same in connection with John Peter DeWint, owner of 
the Long Dock, Fishkill, and on his death in 1870, it was sold to Mr. 
Ramsdell. 

The following has been recently supplied through the courtesy of 
the Ramsdell estate. 

The charter for the Ferry was granted May 24th, 1743, by Hon. 
George Clark, Lieutenant Governor of the Province and the Council 



310 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

to Alexander Golden. This charter was sold by the heirs of the 
patentee December 15, 1802, to Leonard Carpenter. The ownership 
passed through the Carpenters (Leonard and Jacob), the Wiltses and 
Bogardus to Isaac R. Carpenter, who sold a half interest to J. P. 
DeWint in 1832, and in 1833 Mr. Carpenter became sole owner by 
purchase. On May 1, 1835 the Ferry was sold to Mr. DeWint and 
on the 30th of May, same year, DeWint sold the whole to Thomas 
Powell, who deeded it to his daughter, Mrs. Frances E. L. RamsdeU, 
ip October, 1850. The interests of the Wiltses were all bought up 
by the Carpenters and DeWint prior to the sale in 1835 to Mr. De- 
Wint. 

FARMS OF THE VERPLANCK FAMILY. 

It may not be out of place to devote some space to this topic, since 
this family for over a century was by far the largest landowner in 
the township, if not in the county; and also because its partitions or 
sales are the source of title of many thousands of acres of separate 
farms into which the original family holdings are now cut up. The 
development of the property was quite different from that of the two 
other families, Brett and Van Cortlandt, which owned the other two- 
thirds of the township. 

Owing to minorities in two successive generations none of the family 
seems to have come to live or build on that part of the patent set 
off to them, until about 1730, when Gulian, grandson of the patentee, 
having obtained by partition with his sisters one-third of the original 
third set off to himself and his cousins, that is to say one-ninth of 
the entire patent consisting of more than 10,000 acres, built the house 
subsequently knoT^n as Mount Gulian, which is still standing and now 
owned and occupied by WiUiam E. VjBrplapck. There is no record 
as to when the house was built. It ig hardly likely, however, that 
it was prior to 1730. That the house was in existence as early as 
1760 we know through the will of Gulian, which was proved in New 
York County in March, 1752, the year following his death, which oc- 
curred in his 54th year. 

The will provided: 

"I give, devise and bequeath to my son Samuel and his heirs forever All that 
farAi in dutches Ck>unty called Mount Gulian with all the Buildings thereon erected 
and all and every the slaves, stock, household furniture, farming utensils &c." 




WILLIAM S. VBRPLANCK. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 311 

To Samuel is also given all the testator's other lands in Dutchess 
County. Both devises to Samuel are on condition that he lives to the 
age of twenty-one or has lawful issue; failing which the two proper- 
ties shall go to the daughter, Aryentie, for life, and on her death to 
the heirs of her body. Several of the life-leases made by Gulian and 
his son Samuel of their lands in the Rombout Patent are still in ex- 
istence and in the possession of the writer. They were carefully drawn 
on printed blanks. For an illustration, the lease made by Gulian to 
"Henry Philips and his present wife Deborah," May 1, 1751, may be 
taken. The lot consisted of two hundred acres from which "£6 and 
two couples of fowles" were reserved as annual rent, to be paid May 
1st, besides the payment of all taxes. For the first six years, how- 
ever, there was to be no rent, and for this privilege the tenant agreed 
to build "one framed or stone dwelhng. house of at ieast eighteen foot 
square with a Lento on one end thereof, with one framed Barn, all to 
be well shingled." Within the first year, also, the tenant agreed "to 
set up stone land marks at the corners of the Lott," and to further, 
"once a year thereafter in Easter week carry his children (if he hath 
any, otherwise his white servants or four of his nearest Neighbours) 
and show them the land marks." The tenant also agreed to make "a 
nursery of fruit trees, to be some Apels, Pears, Cherries & Peaches 
* * * of forty foot square" and to set out an "orchard of at 
least One Hundred Aple Trees" and to prune them or graft the trees, 
"provided the grafts or inoculations be furnished by the landlord." 
The landlord was to have the fruit of three trees. The tenant agreed 
not to cut or dispose of the wood, timber, stone or dung made on the 
premises; also to "keep six acres in meadow for grass and hay," and 
to "stand Bound to work with a Team of cattle or Horses and wag- 
gon or Cart one day annually" * * * as required by the land- 
lord. 

It was largely through such leases as these that the Verplanck 
property was developed. In other words their policy was quite diifer- 
ent from that of Madam Brett, who owned one-third of the Patent to 
the south, and from that of the Van Cortlandts, who owned the other 
one-third to the north. It was the policy of these latter to sell out- 
right to settlers; the result being that large industrial towns have 
grown up along the Fishkill and Wappinger Creeks, while the Ver- 
planck property still remains largely agricultural, owing to their 



312 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

reluctance to sell. This state of affairs continued until the death in 
1834 of Daniel C. Verplanck, who, as sole heir of Samuel above men- 
tioned, was the largest land owner in Dutchess County. He had been 
County Judge for several years prior to 1812 and subsequently was a 
Member of Congress for several terms. He was the first of the family 
to make his permanent home at Mount Guhan at Fishkill, and as he 
had a large family, he enlarged the house in 1804 by building an 
addition to the north. The Mount Gulian farm at that time con- 
sisted of upwards of three hundred acres extending along the river 
for nearly two miles and thence eastward to the homestead farm of 
Garret Brinckerhoff, who was another large land owner in the neigh- 
borhood. _ 

In addition to his homestead farm, Daniel Crommelin Verplanck had 
several thousand acres in the county, which were divided into farms of 
about two hundred and fifty acres each. After his death the land was 
"actually" partitioned. The Rev. John Brown, of St. George's 
Church, Newburgh, Robert Gill, and Dr. Bartow White, of Fishkill, 
were the commissioners. The notes of Dr. Brown are now in my pos- 
session by gift from John Brown Kerr, Esq., of New York, a grand- 
son of Dr. Brown. From these notes the following facts are gathered : 

The commissioners were chosen by the parties to make partition of 
all the Dutchess County property except that of Mount GuUan. The 
first "view" was made on the 10th of November, 1836. Soon after 
a heavy snowstorm interfered with the work, which the commissioners 
were not able to take up again, owing to the severity of the ensuing 
winter, until the 23d of May of the following year. The whole num- 
ber of farms viewed was thirty-five, besides two commons, in all, 
6,475 87-100 acres, which were appraised at $320,913.39, or $45,- 
844.77 for each of the seven heirs, after deducting the widow's dower 
and the value of the life leases which were running on most of the 
farms. On the 6th of July the commissioners completed their appraise- 
ments, and in August, 1836, the partition deeds were recorded. The 
names of the heirs were James deLancey, Elizabeth V. P. Knevels, 
William Walton, Gulian C, Samuel, Anne Louise and Mary Anna. 

Daniel C. Verplanck was one of the directors and a principal share- 
holder in the Middle District Bank of Poughkeepsie. In 1830 this 
bank failed, Daniel C. losing heavily. He deemed that the credit of 
the bank had been to a great extent dependent on his name, and he 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 313 

made good out of his own funds the losses sustained by the depositors 
and other creditors. He died suddenly March 29, 1834. 

His son, Gulian C, spent the greater part of his life in the city of 
New York where he was active in political life. He represented the 
city in Congress for several terms, and was influential in securing the 
enactment of copyright laws. As State Senator he sat in the old 
Court of Errors and Appeals, where he rendered several opinions in 
important commercial and financial disputes. He edited an edition 
of Shakespeare which took high rank with scholars. He died in New 
York at the age of eighty-four, and was buried in Trinity church- 
yard, Fishkill Village. 

James de Lancey and William S., son and grandson of Daniel C. 
Verplanck, continued to live on the family property until they died, 
the former in 1881, and the latter in 1885. 

Wilham S. Verplanck, though educated for the bar, soon dropped 
this calling to take up agriculture. About ten years after his mar- 
riage with Miss Anna Newlin, he built "New Place," overlooking the 
Hudson. He was one of the founders of the Mechanics Savings Bank, 
on its incorporation in 1866, and on the retirement of General How- 
land in 1868, he became president. He was also one of the incor- 
porators, and until his death in 1885, a director of the First National 
Bank of FishkiU Landing. 

Mount Gulian, owned by WiUiam E. Verplanck, is the only one 
now standing of three old homesteads^ built in the early part of the 
eighteenth century on the land set off to the heirs of Gulian Ver- 
planck. The old part is of stone, and stuccoed; over it is a curved 
roof with dormer windows. This house was for a time the head- 
quarters of Baron Steuben during the Revolution, and under its roof 
was instituted, in May, 1783, the Society of the Cmcmmati, of which 
Washington was the first president, an ofiice he retained until his death. 

A singular and interesting character who lived for many years in 
Fishkill, was James F. Brown, born a slave in Maryland in 1783. At 
the age of thirty years he escaped and came north, and from 1829 to 



1. The two others were the Lawrence Lawrence, and the John Van Voorheea houses. 
Lawrence was a nephew of Gulian Verplanck. His house stood on the river alwut a 
mile south of Low Point, and was later the home of Garrett Brinckerhoff. The Van 
Voorhees stood on the Poughkeepsie road, about two miles north of Fishkill Landing, on 
a tract of land of nearly 3000 acres, sold to him early In the eighteenth century by 
Philip Verplanck. 



314 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1864 was the gardener at Mount GuiKan. During this period he kept 
a diary, in which he made a record not only of the weather, the con- 
dition of the garden, etc., but also of the visitors to the house, local 
news and items of more than family interests When his whereabouts 
were discovered by his southern master, his freedom was purchased, 
and he was soon joined by his wife Julia, whom he had married in 
Baltimore in 1826. Brown died in 1868, and Juha made her home 
in the village until her death in 1890. 

FisHKELL-ON-HuDsoN. This village has grown up around the 
original Five Corners, and become a place of importance within the 
last thirty years. In 1864! it was incorporated under the Act of 
1847, the first general act for the incorporation of villages through- 
out the State, and was given the name of Fishkill Landing. Samuel 
Bogardus was chosen its first president. In 1878 the village was 
reincorporated in accordance with the Act of 1870, under the pro- 
visions of which it still continues. 

In 1804 a postoffice was established imder the name of Fishkill Land- 
ing, and Egbert Bogardus appointed first postmaster. Five years 
later he was succeeded by Peter Folsom. During the Civil War, when 
Nehemiah Place was postmaster, the name of the postoffice was changed 
to FishkiU-on-the-Hudson. The early impetus of the village was 
largely due to the enterprises of John Peter DeWint,^ a man of great 
energy and activity. His operations were not confined to this side of 
the river alone, but he was a property owner and interested in the 
industries of Newburgh. He had a shipyard on the river bank just 
'south of the Long Dock, and was interested in the freighting business 
which for many years was conducted by sloops from the Long Dock, 
as well as from the Lower and Upper Landings. Towards the end 
of his life he was thought to be rather indifferent to the growth of 
the village, and was, as I think, unjustly criticised for standing in 
the way of further improvements in the village. He died in 1870, 
appointing for his executors the late William S. Verplanck, J. De- 
Wint Hook and James Mackin. Mr. Mackin was a prominent man in 
Fishkill; he was President of the National Bank from 1870 to 1886; 
chairman of the Railroad Committee of the Assembly for several terms, 
and State Treasurer. He was also a close friend of Mr. Tilden, and 

1. For biographical sketch of Mr. DeWlnt, see Fait II. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 315 

had Tilden been inaugurated there is every reason to believe that Mr. 
Mackin would have received an appointment of distinction in the 
federal government. 

Under the direction of the will, Mr. DeWint's executors began to 
Settle the estate, and by judicious sales made throughout the village, 
which were mutually advantageous both to the estate and the pur- 
chasers, and largely through the co-operation of the late Lewis Tomp- 
kins,^ who built several hat factories and houses here, the village be- 
gan to grow rapidly. Mr. Tompkins not only built a fine residence 
for himself, but he also laid out that part of the village through which 
Dutchess Terrace and other streets and avenues now run, in a judi- 
cious and tasteful manner, making this part of the village both 
attractive and valuable. Spy Hill about the same J;ime had been laid 
out and several handsome houses built by the Hon. John T. Smith, 
Mr. W. A. Jones and others. In consequence of this the village was 
greatly improved in its general appearance, and ceased to have the 
somewhat squalid appearance which it had in former times. 

Before the advent of the railroad, the river was largely used as a 
means of reaching points north and south, sloops being employed for 
this purpose. Travel between Albany and New York by stagecoach, 
which passed through Fishkill, was wearisome. It took from ten to 
twelve hours to make the trip from Fishkill to New York. Much 
pleasanter was travel by sloops. They were fitted up as packets, and 
many of them had accommodations for twenty-five passengers. They 
made the run to or from New York and Fishkill inside of twelve hours, 
and now and then a great run was made. For instance, the sloop 
"Caroline," owned by John P. DeWint and named for his daughter, 
Mrs. Monell, sailed from the Battery to the Long Dock in five hours. 

After the introduction of steamboats by Fulton, a disaster which 
afFected Fishkill was the burning of the "Henry Clay" in 1852. She 
was racing with the "Armenia" and when a short distance north of 
Spuyten Duyvil she took fire. Several of the passengers who were in 
the stem were either burned or drowned. Among the number was the 
wife of John Peter Dewint, and his son-in-law, Andrew J. Dowjiing. 

From Mr. John Place, treasurer of the Fishkill Savings Bank, I 
learn that in 1857 he went into the freighting business with the late 

1. For biographical sketch of Mr. Tompkins, see Part II. 



316 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Walter Brett and Joseph Cromwell. This firm had the barge "Inde- 
pendence," which was towed to New York by the Kingston steam- 
boats. At one time the steamboat "William Young" of which Charles 
Adriance, of Low Point, was captain called at the Long Dock 
and took its freight. This was the genial "Captain Charley," who 
succeeded to the old freighting business formerly done from Low 
Point by sloops. One of them was the famous "Matteawan," which 
was built on the shipyard at Low Point, belonging to Cornelius Car- 
man. Two trips a week were made. On the death of Joseph Crom- 
well, the firm of Brett & Matthews was formed, which ran the steamer 
"Walter Brett." Later the firm built the "River Queen." She was 
the old "Mary Benton," which was rebuilt at a cost of $60,000, being 
fitted up with staterooms, saloons, etc. She proved too expensive for 
the business and was sold at a great loss to Garner & Company of 
Wappingers Falls and Newburgh, who ran her in connection with 
their factories. At this time Captain Walter Brett retired, and the 
firm of Brundage & Place was organized. They made an arrange- 
ment with the late Homer Ramsdell of Newburgh to carry their 
freight on the steamboats owned by him, and for that purpose the 
firm employed a small barge to run between Dutchess Junction, the 
Long Dock and Newburgh, where the freight was transferred to the 
RamsdeU boats. Now all this freighting business has passed under 
the control of the Central Hudson Steamboat Company. 

The Hudson River Railroad in early days felt the competition of 
the steamboats, and made every effort to meet it, sharp rivalry exist- 
ing between the two enterprises for many years. After the com- 
pletion of the Hudson River Railroad in 1851, no other railroad enter- 
prises were started until after the Civil War. In 1866 the Dutchess & 
Columbia Railroad Company was organized for the purpose of build- 
ing a line from a point at the mouth of the Fishkill Creek northeasterly 
through the county to the village of Millerton on the Harlem Rail- 
road, in the town of Northeast. This company was largely promoted 
by the firm of Brown Brothers, bankers in New York, who had large 
interests in the town of Washington. Several towns along the pro- 
posed line, FishkiU among them, bonded themselves in aid of the con- 
struction of the railroad, and the road was accordingly built and fin- 
ished in 1868, Mr. Oliver W. Barnes being its chief engineer. It was 
unprofitable and soon passed into the hands of its bondholders. Ten 
years later the lower end of the road from Hopewell Junction to 




LEWIS TOMPKINS, 



TOWN OF nSHKILL. 



317 



Dutchess Junction was purchased by the New York & New England 
Railroad Company, and has since been absorbed by the Central New 
England. 

The house now occupied by Dr. Kittridge, on Ferry street, was for- 
merly owned by A. King Chandler, who built the house and laid out 
the adjacent grounds, all in a somewhat pretentious style. It was a 
conspicuous object from the river, with peaks and gables and many 
outbuildings. All the land in front was open as far as Beekman 
street, then a mere country road, and generally called the Old Plank 
Road. Mr. Chandler kept a large dry goods and variety shop in 
Newburgh, somewhat on the order of the department store of to-day, 
and did a profitable business for many years. 

PiiANK Road. The certificate of the FishkiU ancj Beekman Plank 
Road Company was filed August 22, 1851. The company was or- 
ganized by about seventy-five persons, with a capital stock of $30,000, 
divided into shares of $50 each. The subscribers each took from 
Railroad Co., the successor of the original Boston, Hartford & Erie 
Railroad. 

FishkiU 



John S. Thayer 
John B. Rosa 
Samuel A. Hayt 
Jacob G. "Van Wyck 
Guernsey Smith 
Bartow White 
Lewis B. White 
H. F. Walcott 
James B. Brinckerhoff 
Walter Brett 
Catherine E. Kapalje 
James B. Vandervoort 
Chauncey DeLavan 
Richard B. Horton 
Wm. HasBrook 
Alfred Storm 
Isaac Sherwood 
Abraham Brinckerhoff 
Peter H. Schenck-^ 
D. S. Ackerman 
W. B. Sheldon 
Charles Davies 
Louis Meyer 
James E. Member 
S. A. Benson 



New York 
East FishkiU 



Matteawan 

Beekman 
FishkiU Landing 



5 shares 



10 
3 

10 
5 

10 



318 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

It was proposed to build a line from Fishkill Landing to Storm- 
viUe, via Matteawan, Fishkill ViUagey Johnsville, Gay Head and 
CourtlandviUe, a distance of fifteen miles. The two roads leading to 
the river through Fishkill Landing were considered too steep for such 
a line, and a new road was laid out over the lands of J. P. DeWint, 
Martin Wiltse, Louis Meyer, Russell Dart and others. This is now 
Beekman street. The company also occupied an extension of Main 
street by continuing it straight to Matteawan over the low and 
swampy lands of the Teller estate instead of following the Old Road 
to Fishkin Village, which still passes over the higher ground to the 
north, where now are St. John's Church and the Methodist cemetery. 
The company thereupon began building the road and extended the 
same for about seven miles eastward into the township, setting up toll- 
gates at certain intervals in pursuance of the charter, the most east- 
erly one being at BrinckerhoffviUe. The company failed, however, 
to complete the road and otherwise comply with the terms of its char- 
ter. The road, too, was never kept in good order or repair and the 
people became exasperated and annoyed at the condition of things. 
The people, too, were used to the free road laid out by Madam Brett 
over her property from the river eastward to the limits of her lands, 
that is the road now in use through Matteawan, Glenham and Fish- 
kill Village along the west side of the creek, and they looked upon the 
Plank Road Company as an attempt to pervert the ancient highway 
of Fishkill. 

Litigation ensued, and according to tradition, on one occasion a 
mob, made up of many of the respectable people of the neighborhood, 
assembled on a certain night and smashed the toUgates and otherwise 
put an end to the further exaction of toU along the road so far as the 
same was built. Thereafter the road again became free. 

When the electric railroad was being built over the line of Beekman 
street in Fishkill Landing many of the old planks were brought to the 
surface. The late Samuel A. Hayt of Fishkill was president of the 
Plank Road Company at one time and meetings were held at his store, 
and Augustus Hughson was secretary. Later A. J. Vandewater of 
Matteawan, who had been an original subscriber to the Stock, became 
president, and made unsuccessful attempts to revive the project. 

^Matteawan. The name of this village was originally restricted 
to the mills. It was incorporated in 1886,^ and now includes within 

1. WiUard H. Mase was the first president of the village. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 319 

its limits Byrnesville, Wiccopee and Tioronda. Local names fot other 
neighborhoods were Glory Hill, where the Sargent Industrial School 
now stands, and Pancake HoUow on the east side of the creek oppo- 
site the railroad station. 

The first factory in Matteawan was established in 1814! by 
Philip Hone (at one time Mayor of New York), and Eetfer A. 
Schenck, who had married Margaret Brett, granddaughter of 
Matfam Brett. Hone and Schenck built the mill now belonging to the 
Matteawan Manufacturing Company. It was a cotton mill. Peter 
A. Schenck built the house now owned by the Green Fuel Economizer 
Co., formerly the Larch house and earlier the Joseph Blossom house. 
He left no children. His brother, UeMg^: -Schenck, married and lived 
in what is now known as the Teller house, built by Roger Brett in 
1709. Henry Schenck bought this house, together with a large tract 
of land adjacent, from his brother-in-law, Theodorus Brett. 

Joseph Blossom came to Matteawan from New York, and married 
Emerette, daughter of Henry .Schenck, and granddaughter of the 
Henry Schenck above mentioned. Joseph Blossom made a fortune 
in the lumber trade in the South before the war. Peter H. Schenck 
was a nephew of Peter A. Schenck, and succeeded his uncle to the 
ownership and management of the miU. Peter H. Schenck married a 
Miss Courtney of Philadelphia. Their son, the late John P. Schenck, 
M.D., built the house now occupied by the Sargent Industrial School. 
He was a famous physician of southern Dutchess, and his professional 
record appears in the Medical chapter in this book. 

Byrnesville. This district of Fishkill is now better known as 
Tioronda. From the county records it appears that William Byrnes 
bought a tract of land comprising 274 acres, from Isaac DePeyster 
Teller, in June, 1792, and soon after entered into a partner- 
ship as millers with Cyrus Newlin, to whom, in September of the same 
year, he conveyed an undivided half interest. The deed described the 
property as beginning at "Fishkill Bay, adjoining the land of William 
AUen" (who then lived on Denning's Point) and running up the Fish- 
kill on each side about half a mile, together with the mills and other 
water rights. In 1811, the partnership seems to have been dissolved, 
for in that year the property was partitioned between its two owners, 
Cyrus Newhn taking the lower mill property with fifty-one acres and 



320 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

other land adjoining consisting of forty-seven acres more, excepting 
a small lot of one-half an acre reserved by the Tellers for a burial 
place. Cyrus Newhn, in the deed, is described as "of the county of 
Newcastle and State of Delaware." He never lived in Fishldll, though 
he often came there to visit his son Robert, who was the manager of 
his interest in the partnership and succeeded him after Cyrus died 
in 1824.. 

Both WiUiam Byrnes and Cyrus Newlin were of the "Society of 
Friends," commonly known as Quakers. The house where Cyrus New- 
lin's sons Robert and Isaac made their home was built by Madam Brett 
for her sister who married a DePeyster. The Newlins enlarged the 
house, each brother with his family having separate apartments, and 
there they lived until Isaac died. Robert Newlin's daughter Anna 
married the late William S. Verplanck.. The Newlin homestead with 
the adjoining land passed temporarily into the possession of the Bos- 
ton, Hartford & Erie Railroad, a company which was organized soon 
after the Civil War. A deep cut was made across the property close 
to the house, making it undesirable for a residence. This company 
failed before rails were laid to Denning's Paint, and later was re- 
organized under the name of the New York & New England Railroad 
Co. and the terminus changed to Fishkill Landing. 

WiccoPEE is an adjoining neighborhood. The name was applied to 
the district along the creek between Wolcott bridge and Tioronda. 

Daniel Annan, a lieutenant in the War of the Revolution, bought a 
tract of land from the Brett estate. His purchase extended east of 
the creek from a point opposite the present Tioronda bridge, north- 
easterly along the creek to a point near the railroad station in Mat- 
teawan, thence it extended eastward into the mountains to "Solomon's 
Bergh" (North Beacon), thence southerly to a point in range with 
Tioronda — ^in all a tract of about 750 acres. The Daniel Annan home- 
stead stood on the road leading to Cold Spring, east of the residence 
of the late Joseph Howland. The house afterwards fell into ruin, and 
there was built on its site the house known as "Mountain Rest," where 
the Misses Wagner had a boarding school for girls for a number of 
years, and which was discontinued about twenty years ago. Daniel 
Annan was buried in the cemetery of the Presbyterian Church at 
Buinckerhoffville. Lieutenant Annan's first wife was a Miss Van 
Wyck. By his second wife. Miss Allen of Quaker Hill in the town of 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 321 

Pawling, he had a son, Daniel Annan, Jr., who married Margaret, 
daughter of Theodorus Brett. This Daniel Annan was a surgeon in 
the War of 1812, and he was buried in what is now St. Luke's ceme- 
tery, Matteawan. Their children were: Mrs. James W. Andrews, 
Mrs. Samson Adolphus Benson, and two sons,. William and Alexander, 
the latter a captain in the Civil War. 

The Oil Groimds. The district lying between the villages of Mat- 
teawan and Fishkill-on-Hudson known as the Oil Grounds takes its 
name from the circumstance that about 1865 petroleum oil was found 
flowing on the surface of the swampy land then quite extensive here. 
Oil and mining schemes were then rife all over the country, so it was 
not surprising that the people of Fishkill should become seized with 
the craze. An examination of the oil proved that it was the genuine 
article. The land was soon sold and a company Organized, and there- 
upon pumping operations begun. The result was a complete failure. 
Investigation showed that the genuine petroleum had been surrepti- 
tiously brought to the spot in cans and sunk into the ground. The 
result was such that when prospectors walked about or ran poles down 
here and there, oil would constantly rise to the surface. The person 
who actually did this became known as the "Swamp Angel." He con- 
fessed in order to secure exemption from prosecution. A few people 
of prominence were implicated and several reputations suffered, but 
no one seems to have been sent to prison. 

The house now occupied by Mr. Winthrop Sargent, known as 
Wodenethe, was begun by Robertson Rodgers of New York, who sold 
the property, before the house was fuUy completed, to Mr. Henry 
Elliott of New York. He had married a sister of Samuel Whittemore, 
mentioned below. In 1840 Mr. Elliott sold the property to the late 
Henry Winthrop Sargent, who enlarged the house and greatly em- 
bellished the grounds, which when he bought the property were a rough, 
somewhat sterile piece of land partially covered by a poor growth of 
trees. The opportunities of the place were obvious to a person of 
Mr. Sargent's discernment. Although an amateur, he may justly be 
called the originator of landscape architecture in the United States. 
He was a friend of Andrew J. Downing, who lived at Newburgh, where 
he wrote several books that made an impression in connection with the 
development of landscape gardening and horticulture in this country, 
and where he conducted numerous experiments in horticulture and 



322 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

floriculture. An ingenious feature of the laying out of Wodenethe 
is tlie concealment of the boundary line, thus giving the effect of 
much larger area. The river, too, although nearly a haK mile distant, 
seems to reach the grounds. Vistas were made through- the trees 
giving superb views of the Highlands and the river. 

A neighbor of the late Henry Winthrop Sargent, whose place, Rose- 
neath, also has superb views of mountain and river was the late Charles 
Moseley Wolcott, born 1816. He married first, Mary, daughter of 
Samuel C. Goodrich, who died without issue. He married second, 
Catharine, daughter of Henry A. Rankin, a merchant of New York. 

Mr. Wolcott had extensive real estate holdings in Fishkill, includ- 
ing farms and village property, as well as interests in rnanufacturing, 
in which he was at one time associated with Robert G. Raitkin, who 
also lived at Fishkill some years and built there. Mr. Wolcott, by 
his second marriage, had three children who lived to maturity. His 
son, Henry Goodrich, married Julia, daughter of the late Waldo 
HutchMns ; and his daughter, Katherine, married Samuel Verplanck 
and they now occupy Roseneath. This house was built by Lieutenant 
Ward of the United States Navy about seventy-five years ago. His 
wife was a sister of Samuel Whittemore, who married Louisa, daugh- 
ter of John Peter DeWint, and Hved in the Wren's Nest, a cottage 
with attractive grounds on the river a short distance south of the Long 
Dock. The place had two entrances, whence the name. 

Nearby were the homes of the brothers, Davies- — ^Henry E. at one 
time Judge of the Court of Appeals of this State, and Charles, a dis- 
tinguished professor of mathematics at West Point and iafteirwards at 
Columbia College. The houses built by them are both standing, Prof. 
Davies's house being now occupied by the Wilson School, and Judge 
Davies's house by Daniel W. Bumham. 

The house now occupied by Mrs. Douglass W. Burnham was for- 
merly the home of William Kent, many years Judge of the Supreme 
Court of this State. Jiidge Kent was the son of Chancellor Kent. 
He died in 1861 and is buried near his father in St. Luke's Cemetery. 
Other former residents of Fishkill were the preacher, Henry Ward 
Beecher, Dr. De LaMontague and Dr. James Sykes Rumsey. 

The Denning family occupied the old house on Denning's Point, 
built by WiUiam Allen about a century ago. He had married Maria, 
the daughter of Gulian Verplanck, who had purchased the property 




JOHN T. SMITH. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 323 

from the DePeyster family. This property wa» then known as the 
"Island in Fishkill Bay," as the records at Poughkeepaie attest. From 
this it can be inferred that ori^nally the Pwit had been an island. 
It is probable that it was the Denniags who built a causeway, thus 
converting the island into a point, for tli*ey gave it the name "Pres- 
quile" (almost an island). The Denmngs rem^tined nt the Point until 
the death of Miss Jane Denning atout fifteen years ago. 

Joseph Howland, who married Ehza N. Woolsey, came to Fishkill 
about 1855. He bought the Freeland property of over a hundred 
acres lying on the slope of the mountains east of the creek, where he 
built the house "Tioronda." On the breaking out of the Civil War 
Mr. Howland went to the frent, where he soon attained distinc- 
tion and rose to the r9,nk of General. He was much interested in the 
development and improvement of the two neighbering villages, par- 
ticularly Matteawan, where he established a library which bears his 
name. He also took an active part in the establishment of the 
National Bank at Fishkill-on-Hudson, as well as the Savings Bank. 

Smith T. Van Buren, a son of the President, lived at Fishkill for 
many years. Mr. Van Buren had been Secretary of Legation under 
Washington Irving when he was Minister to Spain. 

GiiENHAM takes its name from Rocky Glen, a wild and picturesque 
part of the creek between Matteawan and Fishkill Village, where the 
water rushes through a gorge. It was here that the factories were 
built about 1811, and a village sprang up which soon absorbed the 
little hamlet of Red Rock nearby. 

An interesting and well-known character of days past, who lived 
here, was Joe Tom, a coal black negro, a fish peddler through the 
week, and on Sunday a preacher. He had a stentorian voice, and 
possessed a fund of anecdotes, humorous as well as pathetic. Joe 
was an expert in smoking hams and herrings. 

The AUard Anthony house on the east side of the road between 
Glenham and Fishkill Village, now known as the Knapp house, was 
built by Heinrich Knapp in 1737. The initials "H. K." could at one 
time be deciphered on the gable of the house. This house and adjoin- 
ing farm afterwards came into the possession of the late Frederick 
Sc®field, the uncle of Mrs. Charles Bartow. Miles Scofield, one of 
three brothers, came from Stamford, Conn., soon after the Revolu- 
tionary War, and settled in the Highlands below Fishkill Village. 



324 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Another brother, Lebeus, the ancestor of Mrs. Bartow, bought this 
land near Glenham. 

FisHKii,!, Village dates from a period long prior to the Revolu- 
tionary War, and it sprang up like many of the old villages of New 
England, from houses being built along a thoroughfare near a cross 
road. Though picturesque with its old churches and houses of past 
days, its two broad, slanting streets, shaded by overhanging trees, and 
uniting near the Dutch Church, it lacks the "Green" of a New Eng^ 
land town. But this want is more than offset by its proximity to 
the mountains, its situation at the north gate of the Highlands, 
through the narrow defiles of which the old turnpike passes between 
Albany and New York. This road was laid out two centuries ago and 
foUows the line of the old Indian trail. Along it the stage coaches 
rumbled in years long past, by the old mile stones, some of which are 
still standing. To the west is the "Green Fly" (Dutch Vly), a large 
swamp, although it is much reduced in size since the days of the early 
settlers. In former times the line of the Post Road to Albany, via 
Wappinger's Falls and Poughkeepsie, was carried over high ground, 
once known as Osbom's Hill, to avoid the swamp, and it is this hill 
which shelters the village from the westerly winds, — cold in winter, 
dry and hot in summer. 

Just beyond Trinity Church, the road through the village branches- 
in two, one eastward toward Brinckerhoff and Johnsville, passing sev- 
eral old homesteads, and the other, the Post Road, southward through 
the Highlands, past the Rapelje homestead, soon to cross the Put- 
nam County line. 

The village has always been quiet and secluded, the creek even lend- 
ing itself to such repose. Rapid and impetuous, above and below, 
yet so slow and placid is this stream as it passes through the village 
that it lacks the energy to turn the wheel for a mill. The coming of 
the Dutchess & Columbia Railroad forty years ago roused the old 
place from its slumbers and a few factories sprang up, but they soon 
languished and finally gave up the ghost. In 1876 a great fire rav- 
aged the town, destroying many of the old style wooden buildings, 
which have since been replaced by brick ones. Fifty years ago Ben- 
jamin Aymar, Judge Jackson and other families from the city of 
New York spent the summer months at the village. Later the Aymar 
plac* was occupied by the distinguished engineer, Oliver W. Barnes, 
until his death. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 325 

Other residents of two or three generations back were : J. W. Oppie, 
counsellor-at-law, and Miss Oppie ; Mrs. Chatterton ; Hon. J. L. Jack- 
son, whose house was on the corner of the Post Road where it turns 
west ; C. A. Jackson lived further down the road leading to Matteawan 
and the river; I. E. Cotheal lived in the Rapelje house of his ances- 
tors, now owned by Mr. W. T. Blodgett. There was a boarding 
school for girls, and another for boys. Dr. Lewis H. White was prac- 
ticing medicine, and J. E. Van Steenburgh was cashier of the bank, 
then a prosperous concern. Samuel Hajrt was a wool dealer with a 
large county business, and Charles Burnham was a carriage maker. 

Baxtertown is a small hamlet on a by-road two miles to the west 
of Fishkill Village. It is mostly occupied by negroes, in whom flows 
blood of the Wappinger Indians, As the settlters came in and 
occupied the best of the land the Indians were relegated to the poorer 
land of the interior, for they did not take to agriculture, and inter- 
marrying with the negroes who were originally brought into the 
country as slaves they merged with them, and thus lost their identity. 
Many of the Fishkill negroes bear Indian features and some of them 
Indian traits. The Catskill family of Baxtertown is an illustration 
of this — old Harry was a well-built and handsome man with straight 
hair and almost no negro features. Harry would work on the farm 
for a few days in the "hay and harvest," then the blood of the old 
Wappinger would begin to stir, and he was off to stream and forest 
with rod and gun, leaving his wife Maria as the bread winner to do 
cooking in the kitchens of some of the old families. 

About two miles south of Fishkill Village on the old Post Road is 
a monument, erected October 14, 1897, by the Melzingah Chapter 
Daughters American Revolution, to mark the spot where were buried 
the soldiers who died in large numbers, of diseases, while in camp here 
during the Revolution. The tablet on the monument reads as follows : 

1776-1783 

IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF THE BRAVE MEN 

WHO GAVE THEIR LIVES FOR THEIR COUNTRY 

DURING THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 

AND WHOSE REMAINS REPOSE IN THE ADJOINING FIELD. 

Washington expected that the British would force their way north- 
ward through the Highlands, so he reinforced himself strongly against 
them in this neighborhood. A short distance below, on the Post Road, 



326 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

where the valley is narrow, earth-works were thrown up against the 
enemy's advance. They, too, have been marked by an appropriate 
tablet, viz. : 

ON THE HILLS BACK OF THIS STONE STOOD THREE 

BATTERIES GUARDING THIS PASS 

1776-1783 

MELZINGAH CHAPTER 

DAUGHTERS AMERICAN REVOLUTION 

1903. 

The "Battle of Fishkill" never took place, however, and other places 
reaped the glory in the achievement of our independence. 

West of this road, on the mountains, is the monument on North 
Beacon to commemorate the burning of signal fires on North and 
South Beacons during the War of the Revolution, erected by Melzin- 
gah Chapter Daughters of the American Revolution, July 4!ti[, 1900. 

Beinckeuhopf. About two miles northeast of Fishkill Village is 
the hamlet of Brinckerhoff, named from the family which had two 
homesteads in the neighborhood, that of Derrick being near the old 
Pitfesbyterian Church and the Star Mills, while John BrinckerhofF's 
was further up the Fishkill near its confluence with the Sprout. 

At the gate of the Derrick Brinckerhoff homestead, now owned by 
his descendant, Mr. Frank BrinckerhofF, formerly stood the Presby- 
terian Church, built in the eighteenth century. It was here that 
Chancellor Kent's father used to preach frequently on his way from 
his home in Putnam County to Poughkeepsie. The church in those 
days, and until it was destroyed by fire about forty years ago, had a 
considerable congregation, but with its destruction the congregation 
scattered among other churches in the neighborhood and no new build- 
ing was erected. The adjacent grJaveyard, now known as the Rom- 
bout cemetery, contains the old graves of early settlers of the neigh- 
borhood. 

In 1902 Melzingah Chapter, D. A. R., erected a tablet with an in- 
scription as follows: 

ON THE KNOLL STOOD THE "MIDDLE CHURCH" (PRESBYTERIAN) 
. BUILT 1747— RE-BUILT 1830— BURNED 1866. USED 

AS A MILITARY HOSPITAL DURING 
THE JlMERICAN REVOLUTION. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 327 

The same chapter of D. A. K.., in June, 1905, erected a tablet to 
preserve the story of the old mills, which reads : 

STAR MILLS. 

BUILT BY ABRAM BRINCKERHOFP 

BURNED ABOUT 1777 AND RE-BUILT BY THE ORDER 

OF GENERAL WASHINGTON WHILE THE TROOPS 

WERE ENCAMPED AT FISHKILL. 

Near the graveyard is a monument erected May 30th, 1898, by the 
Lafayette Post, N. Y. G. A. R., to commemorate Lafayette's illness 
and sojourn during the Revolution when he was the guest of Colonel 
BrinckerhoflF. General Daniel Butterfield and Henry Tremain, Esq., 
made addresses on the occasion of the dedication. 

CHURCHES. 

The Dutch Church, Fishkill Village. According to the late T. 
Van Wyck BrinckerhofF, the Dutch Church at Foughkeepsie was the 
first church that was built in Dutchess County. The exact year of 
building is not so apparent. Probably about 1720. The writer adds 
that the church at Fishkill was built in 1731. "The petition to his 
excellency, John Montgomery, Esq., states 'that the members of said 
congfej^ation have agreed amongst themselves to erect and Iniild a 
convenient church, to the public worship of God, nigh the said Fish- 
kill Creek.' The glebe land for the first church at Fishkill, which by 
the way was the first church built on the Romboudt Patent, was given 
by Madam Brett and by Johannis Terboss. For twenty years it was 
the only church in the Patent. It was attended on alternate Sabba,th 
mornings, by people living far in the interior beyond Hopewell and 
Hackensack. For, beside Poughkeepsie, there was no other church, 
at that day on the east side of the Hudson, above the Highlander unless 
in the vicinity of Albany. Whenever, therefore, the preacher lifted 
his voice at Fishkill, it was the only voice, the only open pulpit in all 
that land. Rev. Cornelius Van Schie was the first pastor of the 
churches of Fishkill and Poughkeepsie. He was duly iinstalkd over 
this field of labor on the 4th of October, 1781. He removed to Albany 
in 1788. He was succeeded by the Rev< Benjamin Meinema^ the sec- 
ond pastor of the two churches. * * * Mr. Meinema was suc- 
ceeded by Rev. Mr. Van Nist, in November, 1758. But little is known 
of Mr. Van Nist. He only lived to retain his charge three years, and 



328 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS, 

died in early manhood in 1761. He was buried in the ground adjoin- 
ing the church." Rev. Reginald Duffield is the present pastor. 

A dominie of the Dutch Church, FishkiU, of the eighteenth century, 
who should not be forgotten was Dr. Rysdyck (or Rysdike) ; he was 
pastor of the church there from 1772 to 1790. BrinckerhoiF says of 
him: 

"About this time Dr. Rysdike discontinued his charge over the Poughkeepsle 
congregation, devoting his tinie to Fishkill, Hopewell and New Hackensack. He 
died in 1790, and was buried under the spire of the church at New Hackensack, 
the floor being removed for that purpose. He was considered in his day one of 
the most accomplished preachers and scholars in America. The classics were as 
familiar to him as his own Holland tongue, and he was, also, a thorough Oriental 
Hebrew scholar. Educated in the best universities abroad, the accomplishments 
of the gentleman and the scholar were so blended as to be inseparable. His affa- 
bility and address are to this day spoken of, and his appearance is said to have 
been very • imposing. In person the Doctor was rather stoutly made, and, as was 
the custom of that day, rode through his charge on horseback. He always wore 
a cocked hat and wig, and invariably lifted his hat from his head in passing any- 
one, and gave them a friendly salutation. Upon Sabbath mornings he would ride 
to the church door and dismount, handing his horse to the sexton, who stood in 
readiness waiting his coming." 

From the tablet on the Dutch Church, placed on the occasion of the 
one hundred and sevienty-fifth anniversary, we learn that it was or- 
ganized in 1716 — Building erected in 1731 — Provincial Convention 
met here 1776' — Mihtary Prison during the Revolution — ^Enlarged 
1786— Remodeled 1806-'20-'54-'82. 

The graveyard of the Dutch Church contains many interesting 
tombstones. The inscription on the earHer ones are in old Dutch. 
They mark the graves of the families of Van Voorhis, Brinckerhoff 
and others. Here, too, lies the bodies of the Rapelje, Swartwout, 
Verplanck, DuBoiis and Mesier and other early settlers of the Town- 
ship. The late Elias Van Voorhis, in his family history, has written 
on this graveyard, and later Miss Laura Rosa of Fishkill also pub- 
lished a valuable article on the same subject. Many of the inscrip- 
tions on the early Brinckerhoff gravestones, tending to become ruinous 
were placed on the walls inside the church by the late Abram DuBois, 
a noted physician of New York. Dr. DuBois was a native of Fish- 
kiU *and much interested in its history and development. He was a 
libera] donor in aid of the Rural Cemetery. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 329 

Trinity CHtrncH, Fishkill Village.^ To find the origin of this par- 
ish we must go back to the year 1756, when this State was a province 
under the sovereignty of Great Britain. At that time the Rev. Sam- 
uel Seabury was one of the Missionaries of the Society for the Propa- 
gation of the Gospel (a body estabhshed in this country by the Church 
of England). He had settled at Hempstead, Long Island, for more 
than ten years when he rode on horseback up into Dutchess County to 
found the church in this region. He had been a student at Yale, but 
ended by taking his degree at Harvard in 1724, and in August, 1780, 
he was ordained a priest by the Bishop of London. After staying in 
England two years he went by appointment to New London, Connecti- 
cut, his native place, there he remained ten years before taking up his 
charge at St. George's Church, Hempstead. Ow^g to the acrimony 
which existed on Long Island at that time between the various sects, 
in which Dr. Seabury took no part whatever, he decided to leave that 
part of the country and become a missionary. 

Dutchess County in 1756 had a population of 14!,157 people, and 
included within its boundaries all of Putnam and a good part of 
Columbia counties. On Dr. Seabury's arrival he was entertained 
for several days at the house of Judge Terbos, and afterwards by the 
courtesy of the Dutch minister and the deacons he held services in 
their church. As many as three hundred people attended, coming 
from many miles away, several of whom offered to aid Dr. Seabury 
in the purchase of a glebe and the erection of a church. An unfor- 
tunate dispute arose with the churchmen at Poughkeepsie over the 
right to use these subscriptions. It was settled, however, in favor of 
FishkiU, whereupon the building which is now standing was erected. 
The land on wMch the church stands was given in September, 1767, 
and pledges for the erection of a church were not fully completed 
until 1769. 

The tablet placed on Trinity Church on the occasion of the one 
hundred and fiftieth anniversary of its foundation tells us: Founded 
by Samuel Seabury in communion with the Church of England, 1756 
— Building erected about 1760— Rev. John Beardsley, first rector, 
October 26, 1776. Occupied by New York Provincial Convention 
which removed from White Plains, September 3, 1776.— Used as a 
Hospital by the Army of Washington until disbanded, June 2, 1783. 

1. Extracts from an historical address by Rev. Joaepli Ivle, a former rector. 



330 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

At a vestry meeting of Trinity Church, Fishkill, held November 2, 
1796, the following vestrymen were present: Jeremiah Green, Ben- 
jamin Snider, John F. Carman, John Southard, Greenlief Street, 
Francis Peyer, Daniel C. Verplanck. The present rector is the Rev. 
Clinton Durant Drumm. 

The Reformed Dutch Chubgh at Fishkill-on-Hudson, was estab- 
lished in 1813, as an offshoot of the present church at Fishkill Village, 
which the growth of population on the river warranted. Among the 
principal donors of land and money was John Peter DeWint, also the 
Wiltse, Brett, Van Vliet, Verplanck, CromweH, Bogardus, Crosby, 
Brinckerhoff, Purdy and other families. 

The name of the first pastor does not appear on the recordis, but the 
Rev. Cornelius Westbrook was in charge from 1819 to 1823. His 
successors were Rev. William S. Heyer, 1823-''51 ; Rev. J. Howard 
Suydam, 1852-'63; Rev. Joseph Kimball, 18e3-'65; Rev. Martin L. 
Berger, 1865-'70; Rev. Charles W. Fritts, 18Tl-'99; Rev. Edward A. 
MacCuUum, 1899 . 

In 1860 the old church was replaced by the present building, during 
the pastorate of the Rev. J. H. Suydam, who was very active during 
the Civil War in arousing the patriotism of the people of this neigh- 
borhood, and instrumental in organizing relief societies of various 
kinds. 

Within the past year a tablet has been placed in the church in mem- 
ory of Dr. Fritts, testifying to his long, useful and honored services 
both for his church and the community. 

Methodist Episcopal Churches. The following review of the 
Methodist Episcopal Society in Matteawan and Fishkill Landing was 
furnished by the Rev. Arthur Thompson, recently pastor at the for- 
mer place. 

In 1819 a surveyor, afterward editor of the Poughheepsie Eagle, 
found Methodist societies of considerable strength along the eastern 
border of Fishkill, and in the adjoining towns of Kent and Patterson 
in Putnam County. Already a large camp-meeting had been estab- 
lished in the vicinity. 

For several years prior to 1819, meetings were usually held in the 
Tillbtt and Ketchum neighborhood, a short distance from Matteawan, 
on the east side of the creek. An old stone house, formerly occupied 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 331 

by the family of John Tillott, was appropriated to that purpose. Ser- 
vices were held occasionally at the house or barn on the farm of Mr. 
Ketchum, now owned by Mr. John R. Maddock. 

In 1819 the usual meeting place was changed to the school house 
west of the creek, and located on the old road about midway between 
Matteawan aiid the Landing near the old Methodist cemetery. 

During the earlier years this field was included in the Dutchess 
Circuit, which required a six weeks' journey of its pastors in order to 
cover the field. In 1819 it was changed to a four weeks' appoint- 
ment. On the opening of the new road or Main street, a site was 
selected for a church edifice. 

On March 29th, 1824, a meeting was held in the school house, and 
a boai^d of trustees was elected for the Methodist Episcopal Church 
in Fishkill, consisting of Gerardiiis De Forest, John Tillott, Henry 
McDonald, Jacob Cooper, and William Doughty. 

The building was erected and dedicated in the fall of 1824i. On the 
day of dedication sermons were preached by Rev. Mr. Washburn of 
Poughkeepsie ; Rev. Mr. Cochran, one of the circuit preachers, and 
Rev. William S. Hyer, pastor of the Reformed Church. The con- 
sistory of this society closed their own church for this occasion. 

In the spring of 1825 this appointment was made a station. Ser- 
vices were held in the Main street church until after the division of 
the society in 1860. The last service was held Sunday, February Srd, 
1861. The building was sold to Horatio N. Swift, and used as a 
public hall for many years. It was while occupied by the Roman 
Cathohcs and known as St. John's Church that it burned, February 
12, 1890. 

Previous to the division of the church in 1860, the society came to 
be known as the Matteawan Methodist Church. The Fishkill Land- 
ing portion of the divided society purchased a Presbyterian Church 
which was to be sold at foreclosure, and improved it for their church 
home. The Matteawan people secured a lot where the Newburgh, 
Dutchess & Connecticut station now stands. The corner stone was 
laid October 13, I860, and the building dedicated January 16, 1862. 
This was a brick structure seating four hundred persons in the audi- 
torium, having lecture and class rooms below, and cost $7,000. The 
new Matteawan society began with a rdll of 115 members. In 1869 
the building of the N. D. & C. railroad compelled the abandonment of 



332 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the church building, which was sold to the company. St. Anna's 
Episcopal Church building was then purchased and torn down. 

The comer stone of the present structure was laid August 3, 1869. 
The building was completed at a cost of $37,000 and dedicated May 
7, 1870. Toward the cost of the property $10,000 net proceeds from 
the sale of the former church was apphed. Nearly $10,000 was 
pledged on the day of dedication. A substantial reduction was made 
in the indebtedness during the pastorate of Rev. Thomas Loge (1871- 
'72). There yet remained a mortgage of $12,000, when Rev. J. J. 
Dean began the securing of pledges October 16, 1878. The whole 
amount was finally secured and the mortgage was paid under the 
pastorate of Rev. C. R. North, August 18, 1880. 

The parsonage is located on North street, and is free of aU in- 
debtedness. The church building on Main street is one pf the finest 
specimens of semi-Gothic architecture along the Hudson river. The 
membership numbers about three hundred and seventy. 

The Pkesbyterian Chuech, Matteawan. In August, 1907, this 
church celebrated its "Diamond Jubilee." On this occasion a historic 
address was delivered by the Rev. Paul Stratton, and Mr. Joseph N. 
Badeau wrote a historic sketch, both of which were published in the 
Fishkill Standard soon afterwards. From these sources the following 
information is gathered: 

Seventy-five years ago the Presbyterian Church began when the 
"Presbytery of North River" met in the little schoolroom over the Mat- 
teawan store. The existence of the society goes back much further 
than this for it appears, according to the early records, that "a num- 
ber of the inhabitants of Matteawan and its vicinity met and formed 
a society by the name of the First Presbyterian Society at Mattea- 
wan." On this occasion twenty-four persons signed their names to 
the roll and these became charter members. They continued to meet 
in the upper part of the old Matteawan store and were first preached 
to by the Rev. Mr. Armstrong. These quarters soon proving too 
small, "the Presbytery of North River" met on the 27th of August, 
1833, and organized the first Presbyterian Church in Mattewan, and 
thereupon, in response to a petition which was subscribed by a great 
number of people, a building was erected on the same ground on which 
the present building now stands — a building which stood for thirty- 
eight years thereafter. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 333 

About 1870 it became evident that the old building was no longer 
large enough to suit the increased size of the congregation and steps 
were thereupon taken for the erection of another building. Plans were 
prepared by the celebrated architect, Richard M. Hunt, of New York. 
The committee to raise the funds consisted of Miss Violet Gordon, 
Messrs. James M. Taylor, Robert Gordon, William H. Laurens and 
Mrs. Thomas J. Way. The result was that on the 17th day of July, 
1872, the building was completed and dedicated. 

Among those who subscribed hberally to the fund were Gen. Joseph 
Rowland, Robert H. Halgin and WiUard H. Mase. The last pastor 
of the old church was the late Dr. F. R. Masters, who, however, to 
the regret of all was never able to preach in the new church. The first 
minister who officiated there was the Rev. J. L. Sgott. The Rev. Dr. 
Wickham was the first pastor ; Dr. Irenaeus Prime was pastor for one 
year, being followed by the Rev. Sylvester Eaton. Then came Dr. 
Van Zandt, who was followed by the Rev. James Harkness, D.D., and 
later Mr. Davies and Dr. Carver. 

Mr. Theodore Van Vliet was a trustee of the church for thirty-four 
years. 

On the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the church the 
Rev. Thomas Reeves was then pastor, when the occasion was appro- 
priately recognized by services in the church. The Rev. Frank M. 
Carson succeeded Mr. Reeves, remaining for five years. The Rev. 
Plato T. Jones succeeded him, remaining for eleven years, and he in 
turn was succeeded by the Rev. Paul Stratton. 

The Rev. Mr. Carr has recently become pastor of the church- 
Si. Luke's Church, Matteawan. The church of the parish which 
is now known as St. Luke's was built in June, 1870, under the rector- 
ship of the Rev. Henry E. Duncan. The land consisting of twelve 
acres was given by Judge Henry E. Davies, in memory of his son. 
Colonel C. T. Davies, and the ground for the building was broken on 
the 10th of August, 1868. On the 17th of October of the same year 
a corner stone was laid by the Rev. Dr. J. J. Robertson, a former 
rector of the parish, when it was known as St. Anna's, and on the 16th 
of December of the following year the church bell was first rung. 

The architecture of the church and the laying out of the grounds 
were intrusted to the late Henry W. Sargent, to whose good taste and 
judgment the parishioners readily deferred. The late Frederick C. 



334 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Withers, whose first wife was Miss Emily DeWint, was selected as the 
architect. Owing to the great cost of the church a large debt was 
carried for several years; but during the rectorship of Dr. Bartlett 
these incumbrances were discharged so that on the 17th of October, 
1879, the church was consecrated by Bishop Potter. 

On the completion of the church in 1870 the officers were: Rev. 
Henry E. Duncan, Rector; James S. Rumsfey and John B. Seaman, 
Wardens; Cornelius Van Tine, John J. Monell, John VanderBurgh, 
Adrian V. Knevels, Henry Slack, James Wade, Smith T. Van Buren 
and Winthrop Sargent, Vestrymen, During this year a school house 
and rectory also were built on the new grounds. In 1887 the new 
rectory was burned and the rector, Rev. Henry Bedinger, and his 
family barely escaped with their lives. A great part of the parish 
records and other property were lost in this fire. It followed imme- 
diately after the great affliction which the rector was compelled to 
suffer in the death of two of his children within a few days of each 
other. 

On the 9th day of June, 1895, the parish appropriately commemo- 
rated the twenty-fifth anniversary of completion of the church. As 
a matter of fact, however, the parish was then nearly sixty-three years 
old, for St. Luke's is but the successor to, or rather the same as, St. 
Anna's parish, for when the vestry of the latter church determined to 
move from the center of the village in Matteawan, owing to the build- 
ing of the Dutchess and Columbia Railroad, it seemed wise to give a 
new name to the parish. When St. Anna's was torn down and St. 
Luke's was built no other change took place in the parish or among 
the communicants. St. Anna's stood on the site of the present Metho- 
(Kst Church. It was built of brick and about sixty-five feet long and 
thirty-six feet wide. It was in the Grecian temple style of archi- 
tecture, with six white coliimns on the front, and faced north. 

The new parish of St. Anna's was one of the daughters of old Trin- 
ity, at Fishkill Village, and the work of establishing this parish was 
begun before 1832 by Miss Hannah Teller and her sister Margaret, 
who afterwards married Robert Van Kleeck, the first rector. These 
good women lived in tlieir ancestral home, the Brett house, and there 
had a Sunday-school, which afterwards assembled over the Matteawan 
st^re. Services were soon held there. Mr. Robert Van Kleeck was 
the lay reader for the new parish and he continued with them until 





^HP^^^rf^liri 


Pi 




K s£M 


1^. y <«#9 




^^^^B^" iT^BBBI 






Hnfl 






.^^^H 


^^^HVP^I^^K^^^^^^^^^H 


^■hmi^K _ '.O^ 


IBJ 


^kTT^ ^H 


^^B^fe^L^^^v?^ 'yj|0? ^ 


S 


^^^^H^ '* ^^i^^^^^^^^l 


^^^^^^Hh^^^^^^H^B^^KA^2^^^H ^^K 


^^-3^^ir 


^^m is^^^^t 


^^^^^^^^^^^HlHnB^ ^^Br 


si^^H 




^^^^V^J|' 


^H 


H. iili-'- '~^^M 


^^^^^Kj -A,^ 


^^^H 


^^KKSBSkSk^ '<' ^^^^1 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^£ ' ' ^r^C&J 


•^^^^^^^1 








^^^^^npF^^^^H 


^^^^^■L^ .'"JH 


n 







OLIVER WELDON BARNES. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 335 

October, 1832. During the succeeding winter Professor Hackley, of 
West Point, took his place. Mr, Van Kleeck was afterwards ordained 
and became the first rector. The present rector is the Rev. George 
Herbert Toop. 

St. Andeew's Church, Fishkill-on-Hudson. "The beginning of 
the movement which resulted in the establishment of this church," says 
Rev. Mr. George A. Green, the present rector, "takes one back to the 
year 1870, when the Rev. Henry E. Duncan, rector of St. Luke's 
Church, Matteawan, held a service over the First National Bank, on 
January 6th. May 15th, 1870, saw the formation of a Sunday-school 
which became incorporated under the name of the 'Teachers' Associ- 
ation of Fishkill Landing.' This organization developed into a self 
supporting parish. The Sunday-school, under the direction of the 
late George A. Seaman, was most successful, the books at times con- 
taining the names of 170 scholars and 16 teachers. The Sunday- 
school removed from the bank building in October of 1875, to what 
became known as the DeWint street chapel. Nineteen years later the 
property on South avenue between Main and Beacon streets, with a 
building thereon, was purchased for $3,500, and the first service held 
December 2, 1894. During the occupancy of both these buildings 
the work (of a 'mission' sort) was conducted under the oversight of 
the rectors of St. Luke's." 

"In 1898 definite efforts were made to organize an independent 
parish, and in the spring of 1899, St. Andrew's Church obtained its 
charter from the State. July 3rd its first vestry was elected. Church 
Wardens, James M. DeGarmo, George H. Williams, M.D. ; Vestry- 
men, John P. Rider, Ralph S. Tompkins, John F. VanTine, Charles 
H. Seaman, Ferris C. Shahan, Andrew Bleakley. Its first rector. 
Rev. Joseph Cameron, entered upon his duties September 21st of the 
same year. Almost immediately steps were taken looking to the erec- 
tion of a church, and May 4th, 1900, the first sod for its foundation 
was turned. January 6th, 1901, the new church was opened for 
divine service. Through the kindness of Mr. John P. Rider, a rec- 
tory became possible and was built in 1903, adjoining the church. 
The whole property represents an outlay of $27,000." 

An historical sketch of the CathoUc churches wiU be found in an- 
other chapter. 



336 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

INDUSTEIES OF FISHXIIiIi. 

Mention has already been made passim of the various enterprises 
of the town since the days of Madam Brett, who may justly be called 
the founder of them. It is now proposed to give a brief history of 
the other and later industries, banks, etc., that have tended to develop 
the town. 

Matteawan and Fishkill Landing are now supplied by water from 
the mountains, the ponds, dams, pipes and plant generally, having 
been purchased by the village of Matteawan about five or six years 
ago, when the private enterprise failed. This was the Fishkill and 
Matteawan Water Company, which about fifteen years ago began 
operations in the vaUey south of the North Beacon, by building reser- 
voirs on the stream which passes into the river over the beautiful cas- 
cade and glen known as Melzingah. A few years afterwards, the 
company acquired land on the mountains on the north slope of the 
North Beacon and there impounded a considerable body of water on 
the stream which passes through Matteawan under the name of Dry 
Brook. When the village of Matteawan took over both these prop- 
erties, an arrangement was made with the village of Fishkill Landing 
to take part of the water and purvey it to the inhabitants at cost. 
On the whole the scheme has worked well, and when the contemplated 
improvements are made to the entire plant there wiU be a satisfactory 
solution of the water question, and a most important one it has be- 
come, owing to the system of sewers which the two villages have re- 
cently installed. Events of this kind are tending to bring them to- 
gether, and many years will not elapse before they are consolidated 
into one municipality. 

The gas and electric light works are operated by private capital. 
Principally through the enterprise and activity of the Hon. John T. 
Smith an electric railroad was opened about ten years ago, connecting 
the ferry at Fishkill-on-the-Hudson with Matteawan and Fishkill Vil- 
lage. The power is taken from the creek, supplemented by steam. 
The electric light plant, which is also largely due to Mr. Smith, has 
since been consolidated with the electric railway and the combined 
companies furnish power to several of the industries of the neighbor- 
hood. 

The historic beacons of the Fishkill mountains have recently been 
made easily accessible by the building of an inclined railway, such as 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 337 

has been in successful operation on the Catskill mountains for several 
years past. The construction of commodious buildings for a summer 
pleasure resort has brought large numbers of tourists to the moun- 
tains and also enabled them to be readily enjoyed by the inhabitants 
of the town, and the increase in the number of tourists has warranted 
the opening of a firstclass hotel within the past year. For the incep- 
tion and successful operation of this enterprise the town is indebted 
to Mr. Weldon F. Weston, his brother, the late W. H. Weston of 
Newburgh, and to Mr. Eugene S. Whitney and some others from New 
Hampshire. 



The following historical review of the industries, banks and trans- 
portation is from the pen of Mr. Theodore Brinck&rhoff, president of 
the Matteawan National Bank. 

The first mill was erected by Madam Brett near the mouth of the 
Fishkill Creek. This mill served not only all the inhabitants of the 
Rombout Patent, but also a portion of Orange County, grain being 
brought across the river in boats to be ground at that mill. 

The next mill was erected on the BrinckerhofF lands a few miles east 
of Fishkill Village. Two brothers of that name came from Long 
Island in 1718, and purchased two thousand acres of land of Madam 
Brett. During the Revolutionary W^r this mill was owned and oper- 
ated by Derick BrinckerhofF, who was very prominent in organizing 
and supplying the Continental troops with provisions and forage. 
Washington, in passing to and from the department of the east, made 
his house his stopping place, and LaFayette was confined to his hos- 
pitable mansion by illness for six weeks. The room which he occupied 
was kept intact when the rest of the house was torn down to make 
room for a more commodious mansion. This incident has been com- 
memorated by the erection of a monument on the lawn by Lafayette 
Post, G. A. R., of New York, who dedicated it with appropriate cere- 
monies on Decoration Day, 1898. 

It is said that Colonel Derick became somewhat inquisitive in regard 
to the movements of the troops, when Washington asked him "if he 
could keep a secret." On being assured that he could, Washington 
repKed that he also could. This mill was burned during the war and 
tradition relates it was rebuilt by the soldiers stationed near Fishkill, 



338 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

for the purpose of supplying flour for the troops. This mill is stiD 
in esistence, and is owned and occupied by Alexander Dudley. 

Colonel Derick Brinckerhoff, like all others of the name in America, 
was a descendant of Joris Brinckerhoff and Susannah, his wife, who 
came from Flushing, Holland, and settled at Newton, L. I., in 1638. 
Five hundred acres of this purchase of the Brinckerhoffs still remain 
in the family, being owned and occupied by Frank Brinckerhoff'. 
Another of the old Brinckerhoff houses was the homestead of Colonel 
John Brinckerhoff, now owned and occupied by Myers Brownell. Its 
date of erection as indicated by large iron letters inserted in a stone 
inj3i6 wall, was 1738. 

r^ The ;iext mill was the Schenck mill, erected by Abraham H. Schesack 
in the year 1800.) This mill did a large business grinding grain, and 
much of its product in early days was shipped to New York. It is 
still, in existence, near the railroad station. 

Later, Joseph Byrnes and Robert Newlin erected a mill on the navi- 
gable waters of the Fishkill Creek. They dug a canal from the old 
Madam Brett dam, nearly a quarter of a mile, to convey water to their 
wheel. This mill burned in the late thirties. Messrs. Byrnes and 
Newlin dissolved partnership and each built a brick structure, Mr. 
Newlin continuing in the milling business and Mr. Byrnes' miU being 
used for the manufacture of white lead. 

The presidential campaign of 1840 was carried on with great zeal 
and earnestness, the principal dividing hne being the tariff, the Whigs 
advocating a. high protective tariff and the Democrats one for revenue 
only. The Whigs had nominated General William Henry Harrison 
for President, mainly on account of his popularity as an Indian 
fighter. He had subdued Tecumseh, the ablest Indian of his genera- 
tion, at the battle of Tippecanoe, and for that reason the admirers of 
Harrison had given him the name of that battle. The country rang 
with the plaudits of "Tippecanoe and Tyler too," and from the fact 
that General Harrison was bom or supposed to have been born in a 
log cabin, that was made the emblem of the party. The Whigs of 
Fishkill had erected their log cabin and had met to dedicate it. Speak- 
ers and music (and it was said hard cider too) were provided in 
abundance, but a little incident occurred that placed a damper on 
thfir enthusiasm. Some one, supposed to be of the opposite political 
party, had procured the bladder of a skunk and placed it in the cabin, 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 339 

and whea it was stepped on, aAyane acquainted with the pungency, 
aril perTadingism and pePsisteiicy of that perfume caU imagine the deep 
disgust and indignation of the partisans in and aroUnd that cabin. 

The Whigs won that election, and as they had been for twelve long 
years outside the breastworks, they hastened to carry out their prin- 
ciples. 

A high tariff was soon enacted and then came a wild tush to get 
into manufacturing, largely the spinning and weaving of cotton 
goodtS. New mills were erected wherever water power could be pTo- 
cured, as steam had not as yet been used to any extent oU lafld as a 
source of power. Flouring mills were dismantled and cotton machin- 
ery installed. Both the Newlin and Byrnes mills underwent this ti^ari'S- 
formation, George Pine and associates in the one, and John BroWn 
and Epenetus Crosby in the other. They had hardly got in opera- 
tion when the Democrats came into power in 1844 and with them the 
reduction of the rates of duty. This fact, together with the over- 
production, drove many of these new ventures to the wall and among 
them the Pine and Brown mills. They were again stripped of their 
machinery and laid idle for a number of years, when Mr. Sleight 
fitted them up as fliouring mills. He brought his Wheat frtoi the West 
in canal boats and elevated it directly into the mills, as the raising 
of wheat had been largely discontinued in the Hudson Valley, having 
followed the Star of Empire, and Rochester was the largest producer 
of flour in the United States, the magnificent water poWer of the 
Genesee River being used for this purpose. Mr. Sleight's enterprise 
did not prove a success and he was succeeded by Mr. Coleman. Dur- 
ing his occupancy, which was not a long one, the mills burned, Sep- 
tember 9th, 1862, and have never been rebuilt. 

During the cotton craze of 1841 and '42 Robert G. Rankin and Mr. 
Freeland, his brother-in-law, erected a dam and factory at Wiccopee, 
about a quarter of a mile south of the Matteawan Works. During 
the' collapse of the cotton spinning business this factory was turned 
over to Charles M. Wolcott. He sold it in 1858 to the New York 
Rubber Company. This coftcern was organized in 1852 for the pur- 
pose of making rubber belting and toys, under the Goodyear patents, 
and removed to this point from Staten Island. It has been excellently 
managed, has paid good dividends to its stockholders, and been very 
liberal to its employees. Mr. John P. Rider is president of the com- 
pany. 



340 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The Glenham mill was organized by Peter H. Schenck, John Jacob 
Astor, Philip Hone, Dr. Bartow White and others in the year 1822. 

They built a factory for the manufacture of woolen goods. Mr. 
Schenck was its first president and was succeeded by his son-in-law, 
Russell Dart, Sr., and he in turn was succeeded by his son, Russell 
Dart, Jr. The company operated their factory with varied success 
until the breaking out of the Civil War, when the demand for indigo 
blue goods to clothe the army became so great that the company were 
compelled to enlarge their mill to many times its former capacity. In 
addition many tenements were built during the inflated period. Be- 
tween 1862-18T3 or soon after the latter date, the company having 
expended a large share of their profits in brick and mortar and costly 
machinery, was unable to stand the shock of the financial panic and 
the general drop of prices in rough material and finished goods and 
was compelled to make an assignment September 29th, 1873, with 
liabihties of $700,000, assets $300,000 in stock and material. B. 
Piatt Carpenter, a lawyer of Poughkeepsie, was the asignee, but sub- 
sequently a commissioner in bankruptcy was appointed, and under his 
direction the property was sold to A. T. Stewart, the noted New York 
dry goods man, for $190,000 — only a portion of its cost. This sale 
included not only the original Glenham factory, about one hundred 
tenements and a farm on the east side of the creek, but also the site 
of the former Rocky Glen Cotton Mills which had been acquired from 
Gamer & Co. by the Glenham Company, and also several smaller fac- 
tories at GroveviUe. Mr. Stewart kept the mills in operation and also 
built at GroveviUe in 1876 large and costly factories for the manu- 
facture of carpets. 

These buildings were equipped with the best and most modem ma- 
chinery that money could buy. They had hardly got in successful 
operation when by the death of Mr. Stewart the property by some 
means came into the possession of Judge Hilton & Sons. Soon after the 
Hilton blight fell on, all this property, the original factory at Glen- 
ham was allowed to fall into ruins, the machinery sold for junk, and 
where was once heard the whirl of the looms and the voices of hun- 
dreds of operatives earning their daily bread, is now heard nothing 
but the crash of falling ruins and the roar of the waters of the creek 
as ihey pass on unused and unutilized. 

The GroveviUe mills, owing to their newness and strength, have sO' 




JAMES G. MEYER. 



TOWN OF nSHKILL. 341 

far escaped a similar fate. They ceased operations in the fall of 1893 
and have never resumed; the machinery for the most part has been 
sold for junk. How long, O men, how long is this Dog in the Manger 
policy to be continued? How long are these natural resources of the 
town to be wasted and the splendid property which A. T. Stewart 
built up allowed to go to decay and ruin? 

The Matteawan Company, organized in 1812 by Peter H. Schenck, 
J. J. Astor, Philip Hone and others, erected the stone cotton mill in 
1814, as attested by the inscription in the wall. The company was 
reorganized in 1826, and shortly thereafter they built the machine 
shop and foundry on the east side of the creek, devoted largely to the 
production of cotton machinery. In 1848 and '49 they built two 
locomotives for the Hudson River Railroad Company. The company 
made an assignment to Robert G. Rankin and Robert Carver. The 
property and assets were sold in the same year by John A. C. Gray, 
the receiver, to the Matteawan Manufacturing and Machine Co., of 
which Samuel B. Schenck was president and manager. The property 
on the east side of the creek was sold under a mortgage held by 
Charles M. Wolcott, and purchased by him. This sale was set aside 
by the court in justice to the creditors. At a second sale Mr. Wol- 
cott purchased the stone cotton mill and the property known as the 
Clay mill farther up the creek, together with several outbuildings. 
Mr. Wolcott disposed of the property to John Falconer, who operated 
it under the name of the Seamless Clothing Manufacturing Co., in 
which he was associated with Mr. William Carroll. The company 
failed in 1876, and the concern subsequently resumed business under 
the name of William Carroll & Co. Mr. Carroll was obliged to sus- 
pend payment in 1883, but a few years later liquidated all claims at 
one hundred cents on the dollar, and has since continued successfully 
in the manufacture of wool and straw hats. 

The Rothery File Works was established in 1835 by John Rothery, 
who came from Yorkshire, England. Mr. Rothery was the first to 
manufacture new files in America. After the business had outgrown 
several shops, Mr. Rothery, in company with his sons John and Wil- 
liam, purchased property in Tioronda avenue, and erected a commo- 
dious plant. In 1873 they erected another large building, which was 
destroyed by fire October 28, 1886. It was rebuilt and leased by the 
Rotherys to Messrs. Rockwell & Son for a silk factory. The Roth- 



342 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

erys had no faith in machine-made files, and refused tp thus equip 
their plant. They were eventug,Ily compelled to give up the business, 
as they could not compete in price with the machine-made file. 

The Fishkill Landing Machine Co. was incorporated February 17, 
1853, to engage in the manufacture of stationary and marine engines, 
and a general machine business. The original capital was $25,000. 
The company was composed of some seventeen individuals, mostly resi- 
dents of Matteawan, who had been employed by the Matteawan Co. as 
irpn workers. 

The Matteawan Manufacturing Co. was organized in 1864!, with a 
capital of $150,000, for the manufacture of fine wool hats. This in- 
dustry is one of the largest of its kind in the State, and is fully 
described in Part II of this work, together with various other indusT 
tries of the town, including the New York Rubber Co., the Green 
Fuel Economizer Co., the Fishkill Landing Machine Co., the Dutchess 
Hat Works, the Dutchess Tool Works, and the A. V. Rockwell Silk 
Mills. 

The Fishkill and Matteawan Water Works was organized in 1885, 
the late Wm. H. Van Vliet being its promoter, and Taintor & Holt, 
bankers of New York City, its financial agents. They purchased 
twenty acres of land of Catherine and Theodore Brinckerhofi^, and 
built a dam across the Melzingah stream nearly four hundred feet 
above tidewater, laid mains to the villages and two years later con- 
structed another dam farther up the stream. These two reservoirs 
not being sufficient to meet the growing necessities of the villages, 
another one was constructed on the east side of Mt. Beacon with an 
independent outlet. Qn the morning of the 14th day of July, 1897, 
about 2 A. M., after several days of rain, a cloudburst struck the upper 
dam at Melzingah and tore a great hole in it. The imprisoned 
waters rushed down the gorge, breaking through the lower dam and 
carrying everything before it — rocks weighing ten tons that had laid 
iq the ravine since the glacial period were hurled like pebbles before 
the rush of waters to a distance of five hundred feet. Bridges were 
carried away, and at TimoneyviUe tenements were wrecked and seven 
persons drowned. This disaster crippled the company, and after re- 
pairing the lower dam they pfi'ered it for sale, and it was purchased 
fey ,4a syndicate in the name of Eugene Whitney, and was subsequently 
turned over to the villages. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 343 



BEICK INDUSTBIES. 



In the late thirties of the nineteenth century John Gillies and Henry 
Churchill of Breakneck, Isaac Brinckerhoff of what is now Dutchess 
Junction, and John Gowdy on the Wiltse property at Fishkill Land- 
ing, established brick yards. These men were the pioneers in a busi- 
ness which has since grown to great proportions and has been a source 
of employment for many and of great profit to the town. They used 
the circular pit and wheel for mixing the materials and a hand press 
for moulding the brick. Previous to that time the clay and sand 
were mixed by driving oxen through it and moulding it by hand—a 
slow and laborious process. In the early forties Mr. Adams invented 
a machine, that bore his name, which was used in connection with the 
circular pit and wheel for many years, and which mixed and moulded 
the brick in one operation. On the advent of the Hudson River Rail- 
road in 1847 the Gillies, Churchill and Brinckerhoff yards were dis- 
continued, the railroad running through them. Mr. Gowdy continued 
to operate his yard and on his retirement was succeeded by Mr. 
Joseph Lomas, who, in connection with Stephen Saunters, rented and 
afterwards purchased the property from a concern who had acquired 
it for the purpose of installing a Chambers machine. This machine 
mixed the materials and ran it through a die in a continuous stream 
and the brick was cut off the right length by a knife on a large wheel. 
During the hard times succeeding the panic of 1873 Mr. Lomas be- 
came financially involved and the property was acquired by Mr. Wel- 
ler of Newburgh, who sold it to the New York & New England Rail- 
road Company and the plant was discontinued. In 1852 Thomas 
Aldridge, a shrewd and successful manufacturer, purchased of John 
Van Vliet and Isaac Brinckerhoff forty-six acres of clay property and 
established a small yard thereon. This has been gradually enlarged 
and now has a daily capacity of four hundred and eighty thousand 
brick. The property is all operated under leaseholds under control 
of the Aldridge Brothers Company. 

About 18S5 Joshua Jones, of the noted insurance family of that 
name, purchased of Peter C. DuBois forty acres of what was known 
as Plum Point. Mr. Jones estabhshed a yard and at his death it was 



344 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

acquired by Daniel R. Weed and was afterwards purchased by George 
H. Brown for a terminal for the Dutchess & Columbia Railroad. That 
part of the property not used by the railroad was rented and after- 
wards purchased by W. D. Budd, and at his death the property de- 
scended to his two daughters, who have successfully operated and 
enlarged it. It has a daily capacity of about one hundred and ten 
thousand brick. The Misses Budd were the first to introduce elec- 
tricity as a mode of conveying power from the engine to the machines. 

About 1856 Daniel Gurnee and relatives purchased of Isaac Brinck- 
erhoff thirty-six acres of clay adjoining the Aldridge property and 
built a yard. This plant has been run by different tenants with varied 
success and is now operated by William K. Hammond, with a daily 
capacity of ninety-six thousand. This was one of the properties 
purchased by the American Brick Company and on the failure of 
that scheme reverted to its original owners to their large profit. 

About 1870 George Wade and the Van Amburgh family built a 
yard on their premises adjoining the Gurnee yard, and after operat- 
ing a year or two, sold it to a syndicate of New Yorkers who had a 
contract for furnishing brick for the Fourth Avenue Tunnel. In 
consequence of the depreciation in the price of brick and by mis- 
management the company failed and it was acquired by Samuel R. 
Piatt, of the Buckeye Mowing Machine Company of Poughkeepsie, which 
had large claims on the company. At his death the property was 
purchased by Francis Timoney, whose heirs stiU own it. The daily 
capacity is about two hundred and twenty thousand. 

In the late fifties William H. Van Vliet started a small brick plant 
in connection with his saw miU on the tide water of the Fishldll Creek. 
Mr. Van Vliet was one, if not the very first, to attempt drying brick 
by artificial heat. He used hot air. It was not a success, and owing 
to the distance from the main channel of the Hudson River and the 
absence of harbor tugs, the yard was discontinued. Mr. Van Vliet 
was the first to use wheel trucks for conveying brick from the machines 
to the drying yard. By this means one man carried from thirty to 
forty brick, while by the old way one boy or man carried only five. 

In the late fifties Benjamin Gardner built a yard on the Rumsey 
property at Fishkill Landing. This yard was run by different ten- 
ante until the New York & New England Railroad was built in front 
of it, when it was discontinued. 





m 




*^ 


WHK^ttB^^^tk 


^j^ 







A. H. BLACKBURN. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 345 

In the early eighties Alexander McLane built for Mr. Homer Rams- 
dell a yard on the John Wiltse property near Denning's Point. This 
property, together with a part of Denning's Point, the Newlin Mills 
and the Newlin homestead, had been acquired by Mr. Ramsdell by 
virtue of a mortgage which the Boston, Hartford & Erie Railroad 
Company had given him to secure the purchase price of his ferry and 
some Newburgh property. On the failure of the company, Mr. Rams- 
dell came into possession of the whole. This yard has been enlarged 
at different times and now has a capacity of about two hundred and 
fifty thousand per day. 

In the late nineties Messrs. Hammond & Freeman established a yard 
next south of the Timoney plant, with a daily capacity of about ninety 
thousand brick. « 

In the late fifties Mr. Gilbert CoUins built a yard on his property 
near Chelsea, then known as Low Point. At his death it was pur- 
chased by Thomas Aldridge, who afterwards sold the property to 
James V. Mead, who operated it until the clay at a workable distance 
from the surface was exhausted, when the yard was abandoned. 

In the eighties Charles Griggs built a yard on the Hunt property 
at Chelsea. It has since been run by different tenants. It has a 
capacity of about seventy thousand. 

The Brockway Brick Company, about half way between Chelsea 
and Fishkill Landing, occupies the site of the seventy-acre property 
formerly the country seat of the late William Y. Mortimer, from 
whom Edwin Brockway bought it in 1886. By extensive filling in 
along the front the yard has become the largest in output on the 
east bank of Newburgh Bay. 

The death of William S. Verplanck in 1885 brought several addi- 
tional yards into existence which have been operated under leases and 
are adjacent to the Brockway Brick Company. Among the tenants 
were O'Brien & Vaughey, William Lahey, Clayton C. Bourne, Thomas 
Dinan, WiUiam H. Aldridge and John Paye. Part of these clay prop- 
erties were incorporated under the name of the Verplanck Brick Com- 
pany. All together they have a daily capacity of over 400,000 bricks. 

BANKS. 

The First National Bank of Fishkill Landing was organized August 
10, 1863, with a capital of $50,000, which was increased in 1864 to 



346 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

$100,000, and in 1872 to $150,000. July 1, 1876, the capital was 
reduced to $100,000, at which figure it has since remained. This 
hank was among the very earliest to organize under the National Bank 
Act, as evidenced by its charter number, 35. Captain Walter Brett 
was its first president, and Conrad N. Jordan its first cashier. Janu- 
ary 1, 1870, Mr. Brett was succeeded by James Mackin, who con- 
tinued at the head of this institution until 1886, when the Hon. John 
T. Smith was chosen president and has held that office to the present 
time. Mr. Thomas Aldridge, for many years paying teller, has re^ 
cently become cashier, through the death of Mr. Milton E. Curtiss, 
wlio had been cashier for upwards of thirty-five years. 

The Mechanics' Savings Bank of Fishkill Landing, of which the 
Hon. John T. Smith has been president since 1883, was chartered 
March 5, 1866. Joseph Howland was elected its first president, and 
was succeeded in 1868 by WiUiam S. Verplanck. Silas G. Smith 
accepted the presidency in 1873, holding the office until his death in 
1883, 

The Matteawan Savings Bank was chartered March 21, 1871, with 
twenty-one trustees. It opened for business in April of that year in 
the office of the National Felt Works. David Davis was its first 
president and was succeeded by Willard H. Mase. For the past 
fifteen years the Hon. Samuel K. Phillips has been at the head of 
this institution. 

The Matteawan National Bank was organized in 1893, with eapi-' 
tal of $100,000. It opened its doors for business on the 23d of 
May of that year. Mr. Theodore BrinckerholF was chosen president, 
and Mr. David Graham cashier, both of whom still hold these positions. 

The Bank of Fishkill was incorporated June 1, 1850, with a capi- 
tal of $120,000. Samuel A. Hayt was its principal promoter, and 
for several years its president. April 1, 1863, it was converted to 
a national bank and the capital was increased to $200,000. In 1877 
the bank was obliged to close its doors on account of extravagant 
loans made to unscrupulous business adventurers. The failure in- 
volved the Itoss of the capital, $200,000, and an assessment of seventy 
per cent on each share. 

Fishkill Institute for Savings was incorporated February 25, 1857. 
The "first officers were: Alexander Hasbrouck, president; James E. 
Van Steenbergh, treasurer; Samuel H. Mead, secretary. Mr. Has- 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 347 

brouck removed to Poughkeepsie in 1861, in which year he resigned 
from the office of president, and was succeeded by T. V. W. Brincker- 
hoff. In 1869 James E. Dean was elected president, aild held the 
office twenty-two years, when he resigned and was chosen treasurer, 
resigning the latter office in 1904. During the period of litigation 
with the receiver of the National Bank of Fishkill the business of the 
Savings Institute suffered considerably from loss of confidence, but 
passed through the crisis triumphantly, and now stands on a firm foun- 
dation. Its present officers are: Franklin R. Benjamin, president, 
and Charles R. Montfort, treasurer. 

TRANSPORTATION. 

Martin Wiltse & Son succeeded the Frankfort Association at the 
lower Fishkill lan<&g. They ran a line of sloops to New York, carry- 
ing freight and passengers. Sometimes these vessels would make the 
trip in less than twenty-four hours ; at other times with high adverse 
winds they might be nearly a week on the passage. The passengers 
furnished their own bedding and provisions. One of these vessels, 
the "Hope," Captain George Wiltse, being struck with a sudden 
squall at the mouth of the Highlands, capsized, a-nd some of the pas- 
sengers were drowned. This accident created a profound sensation 
in that rural community, who were not yet satiated by the daily press 
with steamboat, railroad and automobile accidents throughout the 
civilized world. 

The Wiltses, in addition to the New York route, conducted a ferry 
to Newburgh by means of a row boat and a piragua, a two-masted 
vessel without a jib. Quam, a negro slave, was the ferry man. The 
darkey loved his New England rum and was deathly afraid of being 
kidnapped and sent south, so when he ventured to the village after 
nightfall in pursuit of his favorite tipple, the practical jokers of that 
time were sure to bring up the doings of the kidnappers, and, to im- 
press it on his mind, would pursue him in a lonely piece of road be- 
tween the village and the landing. The tracks that darkey would 
make made the sprinters of that day turn green with envy. 

A few years later, after the Matteawan factory was started, Mar- 
tin Wiltse, the son of the first Martin, started a freighting establish^ 
ment at the Upper Landing, and being a brother-in-law of Peter H. 
Schenck, the principal man in the Matteawan enterprise, he received 



348 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

all their freight, which had become of considerable importance. Both 
of these concerns were in operation until John Peter DeWindt had 
completed the long wharf to the main channel of the Hudson, in 
1816. Peter Brett, Epenetus Crosby and John MacKinnon placed 
the steamboat "Norfolk" on the New York route. This boat was 
very staunch and very slow, and it was a common joke among the 
boatmen that with a head wind and tide the Norfolk would race for 
hours with Pollipel's Island. 

Messrs. Brett & Crosby were succeeded by James Rankin, W. H. 
Van Wagenen and John McKinnon. They made improvements on 
the Norfolk by placing staterooms on the upper deck, as previously 
most of the sleeping accommodations were below deck the same as on 
the sloops. After a year or two Mr. Rankin assumed the whole busi- 
ness and carried it on for a time alone, when the troubles in the 
Matteawan factory and the competition of the railroad and the con- 
sequent loss of freight compelled him to suspend. The Norfolk was 
sold and went to that graveyard of steamboats, Rondout Creek. He 
was succeeded by Walter Brett and Joseph Cromwell, under the name 
of Brett & Cromwell. They ran the barge "Independence," and Mr. 
Cromwell having died, Captain Brett associated with him Mr. 
Matthews. They purchased the steamboat "Ansonia," renamed her 
the William Kent, and soon after, the war having broken out, re- 
ceived a very lucrative charter and afterwards sold her to the govern- 
ment at a greatly increased price. This boat, under another name, 
is still running to an up-river port. 

Mr. Matthews having retired, Captain Brett associated with him 
Captain C. W. Brundage and John Place, under the firm name of 
Walter Brett & Co. They purchased the steamboat "Mary Benton" 
from the government, the war having closed, renamed her the "Walter 
Brett," enlarged her and placed her on the New York route. This 
venture was not a success and the boat was sold. Captain Brett hav- 
ing retired, Messrs. Brundage and Place carried on the business by 
means of a transfer barge by which their freight was carried to New- 
burgh and placed on the Ramsdell line of barges and steamers. This 
arrangement continued for several years, when Mr. Place retired and 
Captain Brundage carried on the business alone. Mr. Ramsdell in the 
mealitime had purchased the Long Dock, and on the death of Captain 
Brundage his concern assumed the whole control. On the completion 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 349 

of the Long Wharf, Messrs. Carpenter, Lawrence and DeWindt built a 
horse boat for the Newburgh ferry from that point. This boat was 
sixty-two feet long and forty-two feet wide, probably a catamaran, as 
that was the usual style of ferry boat of the period, that is, two hulls 
joined together at their decks with a wheel between the hulls. This 
boat was named the Moses Rogers, in honor of the Captain who took 
the first steamship — the Savannah — across the Atlantic. The ferry- 
boat was propelled by eight horses on "sweeps" and was said to have 
been capable of carrying ten loaded teams and made the distance of 
one mile in ten or twelve minutes. 

It was soon after the advent of the horse boat in 1828, that 
Thomas Powell, a successful and energetic steamboat man of New- 
burgh, bought up all the ferry rights of the Wiltsies and DeWindts 
and placed a steam ferry boat on the route. The first boat of which 
the writer has any knowledge was named the Goldhunter. She ran 
many years and the business becoming so great on account of the 
Newburgh ferry and the Cochecton Turnpike being the favorite route 
to the southern tier of counties of New York and Northern Pennsyl- 
vania, the Erie Railroad and Delaware & Hudson Canal not yet being 
constructed, Mr. Powell was compelled to get a larger boat to accom- 
modate the traffic. The Williamsburgh was placed on the route, and 
after her the Union, which was burned, and the Fishkill-on-Hudson 
and City of Newburgh. This ferry has always been the most impor- 
tant one between New York and Albany and has been a mint of money 
to its owners, the Ramsdell family, Mr. Ramsdell, Sr., being a son-in- 
law of its original proprietor, Thomas Powell. 

During the early days vast droves of cattle and sheep were driven 
down the Cochecton Turnpike and across this ferry to be fattened 
on the rich pastures of Dutchess and Westchester Counties, and the 
valleys of the Housatonic and Connecticut rivers. 

In the fall of 1849 the Hudson River Railroad was completed. It 
was considered by most of the inhabitants of the Hudson River towns 
a wild and chimerical project, and prognostications of its fibtiancial 
failure were abundant. It was thought to be the height of madness to 
lay rails along the shore of the magnificent Hudson, the only river 
which penetrated the Appalachian chain of mountains on the whole 
Atlantic Coast with tide water from the sea. 

Previous to the completion of the railroad an efi'ort was made to 



35G THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

keep na^'igation open during the winter months. The steamer Utiea 
was furnished with a false bow, which enabled her to fun upon and 
erush the ice with her weight. This was partially successful, and 
a year or two later the Highlander of Newburgh and Norwich of 
Rondout were fitted out in a similar manner. They were successful 
in keeping the river open as far as Newburgh, where they connected 
with stages on both sides of the river. By this arrangement a pas- 
senger could leave New York in the morning and be in Albally the 
following morning. The Norwich at this time gained a reputation as 
an ice breaker, which she has ever since retained. 

The Dutchess & Columbia Railroad, opened for traffic between Pine 
Plains and Dutchess Junction in 1869, was operated for a time by the 
Boston, Hartford & Erie Railroad. On the failure of that company, the 
Dutchess & Columbia Company used its own rolling stock and operated 
the road themselves. It placed a ferry boat on the route to Newburgh 
in 1871, and also car floats to the same place. The Dutchess & Colum- 
bia was reorganized in 1877 as the Newburgh, Dutchess & Connecticut 
Railroad. It was sold to the New York, New Haven & Hartford Rail- 
road July 1, 1905, for one million dollars. 

The New York & New England Railroad, the successor of Boston, 
Hartford & Erie, opened from Waterbury, Conn., to Hopewell Junc- 
tion December 12, 1881, leased trackage from the Newburgh, Dutchess 
& Connecticut to Wiccopee and built a spur from that point to Fish- 
kill Landing. It established a car ferry from that point to New- 
burgh, and carried large quantities of freight from the Erie, Ontario 
& Western and West Shore Railroads. Later it was absorbed by the 
New York, New Haven & Hartford, and the car ferry was discon- 
tinued 

THE PRESS. 

The New York Packet, the initial number of which was issued at 
Fishkill Village, October 1, 1776, was the first newspaper pubhshed 
in Dutchess County. Samuel Louden, its editor, came out boldly as 
an uncompromising patriot. He fled from New York with his press 
and material when that city came into the possession of the British. 
While in Fishkill he printed the journals of the Legislature, and also 
the erders for the army while it lay at Newburgh, In 1777 he was 
instructed to print three thousand copies of the State Constitution. 
Shortly after the close of the war he returned to New York. 




WELDON F. WESTON. 



TOWN OF FISHKILL. 351 

The first distinctly local newsjmper was the Free Ftess, established 
in 1841 at Fishkill Village by Fred W, Ritter. A year later it was 
removed to Poughkeepsie. The next paper published at the village 
was the Fishkill Journal, started in 1863 by H. A. Guild, and dis- 
CQutiniied in 1855. It was followed in 1857 by the Dutchess Covmty 
Timea, of which J. Carpenter Milfe was editoir. Alfred W. Lomas 
soon succeeded Mr, MiUs, and changed the name of the paper to the 
FishhUl Journal. In 1860 it passed into the hands of Caleb M. Hotal- 
ing, and in 1862 into thoise of Charles S. Wilber, who s«)ld it that 
year to James E. Dean and Milton A. Fowler. In August, 1865, 
George W. Owen became its publisher, and continued the paper in the 
village until 1882, when he removed the plant to Matteawan. In 
November of the same year the Fishkill Weekly Times was established 
by the Fishkill Printing Association, which was subsequently absorbed 
by James E. Dean. His son, Herman Dean, has edited the paper 
since 1888. It is a hve, four-page, eight-column sheet, independent 
in politics. 

The Fishkill Standard. This paper was started at Fishkill Land- 
ing about the time the Free Press was discontinued at Fishkill Village. 
It is the oldest paper in the town, and although it has frequently 
changed ownership, its title remains the same. The first number was 
issued August 2, 1842, by William R. Addington, who published it 
imtil 1860. A Vanderwerker & Co. and Reed & Vanderwerker con- 
ducted it until 1862, when it passed into the hands of John W. 
Spaight, who continued it until 1907. It is now published by his son, 
Charles E. Spaight. 

The Matteawan Evening Journal is a live, democratic paper, edited 
by Morgan H. Hoyt. There have been frequent changes in the press 
of Matteawan since the time of the Daily Herald, which was started in 
1869 by Charles G. Coutant. It was soon changed to a weekly, and 
in 1872 was succeeded by the Matteawan Enterprise, published by 
James H. Woolhiser. The plant was destroyed by fire in 1875. The 
Matteawan Observer was started in the fall of 1876 by Peter H. Vos- 
burgh, who sold it in '77 to George W. Owen. Mr. Owen conducted 
the plant as a job printing office in connection with the Journal, which 
he published at Fishkill Village. He combined the two establishments 
at Matteawan in 1882, and in 1885 started the Daily Journal. 

The Fishkill Daily Herald was established at Fishkill Landing in 



352 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1892, by Adams & Still. In less than a year it was sold to Thomas 
Pendell, who continued the paper until July 1, 1897. It was then 
bought by George F. Donoghue, the present editor. 

Records of the meetings of precinct and town boards were de- 
stroyed by fire in 1876. A list of the Supervisors of the South Ward 
and of Rombout Precinct from 1720 to 1787 will be found in Chapter 
VI. The following is the succession of town Supervisors from 1848: 



1848— '49 


Alexander Hasbrook 


1875 


Lyman Robinson 


1850— 'S3 


Henry Mesier 


1876-'77 


Charles W. Tompkins 


1860 


John Jaycox 


1878— '79 


Sylvester H. Mase 


1861 


John R. Phillips 


1880 


John F. Gerow 


1863 


James Markin 


1881 


Thomas S. Judson 


1863 


John R. Phillips 


1883— '85 


John T. Smith 


1864 


John Rothery 


1886— '87 


John P. Rider 


1865— '66 


Augustus Hughson 


1888 


William H. Wood 


186T— '68 


James E. Shurter 


1889 


Samuel H. Sanford 


1869 


James Mapkin 


1890 


Samuel B. Rogers 


1870— '71 


Edward M. Goring 


1891 


Frank G. Rikert 


1873— '73 


Lyman Robinson 


1893— '01 


James E. Mtmger 


1874 


Henry H. Hustis 


1903— '09 


B. Frank Greene 




REV. AMOS T. ASHTON, D. D. 



TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 353 



CHAPTER XXII. 
THE TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 

By Rev. Amos T. Ashton, D.D. 

THE Town of Hyde Park occupies a central position upon the 
west border of the county. It is bounded on the north by 
town of Rhinebeck; east, by Clinton and Pleasant Valley; 
south, by the town of Poughkeepsie, and west by^the Hudson river. 
It has an area of 22,295 acres, principally rolling and hilly upland, 
the highest point being Lloyd Hill in the northeast part of the town, 
which has an elevation of 608 feet above tide. 

Crum Elbow and Fallkill creeks flow through the town in a south- 
westerly direction. The former reaches the Hudson near the village 
of Hyde Park, where it makes a sudden beiid between rocky bluffs 
and in a narrow channel. On this account the Dutch called the stream 
Krom Elebogue, — ^crooked elbow. 

The town was formed from the western section of Clinton, by an 
act passed January 26, 1821, which after defining the boundaries, 
states that it "shall be known and distinguished as a separate town 
by the name of Hyde Park, arid that the fitst town meeting * * * 
shall be held at the house of Philip Bogardus on the first Tuesday of 
April next." 

Title to a portion of the soil dates back to a gra:nt made "by cer- 
tain letters patent bearing dsite of April 18th, 1705, to Jacob Re- 
quier, Peter Faueonier, Benjamin Ask, Bame Cousens and John Per- 
sons." Peter Faueonier who was one of the Little Nine Partner 
patentees, became sole Owner of this grant. The names of the others 
were doubtless added to evade the law prohibiting grants of more than 
one thousand acres to one person. 

Faueonier was a Frenchman who left France on account of religious 
persecution. He became the private secretary of Sir Edward Hyde, 
Governor of the Province of New York at the beginning of the eigh- 
teenth century. He named his patent "Hyde Pafk," which was 



354 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

bounded on the north by the Pauling or Staatsburg patent, the line 
corresponding with the present north boundary of Mr. F. G. Lan- 
don's property ; on the east and south by Crum Elbow creek, and west 
by the Hudson river. 

About 17S5, Jacob Stoutenburgh, a Hollander and trader from 
Westchester, became interested in lands now comprised within the 
bounds of this town. He purchased the ninth "water lot" of the Nine 
Partners patent, on which the village of Hyde Park is now situated. 
This land he gave to his son Luke in 1758. 

Dr. John Bard,^ the earliest physician in this locality, bought out 
the heirs of Fauconier, of whom his wife was a descendant. Crum 
Elbow creek formed a natural division between the property of the 
Bards on the north, and the Stoutenburghs on the south. In early 
times there was much trouble over water privileges, and June 4th, 
1789, Dr. Samuel Bard deeded four small parcels of land to Richard 
de Cantillon and James Stoutenburgh, which may have settled the 
matter. 

At this time the familiar designations of the settlements were the 
Upper and Lower Comers, of which the latter had more business. 
The Stoutenburgh store was the pioneer trading place, built on the 
site now occupied by Hopkins's drug store. Another store stood at 
the south comer of the road leading east (north of Albert Jones' 
house) kept by Ambrose Cook a Quaker, who carried on a large busi- 
ness in pork. He was succeeded by Ephriam Stevens and John Cas- 
well. Other early merchants in the south part of the town were Henry 
Gale and Hiram Nelson. Here were situated the houses of Luke and 
John Stoutenburgh. On the east side of the post road, on a ledge of 
rocks, was built a district school house. Nearly opposite was the 
house of Andrew Phillipe, built early in the century. Of the buildings 
mentioned there alone remain to-day the one owned by Mr. Dickenson. 
The old Red Reformed Dutch Church stood just south of the grave- 
yard. Northward were the houses of Henry Bush, wagon-maker, and 
Samuel Upton, who carried on a carding mill, while a fulling mill was 
conducted by Henry Dusenbury at the Mill pond. Flax dressing was 
also carried on here. 

On the northwest corner of the post road and the road crossing it 



1. Biographical sketches of Dr. John Bard and his son, Samuel Bard, M.D., appear- 
In the chapter devoted to the medical profession of the County. 



TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 355 

from the Upper Landing, stood the village inn. Joseph Carpenter 
was the first landlord. His successor was an Englishman named 
Miller, who put up a sign which read "Hyde Park Hotel." It was 
probably the first time the name of Hyde Tark was used south of Crum 
Elbow creek, and it incurred the displeasure of Dr. Bard, who wished 
the name to be applied to his country seat only. He remonstrated 
and offered to buy the sign, but Miller was obdurate. When a post- 
office was established. Miller was the means of having it called Hyde 
Park. A few years later when the town of Clinton was divided, the 
name was given, in 1821, to the new town. Philip Bogardus was then 
the landlord, and the first town election was held in this building, April 
24th of that year, which resulted as follows: James Duane Livings- 
ton, Supervisor; Reuben Spencer, Town Clerk; Tobias L. Stouten- 
burgh, Peter A. Schryver, Christopher Hughes, Assessors ; Isaac Beld- 
ing. Collector. 

At a meeting of the town officers May 19th, 1821, Charles A. Shaw 
was appointed "a discreet and proper person" to take the census. He 
returned the following statistics : Population, 2,300 ; electors, 431 ; 
taxable property, $547,106. 

An extensive freighting business was done at the Lower Landing 
(near the present freight house of the Hudson River Railroad) about 
the close of the eighteenth century. Jonathan Owen operated two 
sloops between this point and New York ; one sailed by Captain David 
Braman, and the other by Captain David Wickes. After 1807 James 
Wilson succeeded Owen in this business. 

Richard de Cantillon gave his name to the Upper Landing. His 
sloops sailed as far south as the West Indies, to which he shipped 
great quantities of corn in exchange for sugar and rum. In 1770 
he married Mary, daughter of Tobias, the eldest son of the first 
Jacobus Stoutenburgh. 

Peter de Reimer and his son-in-law, Robert Gilbert Livingston, suc- 
ceeded de Cantillon in business at the Upper Landing. Later William 
Ellsworth and Miles Fletcher operated the line. The barge "Lex- 
ington," made weekly trips to New York, from 1840 until the rail- 
road was built. 

The eastern part of the town adjoining Pleasant Valley and Clin- 
ton was settled at an early day by Quakers from New England and 
Long Island. Among them were the Marshalls, Bakers, Briggs, 



356 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Hoags, Halsteads, Moshers, Stringhams, Waiters, Lamorees, Nel- 
sons and Williams. The Friends' house of worship here was for many 
years called the "Crom Elbow Meeting House," erected about the 
year 1774. The early members have long since passed away, leaving 
their descendants to unite with and to conform to the manners and 
discipline of other sects. 

On the west border of the town, overlooking the Hudson, are sev- 
eral magnificent country seats of families prominent in the social and 
business world. The most southern of these is the residence of John 

A. Roosevelt, a descendant of James Roosevelt, who owned Mount 
Hope, now the property of the Hudson River State Hospital. Near 
Teller HiU was the house of Moses S. Beach, now owned by Mr. Weben- 
dorfer. Further north are the estates of Mrs. James Roosevelt and 
J. R. Roosevelt, the latter also a descendant of James Roosevelt of 
Mount Hope. 

"Belfield," now the home of Hon. Thomas Newbold, originally be- 
longed to the Crook family, descendants of one of the original Nine 
Partners. It was subsequently in possession of the Kneelands, Judge 
Johnston, and his grandson. Dr. F. U. Johnston. North of "Belfield" 
is an estate which has been in the possession of Mr. Archibald Rogers 
for the past twenty years. In 1842 it was owned by Elias Butler 
who gave the place the name of "Crumwold." The houses of Dudley 

B. FuUer and General James J. Jones now form part of this immense 
estate. The Miller and HoflFman families also lived on this property. 

Adjoining Hyde Park village on the north is the country seat of 
Mr. F. W. Vanderbilt, who purchased this property in 1895. This is 
the estate to which the name of "Hyde Park" originally applied, and 
which was^for many years the home of Dr. John Bard and his son 
Samuel, both of whom erected dwellings on the premises. In 1827 
the estate of Hyde Park was purchased by Dr. David Hosack, an 
eminent New York physician, who greatly improved the property, 
planting many rare and beautiful trees. He built the "Farm House," 
long the home of John A. De GrafF; also the bridge on the drive from 
the south entrance to the place. Dr. Hosack died in 1835, and the 
estate was sold to Walter Langdon, Sr. His wife, Dorothea, was a 
daughter of John Jacob Astor. Their son Walter inherited and occu- 
pied "the estate to the time of his death, September 17, 1894). Mr. 
Vanderbilt, the present owner, removed the Langdon house, and built 



TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 357 

a stone mansion, considered the finest example of Italian renaissance 
in this country. 

Nathaniel Pendleton, a native of Virginia, married Susan, daughter 
of John Bard, and built a residence north of the Bard place, known as 
"Placentia." Their eldest son, Edward H., inherited the property. 
He was elected to Congress, and was County Judge. "Placentia" 
was long the home of James K. Paulding, a name intimately associated 
with that of Washington Irving. It was also the home of N. Pendle- 
ton Rogers. It is now owned by J. S. Huyler. 

Cyrus Braman bought lots 2 and 3 of the Hyde Park patent. The 
estate was known as "Belgrove." This property was subsequently 
conveyed to William Ellsworth, who married Ruth, daughter of Cyrus 
Braman. After the death of Mr. Ellsworth, it passed into the hands 
of Mr. N. P. Rogers. 

The Rymph family have been landowners in this section for a longer 
period than any other except the Bards. November 10th, 1768, John 
Bard sold to George Rymph lot No. 5 of the Hyde Park patent, con- 
taining 215 acres. It is now the property of James Rymph, grand- 
son of George ; the latter died in 1791, leaving a wife and ten children. 

The Broughtons were the original settlers of the Inwood property. 
The will of Francis Broughton, dated October 22, 1790, leaves the 
place to his son Joseph. In 1809 Joseph Broughton sold that part of 
his farm west of the post road to Rev. John McVickar. The Mc- 
Vickars sold "Inwood" to Alfred L. Pell, who in turn sold it to Rob- 
ert M. Livingston. The place finally passed into the hands of Alex- 
ander H. Wickes. It is now owned by Hon. Francis G. Landon. 

Staatsbtjrgh, a village in the northern part of the town, derives its 
name from the Staats family, who settled here about 1720. Other 
early settlers were the Hughes, Mulford and Russell families. Here 
was the residence of General Morgan Lewis, the second son of Francis 
Lewis, one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence. He 
was born in New York city in 1754, and graduated from Princeton 
in '73. During the Revolutionary War young Lewis was Major of 
a company of volunteers which entered the Continental service as the 
Second New York. He was appointed Quarter-master General of the 
Northern Department of the Army, and was mentioned in reports for 
bravery at Bemis Heights. In 1778 and '80 he was with General Clin- 
ton. At the close of the war he was admitted to the bar. He repre- 



358 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

sented New York City in the Assembly, and soon after Dutchess Coun- 
ty, to which he had removed. He was next elected Judge of the Court 
of Common Pleas, and in 1791 was appointed Attorney General of the 
State. In 1792 he was raised to the Bench of the Supreme Court, 
and next year became Chief Justice. In 1804 he was elected Gover- 
nor of the State of New York. During the War of 1812 he was made 
a Major General and served throughout the campaign on the Canadian 
frontier. 

General Morgan Lewis, in 1779, married Gertrude, daughter of 
Robert Livingston. He died in 1844! in the ninetieth year of his age. 
For many years he was one of the wardens of St. James' Church, Hyde 
Park, and is buried in the churchyard. His estate at Staatsburgh is 
now owned by his great-granddaughter, Mrs. Ogden MiUs. Among 
his descendants still resident at Staatsburgh is the family of the late 
Lydig M. Hoyt. 

North, of this property is "The Locusts," the estate of the late Wil- 
liam B. Dinsmore, now owned by his widow and children. Since 1857 
this estate has been under the general supervision of Timothy Herrick, 
who at diffierent times has served the town as Supervisor. 

In the village of Staatsburgh is situated St. Margaret's Church. 
This was formerly a mission, or rather a part of the Parish of St. 
James, and not until the rectorship of Dr. Cady did it become an 
independent parish. A Methodist Church and St. Paul's Roman 
Catholic Church are also situated here. 

In 1858 Mr. J. H. Bodenstein established in Staatsburgh a shop 
for the manufacture of ice cutting implements. The plant has been 
enlarged at different times, and is now conducted by his son, John G. 
Bodenstein. 

ScHOpxSy In 1806 Captain David Braman taught school in the 
stone h(We opposite the gateway of D. S. Miller. The first district 
school was built soon after this time, nearly opposite the house of 
Andrew Phillips. The teacher was WiUiam Prince Williams. A 
larger building was erected in 1829 on the corner of Albany and Al- 
bertson streets. In 1869 a two-story brick school house was built in 
front of the old one. 

Benjamin Allen, LL.D., was long at the head of a classical school 
at this place which he opened about 1815. A few years later Miss 
AletBa Gibbs opened a boarding and day school for girls, which was 




RICHARD A. SCHOUTEN. 



TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 359 

considered as being one of the best of that day, and with Dr. Allen's 
nearby, gave Hyde Park an enviable reputation for educational ad- 
vantages. 

Others who had private schools here in later years were Miss Emily 
Nelson, Joel Nelson, Evan T. Griffiths, Wesley Doughty, Miss Anna 
Phillips, Miss Ellen Wallace, Miss Catharine A. Cooly. 

The Bard Infant School was founded according to the provisions 
of the will of Miss Susan Mary Bard, dated August 4th, 1831. She left 
the interest of $4,000 in trust for its maintenance. The trustees 
bought a lot from the heirs of Joshua Laurence, and erected a frame 
building, and the school was conducted successfully for many years, 
the income being sufficient inducement for a competent teacher. After 
the school was discontinued the room was used foj St. James' Guild. 
A public reading room and library was established by the Guild and 
is now supported by the parish. 

Chueches. In 1780 there was formed in Hyde Park the Stouts- 
burgh Religious Association. Its members were composed of ad- 
herents of the Church of England, and of the Reformed Protestant 
Dutch Church. An agreement was made to this effect, that any min- 
ister of any orthodox church whose services could be procured should 
be allowed to preach before the association and friends, and that when- 
ever either Dutch or Enghsh felt that they alone could support a 
minister of their own persuasion, that party was to receive the church 
building and all other property belonging to the association, and a 
church should be established and worship continued according to the 
rites and forms of the prevailing party. 

The old Reformed Dutch Church stood south of the graveyard where 
now stands the chapel of the Reformed Church. It was a frame 
building painted red, and looked very much like a bam. A great 
sounding board was over the pulpit. There were no buildings between 
the church and the East Road. Among Dutchess County deeds is 
found this record: "Monday, December 21st, 1789, Election at the 
Church of Stoutsburgh in the County of Dutchess of Trustees for the 
Society called the Stoutsburgh Religious Society, — ^Elected: John 
Stoutenburgh, Sr., Isaac Conklin, Thomas Banker, Joshua Nelson, 
Jacob Schryver, John A. Lee." The Society continued until the 
early part of the nineteenth century, when the Dutch organized a 
church and received, as per agreement, the church edifice and all other 



360 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

church property. The present building was erected in 1826. The 
list of pastors is as follows : Cornelius Brower, of Poughkeepsie, sup- 
plied the church from 1794-1812, and was in full charge from 1812- 
1815. Peter S. Wynkoop officiated from 1817-'20, and had charge 
of Hyde Park, and Pleasant Plains 1820-'22. Ferdinand H. Van Der 
Veer, 1823-'29. William Cahoone, 1829-'3S. Simon D. Westfall, 
1834-'37. He was the first one to Uve in the present parsonage, 
which was built in 1833. Next came John C. Cruikshank, 1837-'43. 
Anthony Ehnendorf, 1843-'48. William H. Ten Eyck, 1848-'53. 
Henry Dater, 1853-'77. George R. Garrettson was installed Feb- 
ruary 19, 1878, and was succeeded by Rev. Cornelius R. Blauvelt, 
1880-'83. Rev. Frank E. Kavanagh, September 26, 1883-'84. He 
was of Irish extraction and was at first intended for the priesthood. 
He married a niece of Bishop Niles and became a member of the Epis- 
copal Church, then a Presbyterian minister, and then Reformed Dutch. 
His ministry here, owing to his eccentricities, was very brief. Rev. 
John F. Shaw was installed November 11, 1885. He resigned Feb- 
ruary 1st, 1893. Rev. John F. Harris was installed June 27, 1893, 
and served imtil 1898. Soon after he died. The Rev. Mr. Hamlin 
served from 1898 to 1908, and was succeeded by the present pastor, 
the Rev. Mr. Ficken. 

In 1811 there were some fifty members of the Episcopal Church 
living in Hyde Park. It was decided to build a house of worship. 
Dr. Samuel Bard gave the central part of the present churchyard for 
the purpose. The church was erected in 1811 by subscription. The 
Bard family were the largest contributors. Other contributors were 
the following: Gov. Morgan Lewis, who contributed, besides money, 
a "Pew" in St. Paul's Church, New York; John McVicker, William 
Bard, John Johnston, Sarah Barton, Magdalen Murisson, T. de Can- 
tillon, Jacob Bush, Jotham Post, Samuel Mead, Hunting Sherrill, 
Richard de Cantillon, Tobias Stoutenburgh, L. Ring, Timothy Steven- 
son, Titus Dutton, Reuben Spencer, N. Pendleton, Baron S. Hutchins, 
Isaac Russell, Cyrus Braman, George Gillespie, James Duane Livings- 
ton, Christopher Hughes, David Mulford, Lemuel Hyde and others. 
The edifice was built of brick and stone. It had a short, square tower 
at the west end. Inside, the ceiling, walls and woodwork were white. 
On^the wall was a tablet to the memory of Dr. John Bard. Later 
were added tablets to the memory of Dr. Samuel and Mrs. Mary Bard, 
and Nathaniel Pendleton. 



TOWN OF HYDE PARK. 361 

At a meeting of the congregation held on the 30th day of March, 
1812, the rector, Rev. John McVicker, presiding, the following per- 
sons were unanimously elected as wardens and vestrymen of the par- 
ish: Wardens, Dr. Samuel Bard and Morgan Lewis; vestrymen, 
Joha Johnston, Nathaniel Pendleton, WilUam Broome, William Bard, 
Christopher Hughes, James D. Liviiigston, Titus Dutton, William 
Duer. At this meeting it was resolved that St. James' Church at 
Hyde Park, should be the name by which the church should be known. 

About 184)3 it was found that the church needed a new roof, and 
that other repairs were necessary. A committee appointed advised 
taking down the church and rebuilding it. This plan was adopted and 
in 1844 a new church, but substantially the old chujch, was rebuilt on 
the same site. During the time that changes ware made services were 
held in the rectory, on the north side of the church, which had been 
built in 1836. The mural tablets were replaced, and two others, to 
the memory of Morgan Lewis and William Bard, were added. Dr. 
Daniel Hosack increased the churchyard by giving land on the south 
end. In 1873 Mr. Walter Langdon gave a large addition on the 
east. 

The rectors of St. James' Church from its organization in 1811, 
when the parish was received into union with the diocese of New York, 
have been as follows : Rev. John McVicker, D.D., Rev. David Brown, 
Rev. Samuel Roosevelt Johnson, Rev. Reuben Sherwood, D.D., Rev. 
Horace Stringfellow, D.D., Rev. James S. Purdy, D.D., Rev. Phi- 
lander K. Cady, D.D., Rev. R. H. Gesner, Rev. A. T. Ashton, D.D. 

The Methodist Episcopal Church was built in 1833, upon ground 
given by John Albertson, Sr. The first Board of Trustees was com- 
posed of Joseph Williams John Giles, WiUiam Armstrong, Alonzo F. 
Selleck and Henry S. Backus. Mr. A. F. Selleck, a local preacher, 
held services here in 1829, and continued until 1834. He afterward 
became a useful member of the New York Conference. In 1835 Rev. 
Denton Keeler occupied the pulpit of this church. In 1840 John Al- 
bertson, Jr., presented the trustees of the church a lot adjoining it, 
for a parsonage. The building which cost $2,200 was not erected 
until 1856, at which time Rev. A. C. Fields was pastor. In 1896, 
during the pastorate of Rev. E. Miles, the old church was removed 
and the present edifice built. 

A sketch of the Roman Catholic Church, which is in charge of Rev. 
J. P. Lonergan, will be found in a subsequent chapter. 



362 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



The Baptist Chuech was organized at the house of Garret P. 
Lansing, April 18, 1844, and the church built in 1846. Mrs. Susan 
Van Wagner was a large contributor. Rev. David Morris was the 
first pastor. He was succeeded by Rev. Charles Van Loon of the 
First Baptist Church of Poughkeepsie, who officiated as "a supply." 
Services were held very unfrequently, as many of the active members 
moved away. Some years ago Mr. John S. Huyler purchased the 
building and fitted it up as a gymnasium under the auspices of the 
Methodist Church. 

The following is the list of Supervisors elected In the town and the 
date of serving: 



1891— '2S 


James D. Livingston 


1861— '62 


John M. Friss 


1826— '28 


John Johnston 


1863 


Elias Tompkins 


1829 


James D. Livingston 


1864 


John Russell, Jr. 


1830— '31 


Elijah Baker 


1865— '66 


Joel N. De Graff 


1832 


James D. Livingston 


1867 


Elias Tompkins 


1833 


David Barnes 


1868 


David H. Mulford 


1834n-'37 


Luke S. Stoutenburgh 


1869— '70 


Albert S. Schryver 


1838 


William W. Woodworth 


1871— '72 


James Roosevelt 


1839— '40 


James Russell 


1873— '74 


Timothy Herrick 


1841 


William W. Woodvcorth 


1876— '76 


John A. Marshall 


1842— '43 


Nelson Andrews 


1877— '79 


Henry K. WUber 


1844 


James Russell 


1880— '81 


Edward H. Marshall 


1845 


Elias Tompldns 
David CollinA 


1882 


Edgar A. Briggs 


1846— '47 


1883 


Henry K. Wilber 


1848 


TsRac Mosher 


1884^'85 


Casper Westervdt 


1849— 'SO 


Louis T. Mosher 


1886— '87 


Timothy Herrick 


1851 


Henry Green 


1888— '92 


David E. Howatt 


1852— '53 


Elias Tompkins 


1893 


Lount Lattin 


1854— '55 


David H. Mulford 


1894— '97 


Henry M. Barker 


1856 


Brooks Hughes 


1898— '99 


Henry K. Wilber 


1857— '58 


Morris G. Lloyd 


1900— '03 


H. Fremont Vandewater 


1859 


A. V. W. Tompkins 


1904— '05 


Fred Bodenstein 


1860 


Morris G. Lloyd 


1906— '09 


Harry Arnold 




^^^'^M^yCi^^^^^^ 



S .A..MbtiAieu ^uif/isJit/jr. 



TOWN OF LA GRANGE. 363 



CHAPTER XXIII. 
THE TOWN OF LA GRANGE. 

THE territory comprising the town of La Grange was formed 
from portions of the towns of Fishkill and Beekman, Feb- 
ruary 9, 1821, under the name of Freedom. A strip of about 
five thousand acres was taken from it March 1, 1827, to form part of 
the town of Union Vale. 

. The town is bounded on the north by Pleasant Valley ; east by Union 
Vale and Beekman; south by Wappinger and East Fishkill, and on 
the west by the town of Poughkeepsie, from which it is separated by 
Wappinger Creek. The area thus embraced comprises 25,443 acres, 
mainly devoted to agriculture. The original description of the bounds 
reads as follows: 

"That part of the town of Fishkill, lying north of a line commencing at the 
fording place on the Wappingers Creek, nigh the honse of the late Samuel Thome, 
deceased, from thence rvmning easterly to the division line between Fishkill and 

Beekman towns, ten chains southerly of the house formerly owned by Palmer 

and now in part occupied by John Arthur; and all that part of the town of 
Beekman lying west of a Une commencing at the point on the division line between 
Fishkill and Beekman, where the east and west line aforesaid in Fishkill will inter- 
sect said division line of Beekman and Fishkill, rvmning from thence north- 
easterly to a point two chains distance due east from the northeast corner of the 
house of Seneca Vail, built by Dr. Soffin (provided it includes the house of Blisha 
C. Barlow, if not, thence commencing at the point aforesaid, and running from 
thence to and including the house of Nicholas Tyce; from thence to the point 
aforesaid, two chains distance, due east from the northeast corner of the house of 
the said Seneca Vail), from thence on either of the courses last aforesaid, as may 
be determined by actual survey, to the Washington town line." 

The act authorizing the erection of the town, directed that the first 
town meeting be held at the house of William Wolven, on the first 
Tuesday in April, 1821, at which the following ofiicers were elected: 
John Wilkinson, Supervisor; John Clapp, Clerk; Isaac B. Clapp, 
Silas Pettit, Reuben Tanner, Israel Fowler, and John Van de Belt, 
Assessors ; Leonard Nelson, Collector ; John Billings, Mynard B. Velie, 



364 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Overseers of the Poor; Baltus Velie, Elias Vale and Henry Dates, 
Commissioners of Highways; Ezekiel Velie, John D. Brown and John 
G. Dunkin, Commissioners of Schools ; James Congdon, John G. Dun- 
kin, Samuel Petit, Henry D. Sleight, Thomas H. Potter, and Avery 
L. Herrick, Inspectors of Common Schools; Jacob Culver, Daniel 
StiUweU, James Coles and Peter Hageman, Constables. 

The name of Freedom was given to the town by Enoch Dorland, a 
Quaker preacher. As this name caused confusion in the delivery of 
mail, it was changed in 1829, by the Board of Supervisors, to La 
Grange, after the ancestral estate in France of the Marquis d' La- 
fayette. 

Settlement in the southern part of the town began as early as 1754!, 
and the names of Shear, Clapp, Brundage, Swade, Dean, Weeks, and 
Townsend are recorded among the pioneers. Arthursburg and 
"Morey's Comers," now La Grangeville, were early neighborhoods. 
The families of Ver VaUn, De Groff, Sleight, Nelson and Cornell set- 
tled in the western part of the town previous to the Revolution. 

The following is the inscription on a field stone in La Grange 
Rural Cemetery, near Manchester: "I. V. Died Dbr. 12, 1762." This 
is the earliest known grave in this cemetery, and is supposed to mark 
the burial place of Isaack Ver VaKn, as other members of the family 
are buried nearby. A mile north of the cemetery stands the Sleight 
homestead, built in 1798 by James Sleight, son of Abram and Ariantj 
(Ehnendorf) Sleight, and now occupied by their descendants. James 
Sleight was a soldier in the Revolution, served through three cam- 
paigns, and took part in several of the battles of that struggle. Reu- 
ben Nelson, Jr., was an innkeeper at Manchester. His hotel was 
located on the property now owned by the Van Wyck family, de- 
scendants of Theodorus Van Wyck, of FishkiU, an active patriot in 
the Revolution, and prominent in the oiEcial afiFairs of the county at 
that period. 

Grist mills and fuUing mills were in operation within the present 
town limits before the close of the eighteenth century. Moses De Groff 
owned the miU at Manchester ; Stephen Moore operated one at Moore's 
Mills, and John and Daniel Hosier built another at Morey's Corners. 
Jacob Morey, from whom the hamlet received its name, was a black- 
smith by trade; he also conducted a tavern for several years. Upon 
the meadow just south of Morey's Comers, during the Revolution, 



TOWN OF LA GRANGE. 



365 



was an encampment of a Tory band, which took part in the raid upon 
Washington Hollow in the summer of 1777. This field has since been 
known as the "Camp lot." 

In the latter part of the eighteenth century, Jonah Coshire and 
his squaw, Lydia, two pure blooded Schaghticoke Indians, a branch 
of the once powerful Pequod tribe, settled on a ridge in the north 
part of the town. This couple and their children, Steve and Han- 
nah, became known as "the Jonahs," and their few acres of rough land 
was termed "Jonah's Manor." 




HANNAH COSHIRE OR "JONAH," 
Last of the Schaghticoke Indians in Dutchess County. 



366 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Steve lived here until his death, after which Hannah lived many 
years, having a home with one of the families of the neighborhood, her 
services being much in demand as a nurse in sickness throughout the 
surrounding country. The Jonahs possessed, or claimed to possess, 
knowledge of an herb that was a certain antidote to the poison from 
the fangs of the copperhead and rattlesnake, but nothing could ever 
induce them to divulge the secret, which was carried to the grave 
about thirty years ago, with the remains of Hannah Jonah, the last 
of the Schaghticokes of Dutchess County. 

We are indebted to Mrs. Sarah Chatterton, of Newburgh, N. Y., 
for the accompanying portrait of Hannah Jonah. Mrs. Chatterton 
had knowledge of Hannah for many years, and can vouch for the 
photograph as being authentic. 

The oldest religious organization in the town is that of the Society 
of Friends of Arthursburg. At this place was built a Friends meet- 
ing house, and Oswego monthly meetings were held here as early as 
1761. Samuel Dorland and wife, Allen Moore and wife and Andrew 
Moore are recorded as being present at this meeting. Several Quaker 
families resided in this vicinity. Following the division in the Society 
in 1828 the Hicksites built a meeting house at Moore's Mills, where 
meetings are regularly held. 

The Methodists were next in the field in missionary work, but the 
Presbyterians were first in organizing a church, which they did at 
Freedom Plains in 1828. 

The records of the Presbyterian Church of Freedom Plains state 
that "On the 26th of July, 1827, sundry persons of Freedom did meet 
at the house of Mary Nelson and chose the following trustees: Ben- 
jamin H. Conklin, Baltus Overacker, Eleazer Taylor, Baltus Velie, 
Rickertson Collins, John D. Brown, Abram S. Storm, Isaac B. Clapp 
and John Clapp." 

The church was regularly organized on the 14th of May, 1828, by 
the following committee, appointed by the Presbytery of the North 
River, viz. : Messrs. John Clark, James P. Ostrom and Alonzo Welton. 
The organization took place in the barn of Baltus Overacker, with 
thirty-nine members. Benjamin H. Conklin, Baltus Overacker, Abram 
S. Storm and Samuel Thurston were elected elders, and Eleazer Tay- 
lor and Henry Disbrow, deacons. Services were held in the barn dur- 
ing the most of that year, and the church edifice was completed in the 



TOWN OF LA GRANGE. 



367 



latter part of 1828, and dedicated on New Year's Day, 1829, the 
original cost of which was $2,169.38. In 1831, twelve acres of land 
were purchased from Baltus Velie, for $650, and a parsonage erected 
thereon. 

The church has been the recipient of several bequests including 
$500.00 from Mrs. Celia Taylor in 1842, and $200.00 from Adrian 
Montfort in 1871. 

The first pastor was the Rev. Milton Buttolph. He was succeeded 
in 1838 by the Rev. Sumner MandeviUe, who continued in his pastoral 
office twenty-three years. At present there is no settled pastor, ser- 
vices being conducted by a supply. 

The organization of the Methodist Episcopal Church of La Grange 
was eflFected July 14, 1849. Previous to this date meetings were held 
occasionally in different neighborhoods by "circuit riders," and the 
inhabitants of the Morey vicinity attended chiefly at Potter's Hollow, 
where the first church edifice was built, and from which it was removed 
to Morey 's in 1866, and called the "Trinity Church of La Grange." 
The minutes of the society contain no records of the early pastors, 
except for the year 1851, when Rev. Loren Clarke officiated. 

Union Chapel at Manchester Bridge was originally situated at 
TitusviUe, and moved to its present location in 1884. Services are 
conducted regularly by ministers of various denominations. 

At the outbreak of the Civil War several meetings were held in the 
town to stimulate interest in enlistments. Addresses were made by 
Albert Emans and Gilbert Dean. The town furnished seventy-seven 
men for the army, and thirty-five men enlisted in the navy. Most of 
the volunteers joined the 128th Regiment of Infantry, and did ser- 
vice in Louisiana. 

The following has been the succession of Supervisors since the or- 
ganization of the town : 



1821— '23 


John Wilkinson 


1834^'3S 


William Storm 


1823 


John Clapp 


1836— '37 


Treadwell Townsend 


1824— '25 


Jonathan Lockwood 


1838— '39 


E. T. Van Benschoten 


1826 


John Wilkinson 


1840— '42 


Gideon Van Valin 


1827 


John Clapp 


1843 


Tunis BrinckerhofF 


182&— '29 


Jonathan Lockwood 


1844— '45 


Joseph Wicks 


1830 


B. T. "Van Benschoten 


1846— '47 


Silas Sweet 


1831 


Jonathan Lockwood 


1848— '49 


Treadwell Townsend 


1832— '33 


E. T. Van Benschoten 


1850— '51 


Albert Emans 



368 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



18S2— '63 


John G. Pells 


1877— '78 


John W. Storm 


18S4 


James Howard 


1879— '80 


Stephen H. Moore 


1855— '56 


Jacob Velie 


1881 


John D. Howard 


1857— '58 


Abraham W. Storm 


1883 


Charles Cole 


1859 


James Howard 


^^83— '84 


Alexander W. Sleight 


1860 


Hemy Van Benschoten 


1885 


Henry R. Hoyt 


1861 


John S. Brown 


1886— '87 


Albert Emans 


1863— '63 


Albert Emans 


1888— '90 


William H. Austin 


1864— '67 


John W. Storm 


1891— '93 


Towsend Cole 


1868 


George Ayrault 


1894^'9S 


Alexander W. Sleight 


4869— '70 


Alexander W. Sleight 


1896— '97 


Joseph Van Wycfc 


1871— '72 


James A. Stringham 


1898— '03 


John E. Townsend 


1873— '74 


John D. Howard 


1904.-'06 


Alexander W. Sleight 


1875— '76 


Alexander W. Sleight 


1906— '09 


Clark Barmore 




JOHN E. TOWNSEND. 



TOWN OF MILAN. 369 



M' 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE TOWN OF MILAN. 

ILAN was formed from the town of Northeast, March 6, 1818. 
Stissing Mountain was a barrier to any communication east 
by highways, and it was reasonable and right that Milan 
should be set off from the parent town. The division seems to have 
been anticipated for two years or more, and hSghway work mean- 
while came to a comparative standstill. 

The town lies on the northern border of Dutchess County, and 
comprises the western portion of that tract of land originally em- 
braced in the Little Nine Partner' patent. It is bounded northerly 
by Columbia County; east by Pine Plains; south by Clinton and 
Stanford; and west by Red Hook and Rhinebeck. It covers an area 
of 22,452 acres, with an assessed valuation of real and personal prop- 
erty placed by the Board of Supervisors in 1907 at $369,324. La- 
fayetteviUe, Milan and Rock City are hamlets. 

In the year 1760, Johannes Rowe, a German by birth, located in 
this town north of what is now LafayetteviUe, on nine hundred and 
eleven acres of land which he purchased of Chancellor Robert R. 
Livingston. For this land he paid £750, on which, in 1766, he built 
a stone homestead. Much of the land is still in possession of the 
Rowe family. Johannes Rowe died in 1771, and was buried in the 
family ground across the road from the church which bears the family 
name. He had four sons — John, Sebastian, Philip and Mark, who 
settled around on the land of their father's purchase, and to each 
of whom he gave a farm. The sons built the Methodist Church there, 
and were generous supporters of local enterprises. Philip had a son, 
William P. Rowe, who served as a soldier in the war of 1812. 

Other early settlers at LafayetteviUe were Maltiah and Macy Bow- 
man (Bowerman) who came from Connecticut to Dover in 1780, and 
to Milan in 1790. Maltiah is the ancestor of the Milan families of 
that name. He had three sons — Joseph, Otis E., and Sands. Otis 



370 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

E. was a surveyor, and for twenty years a lawyer of some note. The 
Wilburs, Briggs, Whites, Pells, Hicks, Martins and Motts settled 
near the east part, while the Links, Holsopples, Rhyfenburghs, KiU- 
mans, Fultons, Stalls, Fellers, Hopemans, Philips, Teats and Fra- 
ziers took up land in the north part of the town. A description of the 
town and some statistics pubUshed in Spaffords Gazetteer of 1824!, 
six years ^fter the division from Northeast, says in part: 

"It is a good Township of land, though considerably uneven, but with rich arable 
sweUs, hills and ridges, and some flats. The soil is principally a warm productive 
loam. The inhabitants are principally farmers, and there are no villages, as yet, 
to demand the application of a, microscope, or tire a topographer's patience. Its 
streams are some small head branches of Wappingers creek, and a, short distance 
of Ancram creek, with a branch that puts into it, but the town is well supplied 
with miUs. There are plenty of roads. The centre, always meant, when I speak 
of distances in this way, is about 8 miles E. of the Hudson, at Red Hook. Popu- 
lation, 1797: 358 farmers, 77 mechanics, 3 traders, 49 free blacks, 18 slaves; tax- 
able property, $370,794; 11 schools; 15,392 acres of improved land; 1834 cattle, 
679 horses, 3618 sheep, 17,866 yards of cloth made in the household way; 7 grist 
mills, 4 saw mills; 1 JFuUing mill, 1 carding machine; 1 trip hammer, and one dis- 
tillery." 

The oldest miU in the town was built by Robert Thorne some two 
miles west of LafayetteviUe. This hamlet was on the post road from 
Northeast to Rhinebeck, and before the birth of railroads in northern 
Dutchess was a place of some business importance. Wilham Walter- 
mier conceived the idea of building a hotel here for the accommodation 
of the travelKng public. He conducted it successfully for ten years, 
when he disposed of the property to Jacob Knickerbacker. 

The hamlet of Milan, also on the old post route near the center of 
the town, was originally called "West Northeast." In the Dutchess 
Observer of September 2, 1818, this notice appears: "The name of 
the postoffice heretofore called 'West Northeast' in this county, of 
which Stephen Thorne, Esq., is Post Master, has been changed to 
Milan. Persons directing that office will notice alterations for the 
future." 

The first town meeting for Milan was held at the house of Stephen 
Thome on the first Tuesday in April, 1818. Apart from the election 
of the following officers, the proceedings of this meeting relate to the 
raising of money for the support of the poor, and for building and 
repairing bridges. 



TOWN OF MILAN. 371 

Supervisor, Stephen Thorne; Town Clerk, John F. Bartlett; Asses- 
sors, Jonas Wildey, John Fulton, Jr., John Stall; Commissioners of 
Highways, Everet N. Van Trogner, Daniel Morehouse, James Tur- 
ner; Commissioners of Schools, Henry Peck, John Thome, Jr., Jeptha 
Wilbur; Overseers of Poor, Jacob Shook, James I. Stewart; Inspec- 
tors of Common Schools, Joshua CoUeres, John Darling, James Adams, 
John R. Heermance, Peter Snyder; Constable and Collector, Philip 
Rider; Constable, Henry Witherwax; Fence Viewers, Tobias Green, 
in the southern neighborhood, Obediah Quimby in the northeast, and 
Jacob Bachman in the northwest. 

The poor was the principal matter in common to the two towns to 
be settled. Northeast took ten persons, Milan twelve, and three were 
left to be supported by both towns jointly in prdportion to the tax 
list. Northeast to pay at the ratio of seven to five. The next year a 
general settlement was made. 

In the summer of 1818 new bridges were built over a stream at 
Mount Ross and at Hoffman's Mill, which cost $195 and $185 re- 
spectively. 

In the War of the Rebellion the town of Milan not only responded 
generously to the call for volunteers, but kept a complete and interest- 
ing record of its proceedings, relating to enhstments, in a manner 
greatly above the average towns. 

At the first meeting to raise a war fund held at the house of Nelson 
Motts, November 29, 1862, it was 

"Resolved, That the sum of $3,265.66 be levied on the town, and the same be 
assumed as a debt upon the town and the taxable property therein. 

"Resolved, That the sum of $900.00 be levied on said town, to be paid to the 
volunteers who enlisted previous to the 36th of August, 1862, the said $900.00 to 
be paid to John Ferris, Alonzo CarroU and Philo Sherwood, to be kept by them 
for the benefit of the volunteers who enlisted previous as above stated." 

August 9, 1864, a special town meeting was held at the house of 
Ambrose L. Smith at which it was 

"Resolved, That the Supervisor of the town shall have the power to borrow 
money on the credit of the said town sufBcient to pay volunteers to fill the quota 
of the town under the call of the President for 500,000 men. 

"Resolved, That to every man who shall volunteer and be mustered into the 
United States service for the term of three years shall be paid as a town bounty 
the sum of $500.00, and to every man that is drafted under the present call shall 
be paid, as a bounty from this town, the sum of $400.00." 



372 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



A further resolution appointed Supervisor Lewis M. Smith and H. 
B. Sherwood to procure volunteers, for which they were allowed three 
dollars per day and expenses. 

The town voted a bounty of $600.00 for one-year men, $700.00 for 
two-years' men, and $800.00 for those who entered the service for 
three years, following the call of the President December 19, 1864, 
for 300,000 men. 

In the record of enhstments seventeen men served in the 128th 
Regiment; twelve in the 150th; seven in the 20th; five in the 91st; 
three in the 159th; three in the 4i7th; two each in the 32nd and 87th 
Regiments, with a scattering of seven others. 

The Methodist Society here was organized mainly through the 
efforts of the Rowes, who built the first house of worship on their farm 
near LafayetteviUe about the year 1800. This was succeeded in 1838 
by a substantial structure near the site of the old building, and was 
erected chiefly through the generosity of John Rowe, who also built 
the parsonage. His home had been the stopping place of all the 
itinerant Methodist preachers. 

The "Christian Denomination" originated from three of the more 
popular sects, the Methodists, Presbyterians and Baptists, about the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. Among the first to break this 
denominational ground in the town were Levi Hathaway and Daniel 
Call, who organized the First Christian Church in Milan in the autumn 
of 1820. Elder John L. Peavey of New England was called to the 
oversight of the church. His circuit of labor embraced this and three 
other congregations, located in Stanford, Union Vale and Beekman. 
His friends assisted him in purchasing a home near Rock City, and 
Elder Peavey divided his time between pastoral work and itinerant 
labors. He was not only a talented man, but a kind and successful 
pastor. Other early pastors of the Christian Church were Dr. Abner 
Jones, Rev. Joseph Marsh and Rev. John N. Spoor. 

The following has been the succession of Supervisors since the or- 
ganization of the town: 



1818— '30 


Stephen Thome 


1839 


Stephen Thorne 


1821— '33 


Jacob Shook 


1830 


Ephraim Fulton 


1824— '35 


Richard Thorne 


1831 


Stephen Thorne 


1886— '37 


Stephen Thorne 


1833— '34 


Ephraim Herrick, Jr. 


1838 


Henry Pulton 


1835— '36 


Leonard Rowe 



TOWN OF MILAN. 



373 



1837- 


-'38 


John Thome 


1871 


1839- 


-'40 


John P. Teats 


1873 


1841- 


-'42 


George White 


1873 


1843- 


-'44 


Stephen Thorne 


1874 


1845- 


-'46 


Clinton W. Conger 


1875 


1847 




Otis E. Bowman 


1876 


1848 




Leonard Rowe 


1877— '78 


1849 




John Ferris 


1879— '80 


1850— 'SI 


Rensselaer Case 


1881— '83 


1852- 


-'63 


Benjamin S. Thorne 


1883 


18S4— '55 


William Ferris 


1884— '85 


1856- 


-'57 


John Teats, Jr. 


1896— '87 


1858 




Rensselear Case 


1888— '89 


1859- 


-•60 


Alexander Best 


1890 


1861- 


-'63 


Herrick Thorne 


1891 


1863 




Peter Rissebbrack 


1893— '93 


1864 




Lewis M. Smith 


1894 


1865 




John W. Stickle 


1895 


1866 




Alexander Best 


1896— '97 


1867 




Herrick Thome 


1898— '01 


1868 




Heniy A. Fellers 


1903— '07 


1869- 


-'70 


Harmon B. Sherwood 


1908— '09 



Horatio Rowe 
Albert Bowman 
Nicholas PhUlips 
Ezra L. Morehouse 
William E. Shoemaker 
James Herrick 
Uriah Teator 
Horatio Rowe 
John W. Stickle 
Adelbert Husted 
James Herrick 
Adelbert Husted 
John W. Stickle 
Cyrus F. Morehouse 
Irving B. Crouse 
Cyrus ^. Morehouse 
Irving B. Crouse 
Uriah Teator 
Cyrus F. Morehouse 
George A. Boice 
Cyrus F. Morehouse 
Charles B. Simmons 



374 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 

By Philip H. Smith. 

THE Little Nine Partner Patent granted in 1706, the North- 
east Precinct, constituted in 1746, and Northeast Town, 
erected in 1788, and the present towns of Northeast, Pine 
Plains and Milan, taken collectively, comprised approximately the 
same territorial limits. Huntting says that this section of the county, 
originally embraced in a single town, was by creation separated into 
three geographical divisions before a surveyor was thought of or 
needed. The Winchell Mountain is a barrier between the Harlem 
Valley and Stissing Basin, while Stissing Mountain divides the latter 
from the valley of Milan. Thus are situate the three towns side by 
side, each occupying a natural basin, with mountain ridges for boun- 
daries. 

In 1818 Milan was set off by itself. Until 1823 letters addressed 
to Northeast were received at what is now Pine Plains. Some of the 
pioneers who settled in Salisbury, Conn., died in the State of New 
York on the same farms they cleared. A man from Westchester 
bought a farm in the town of Northeast. His brother some years 
later visited him on this identical farm in the town of Milan. 

These paradoxical statements are made possible by reason of the 
changes in the town and state boundaries. The Harlem Railroad, 
when first built, ran through a corner of Massachusetts. Now the 
trains pass a half mile west of the state line — Massachusetts having 
receded that distance — ^but this will be told of more fully elsewhere. 

In 1823, Northeast was shorn of Pine Plains, but had annexed a 
liberal slice of Amenia to its southern border at the same time, thus 
preserving its equilibrium among its sister towns by this compensa- 
tion in wealth and population. 

Before the town of Northeast was divided, all Northeast and Milan, 
as towns now stand, went to the Stissing House in Pine Plains to vote. 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 375 

The town records of the present Northeast previous to 1823 were 
kept in the Town Clerk's office at Pine Plains. Under these circum- 
stances it is not always easy to make historical statements clear to 
the reader. 

Northeast received its name from its geographical position in the 
county. A tongue of land approximately two miles in width, extends 
along the Connecticut border into the town of Ancram, Columbia 
County, about four miles beyond the remaining portion of the town. 
Northeast is bounded on the north by Columbia County, east by 
Litchfield County in Connecticut, south by Amenia and west by Stan- 
ford and Pine Plains. 

A lofty range of the Taconic Mountains extends along the eastern 
border, with the Winchell Mountain on the west. Rudd Pond and 
Indian Pond are the principal bodies of water, 'the latter lying for 
the most part, in the State of Connecticut. The "Ten Mile" River, 
some eighteen miles in length, runs south through the eastern part 
of the town, through Amenia and into Dover, where it forms a con- 
fluence with the Housatonic. The Shekomeko runs in a northerly di- 
rection through its western portion. 

The first town meeting in Northeast as at present constituted was 
held at Northeast Center. The following is the earliest record: Pur- 
suant to an act of the Legislature of the State of New York, passed 
March 9,6, 182S, for dividing the towns of Amenia and Northeast in 
the County of Dutchess, and erecting a new town therefrom by the 
name of Northeast, and directing the first town meeting to be held at 
the house of Alexander Neeley in said town. 

A town meeting was held at the house of the aforesaid Alexander 
Neeley, on the first day of April, 1823; the above act was read; Enos 
Hopkins was chosen Moderator, Charles Perry and Alanson Pulver, 
Clerks. Among the regulations, or town laws, passed for the town 
of Northeast at this meeting are these: Voted, that a fence, to be 
considered lawful, shall be four feet and a half high ; that the materi- 
als shall be laid no more than five inches apart for two feet above the 
ground. Voted, that no hogs shall be suffered to roam in the high- 
ways after three months old without a ring in their nose. Voted, that 
proper persons shall be employed to run the line between the towns of 
Amenia and Northeast. 

At the annual town meeting of Northeast on the 6th of April, 1824, 



376 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

John H. Wilson, Alexander Colver and Eli Mills were elected Com- 
missioners of Common Schools; Charles Perry, Peter Mills and John 
Buttolph, Inspectors of Schools. Each town, by this system, was the 
supreme judge of the requisite qualities of the teachers, and the sole 
arbiter of the curriculum of the schools. 

At the annual town meeting in 1824, Voted, that the town raise 
the sum of six hundred dollars for the support of the poor. In con- 
nection with the preceding, the following entry explains itself: "We, 
Joel Benton, Supervisor and Solomon Cook and Joel Brown, Over- 
seers of the Poor of the town of Amenia, and Philo M. Winchell, Super- 
visor, and Eben Wheeler and Enos Howkins, Overseers of the town 
of Northeast, being convened for the purpose of dividing the poor 
and money of the town of Amenia." 

It will be recollected that Northeast had just annexed a part of 
Amenia, and the territory annexed carried with it its quota of the 
poor of the entire town. Those early legislatures could not agree 
as to what would be a proper division, and public feeling was aroused 
to such an extent that the matter was taken to the Court of General 
Sessions at Poughkeepsie for adjudication. By direction of the court 
eighteen persons (named in the record) were by these town officials, 
assigned to Amenia and twelve others allotted to Northeast. 

At this time each town was required to take care of its own poor, 
and the officials sometimes were not proof against the temptation to 
be rid of objectionable citizens at the expense of other towns. The 
question was a continual source of bitter jealousy and wrangling until 
the state passed a law which mitigated the condition. The follow- 
ing is among the entries: "We have set to the town of Pine Plains 
(naming fifteen persons), and set to the town of Northeast (naming 
six persons), and there are still six persons that are not divided, and 
are a subject of future arrangement." 

There were other sources of friction, owing to the changes in town 
lines, such as the division of school and highway moneys, and the 
settlement of quit rents, the latter having reluctantly been permitted 
to survive until about 1823, when this vestige of English manorial 
customs was banished from American soil. 

The earliest settlements in Northeast were made in the Oblong tract. 
One jeason for this was that better titles could be given to the prop- 
erty, which were guaranteed by the state; and, being contiguous to 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 377 

New England where most of the early settlers came from, these prob- 
ably located at the first desirable place they came to; the iron mines 
were another and perhaps stronger attraction. 

Spencers Corners or "Clearing" was among the oldest settled parts 
of the Oblong. The history of the Baptist Church built here in 1777, 
during the Revolutionary War, is given on other pages. Their church 
edifice in Northeast stood near the present cemetery, opposite the 
brick house now occupied by Walter Wilcoxson. The well used by 
those early Baptist worshipers still supplies the sweetest and purest 
water for miles, and is located in the Wilcoxson yard. This well was 
originally partially enclosed in a "well house," and was provided with 
seats around the sides. The farmers came from distance, on Sunday 
mornings, with their families in wagons drawn hy oxen, remaining all 
day and listening to the sermons, and adjourning to the "well house" 
for their noonday repast. 

North of Spencers Corners a short mile, stands the old-fashioned, 
rambhng, small-windowed, many-roomed dwelling house of the Dakins. 
Orville Dakin, the ancestor of the Dakins, and owner of the mine and 
furnace adjacent, built this house when the country was a wilderness. 
There was a line of ore beds from here to Boston Corners and beyond, 
of which the Dakins were either sole or part owners. To the west of 
this line, at Irondale, are the buildings of the Millerton Iron Com- 
pany, now sadly fallen to ruin. This was once a busy hamlet, having 
a mill employing over one hundred hands, with grist mill, store and 
postofllce. Now nothing but a school and a few families remain. 

In fact the digging and smelting of ore constituted the leading in- 
dustry of this part of Northeast for the better part of a century. 
During this early period other lines of business occupied their neigh- 
bors over the mountain, in the southwest part of the town. The fol- 
lowing advertisement shows the nature of the business referred to, and 
tells of its decadence: 

"MILL FOR SALE.— The subscriber offers for sale his mills, situate in Amenia 
(now Northeast), four miles north from the Federal Store. The neighborhood 
consists of wealthy farmers, and the surrounding country very productive of wheat. 
The machinery of the grist mill and fulling mills are in tolerable good order, and 
the stream which supplies them very durable. There is adjoining fourteen acres 
of good wheat land, and a comfortable dwelling house, garden, &. The terms of 
payment will be made easy. A good title and possession given inmiediately by 
applying to the subscriber living near the premises. 

May 4, 1807. Matthias Row." 



378 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

At one time the "Federal Store" referred to was a busy place. Some 
years previously a stock company had made this point a nucleus for 
general exchange and merchandising in this vicinity, their shipping 
point being Poughkeepsie. This Association was called the Federal 
Company, and the store the Federal Store. There was also a grist 
mill, a carding machine and fulling mill; also a factory for the manu- 
facture of farm implements. The store ceased as a place of business 
before 1850. 

The invasion of the Harlem Railroad into the vicinity about 1852 
wrought a great change in the town. Carding machines, fulling miUs 
and family looms are things of the past, and the shipping of milk to 
the New York markets has become the great industry of Northeast. 

In the early years of our local history the system of carrying the 
mails was very inadequate and unsatisfactory. Oftentimes letters 
would be trusted to a friend, who happened to be traveling to the 
vicinity of the letter's destination. Important messages usually were 
sent by special carrier. In old documents the person who is deputed 
to be the bearer of the communication is frequently mentioned by 
name. Some fifteen or twenty years after the close of the Revolution, 
private parties undertook the carrying of letters and papers on their 
own account, the sender or receiver of the letter paying the carrier 
therefor. In 1796 Alexander Neeley, of Northeast Center, started a 
post route in the upper part of the county, and it is said that for 
several years after the war of 1812 with England, he carried the gov- 
ernment mails from Pine Plains to Sharon. At first the postman 
took for his own all the income of the business; later, after the route 
was established, the government assumed its control, reimbursing the 
carrier for his interest. Spencers Corners was early a postofEce; an- 
other was Northeast Center, where, in 1823, Alexander Neeley was 
both postmaster and merchant. 

At the outbreak of the Revolution there was a great demand for 
lead for bullets. An Indian used to bring quantities of lead to Ezra 
Clark at about this time; he said he got it on Indian Mountain, but 
would not teU where. No one was ever able to find the place. The 
requirements of the new governments also called for sulphur and flint. 
Near the present hamlet of Shekomeko, in the southwestern part of 
th»town, one John McDonald, a miner from Scotland, under instruc- 
tions from the Provincial Congress, began to excavate where a mine 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 379 

had been worked some quarter of a century before by some Hollanders. 
McDonald was directed to open the pits or shafts which Van Hook 
and Tiebout formerly worked, doing the labor with only four assist- 
ants, and await further orders from Congress, at whose expense the 
mining was to be done. In the first pit a small quantity of lead was 
discovered in three places, but not in a continued vein. The second 
pit contained lead in several places, but not in an unbroken vein. The 
bottom was void of the appearance of ore. He next cleared a pit 
about fifty feet in depth. These pits were on the hill or knoll near the 
present railroad depot. 

Ezra Thompson, who then resided at the "Federal Square," was 
superintendent, and furnished the necessary tools to McDonald, and 
also advanced money to prospect the mining ojperations. Not meet- 
ing with ore deposits in paying quantities they abandoned working in 
pits and commenced at the northeast end of the 'hill near the highway 
bridge, where they dug a trench "eighteen foot length and about three 
foot deep." Making further excavations, during which they "opened 
thirty feet in length and in some place digged three feet deep, and in 
other places have sunk six foot, in there discovered a vein about two 
or three inches in breadth, and raised about fifteen hundred weight of 
ore." 

October 16, 1776, McDonald entered into a further contract with 
the Committee of the Provincial Congress to sink the lead mine which 
he had lately opened, "twelve feet in depth from its present state, and 
extend the same thirty feet in length in such direction as he shall think 
best, and deliver the ore to the order of this convention." He was to 
furnish everything, and was to receive ten pounds for every six feet 
in depth, six feet in length and three feet in breadth, which he should 
sink in said mine. At the final settlement it was found that McDonald 
had dug six hundred and ninety cubic feet, which at the rate of ten 
pounds for every one hundred and eight, amounted to sixty-three 
pounds, seven shillings and nine pence, which the Provincial Congress 
paid, and discontinued the mining operations. 

That the McDonalds were a wealthy and important family is evi- 
dent, as there is a spacious burial ground north of Shekomeko, oppo- 
site the schoolhouse, where many of that name are buried. The 
grounds have been walled in at considerable expense, the stones com- 
posing the fence having been hauled from the vicinity of The Square. 



380 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The McDonalds were slave owners, but would not consent to their 
slaves being buried inside the enclosure where there was ample room, 
but were content to have them placed in graves contiguous to the 
tombs of their masters, so long as they were outside the walls. 

For a period of nearly three-fourths of a century the lead mines at 
Shekomeko were unmolested, but in 1853 attention was again drawn 
in their direction. On the 29th of August of that year W. H. Hughes 
of New York secured a mineral lease of the mine hill, and mining was 
again resumed. The lease was given by Ward W. Bryan (grand- 
father of the present owner of the farm), and was to remain in force 
for a period of twelve years with the privilege of renewal. It read 
in part: "If no mineral or fossil substance be mined within the period 
of eight months from the present, or any time afterwards in eight 
months, then these presents and everything contained therein shall 
cease and be free." 

Hughes for a time worked the mines under this lease and then sud- 
denly left. The reason of his action was subsequently explained. Hughes 
had been operating as agent for a company, and he struck a vein 
of ore of uncommon richness. The lease terminated by its own con- 
ditions, for eight months elapsed during which no mineral was raised. 
At the expiration of that time Hughes put in an appearance and made 
application for a new lease from Bryan in his own name; but he died 
suddenly before the business was consummated. The rich "find" was 
not disclosed until after his death, and its location, if such there was, 
is not now known. Experts claim that indications point to a rich 
vein of ore somewhere in this range of mountains. 

In 1862 the Bryan farm was again leased, this time to Gust. A. 
Sacchi, who represented a mining company in New York with a capi- 
tal of $600,000. Heretofore the work had been done by hand labor, 
drainage of the pits being affected by drifts or tunnels from the loca- 
tion. But this new company did the work of pumping and hoisting 
by steam. The company bought a farm nearby, on which was wood 
for fuel and a building for a boarding house. At one place a shaft 
was sunk seventy-five feet with lateral tunnels at the bottom. After 
some $300,000 of stock was sold work was stopped and the farm re- 
verted back to the owners, Calvin C. and Ehhu W. Bryan, father and 
uncl9 of the present owner. 

Ezra Bryan emigrated to Shekomeko from the Connecticut or New 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 381 

Haven Colony. The family came from the same branch as did Hon. 
William Jennings Bryan, to whom the early Shekomeko emigrants 
bear a family resemblance, it is said. The Bryans for three-fourths 
of a century furnished Dutchess County and adjacent territory with 
fanning mills ; a part of their factory is still in existence, and is now 
a wagon house in the hamlet of Shekomeko. 

The history of the Baptist Church of Northeast dates back to the 
first day of May, 1773, when the first covenant meeting in this Pre- 
cinct was held at Brother Dakin's house near Spencers Clearing; and 
in 1777, on land in the vicinity of the old graveyard at Spencers Cor- 
ners, their house of worship was erected. 

A dissension having arisen in relation to some matters of church 
government, a council was called, composed of Elders Waldo, Drake, 
Gano, Moss, Kellogg and Ferris, who advised the release of the dis- 
senting members. Then successively follow the names of Eastman, 
Hopkins, Allerton, Winchell, Buttolph, Thompson, La Grange and 
others, beloved and consecrated elders of the church, serving well and 
faithfully their pastorships while the church grew and prospered. 

In 1829 a new and commodious house of worship was dedicated. 
It was of brick, and cost about $5,000, of which James Winchell con- 
tributed $1,700. Rev. Thomas Winter preached the dedicatory ser- 
mon. Dr. Rufus Babcock assisting at the services. 

About the close of the Civil War the society voted to sell the old 
brick church at Spencers Corners, purchase a new site in the growing 
village of Millerton, and build another house of worship nearer the 
business center of the town. In pursuance of this decision, on the 
4th of November, 1867, the church met to lay the cornerstone of its 
new house of worship. 

The edifice is situated at the head of the main village street, and 
the church is prospering under the pastoral care of Rev. George C. 
Kiernan. 

Congregational Chuech, Northeast. The first meeting to con- 
sider the question of building a Congregational House of Worship in 
the town of Northeast was held at the house of Nicholas Holbrook at 
Northeast Center, October 17, 1827. A resolution was adopted in 
favor of building such a house, and a committee of five was appointed 
to solicit subscriptions. December 2nd, a building committee was 
named to proceed with the work. During the summer of 1828 the 



382 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

house was built, and on December 2Srd was formally delivered to the 
society by the committee. The cost of the building in money, aside 
from the labor contributed and the site given by Mr. Holbrook, was 
$2100. 

January 15th, 1829, the house was dedicated and the church con- 
stituted. There were nine members, as follows: Ehhu Payne, Ezra L. 
Barrett, Rhode Barrett, Philip J. Jenks, Julia Ann Jenks, John I. 
Douglass, Elizabeth Clark, Mary Hotchkiss and Myra Coleman. The 
society was incorporated in June, 1829. 

The first pastor to minister to this church was Rev. Thomas Fletcher, 
who was installed January 14, 1830. At the end of his pastorate 
three years later, the church had on its roUs about one hundred mem- 
bers. 

In 1873 this church was affiliated vdth the Presbyterian denomina- 
tion. 

In 1866, $4000 was subscribed to tear down the church building at 
Northeast Center and rebuild at Millerton. The second house of wor- 
ship was dedicated February 17th, 1867. The entire cost of this 
building was $10,473.79. 

November 8, 1904, a meeting was held to consider the remodelling 
of the church or the building of a new one. After repeated sessions, 
the trustees in September, 1905, voted to build a new church, award- 
ing the contract to the local builders, Beers and TrafFord, for the 
sum of $7,800, not including the leaded glass windows, seats, light, 
heat, or any of the furniture. An oflFer of $500 for the old church 
building was accepted, and a subscription list of about $7,200 re- 
ported. 

The cornerstone of this, the third house of worship of the society, 
was laid on Thanksgiving Day, November 30, 1905, the pastors of 
sister churches. Revs. H. Y. Murklaiid and E. F. Charles, participat- 
ing in the service. 

Methodist Episcopal Church or Northeast. The Methodists 
were the first to hold religious services here after the departure of the 
Moravian Missionaries, but records of the church are very meagre. 
The first record of which anything is known bears date of 1842, in 
part as follows: "The subscribers, being appointed judges by a 
majority of the members present do find that Daniel Lee, John I. 
Hull and Nathaniel Gridley were elected by a plurality of voice to 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 383 

serve as trustees of the Northeast Center Methodist Church in the town 
of Northeast, Dutchess County, N. Y., in witness whereof we have 
hereunto set our hands and sedls this seventh day of February, 1842. 

Daniel Lee, Jr., (L, S.) 
LoBEN^o Gilbert, (L. S.) 

The second quarterly meeting for the conference year 1847, for 
Salisbury and Northeast, was held at the church at Northeast Center, 
February 23. Presiding Elder, Denton Keeler; Preacher in Charge, 
D. C. Benjamin; Clerk, J. S. Caulkins. At a quarterly meeting in 
1850, Rev. Phineas Rice, Presiding Elder, a committee having been 
appointed to estimate the table expenses of the preacher for North- 
east, Rev. J. L. Dickerson, they allowed him $100 and his fuel. At 
a quarterly conference held at the M. E. Churcn, Northeast Center, 
Rev. J. Z. Nichols, Presiding Elder, the subject of a district associa- 
tion was proposed. In 1855 Rev. P. C. Oakley is mentioned as Pre- 
siding Elder, and Rev. A. H. Ferguson as Preacher in Charge. 

An important change in the society was made about this time. 
At a meeting of the male members of the Methodist Church and society 
of Northeast, held at the hall at Millerton, that being the regular 
place of worship of said society, March 2nd, 1857, for the purpose of 
electing sworn trustees for the incorporating of said society, the 
meeting was called to order by Rev. W. G. Browning, when the follow- 
ing trustees were elected: Nathaniel Gridley, Alexander W. Trow- 
bridge, Nicholas D. Eggleston, John S. Caulkins, Horace S. Kelsey, 
Douglass Clark, Jr., and Perry Vroman. A certifiaate was duly 
signed and recorded in the County Clerk's office, and thus a second 
Methodist Society was constituted and located at the growing village 
of Millerton. The preacher in charge at the later place also held ser- 
vices at the Center for a time, but these were finally discontinued. 

Under date of April 2nd, 1859, is found the following : "The trus- 
tees of Millerton beg leave to report that they have purchased a lot 
on which they have erected a church edifice which costs, with the said 
lot, the sum of $4,500. That they have paid $3,700. That there is 
now in subscriptions $450." 

March 23rd, 1861, conference was held at Northeast Center, and 
again in July of that year at Millerton, indicating that both com- 
munities were enjoying church privileges. 

The society is now meeting in a commodious house of worship, of 



384 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

an attractive and modem design, and are enjoying the ministrations 
of Rev. Angelo Ostrander. 

The village of Millerton^ was incorporated June 30, 1875, with N. 
C. Beach, President; O. Wakeman, H. B. Eggleston, W. B. Grey, 
Trustees; J. M. Benedict, Treasurer. 

At a public meeting held at the Nickel Plate Rink, January 19, 
1891, it was voted to raise money to procure a water supply for the 
village of Millerton, authorizing the bonding of the village for a sum 
not to exceed $15,000. Previous to this the Village Board had met 
and organized a Board of Water Commissioners as follows: E. H. 
Thompson, President; J. W. Pulver, P. N. Paine and Nicholas Best, 
Trustees. In the following year the village was bonded for $18,000, 
and a fire department was organized, with spacious quarters and 
adequate apparatus. 

The Millerton Telegraph, a weekly publication, was started Novem- 
ber 1, 1876, by Cooley James, who sold it to Van Scriver and Deacon 
after conducting it about three months ; subsequently Colvin Card pur- 
chased Van Scriver's interest, later assuming the sole proprietorship, 
continuing its publication until his death. Its present proprietor is 
W. L. Loupe. 

The Millerton National Bank was organized in 1882. G. S. Frink 
was its first President, and W. M. Dales its first Cashier. The pres- 
ent bank building was erected in 1903, and is equipped with modern 
vault and safe deposit boxes. The Bank has a capital stock of $50,- 
000, with individual deposits according to the statement of February 
14, 1908, of over $299,000. Its present officers are Frank A. Hotch- 
kiss, President, and W. C. Denny, Vice President and Cashier. 

There is a natural phenomenon connected with the lofty range of 
the Taconic Mountains, forming the border line between Northeast 
and the State of Connecticut, that has aroused the wonder of scientific 
minds, and the inhabitants who spend their lives in the valley at its 
foot are by this strange happening often put to their wits end. 

High up among the crags, says Landon, is the hatching place of 
great wiads. With this high mountain range lying along the east 
side for miles, the valley would seem to be the best protected region 



1., This Tillage derived Its name from Sidney G. Miller, one of the contractors and 
builders of the extension of the New Tork & Harlem Railroad from Dover Plains to 
Chatham. 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 385 

from easterly gales that could be imagined. There are more east 
winds of typhoon power right here than in any other place this side 
the Rocky Mountains — and that is what puzzles those who are ever 
trying to explain the weather. 

Hours before the gales reach the vaUey their roar is heard on the 
mountain top, not unlike the moan of the ocean heard at a distance. 
Gradually they work down the mountain side, their voice becoming 
more menacing as they gather momentum in their descent; then 
the beholder notes the forest trees bending and swaying before an 
unseen force upon the mountain side, while at its foot the leaves hang 
motionless. And when the winds at the moment of their greatest fury 
reach the mountain's base, and rush howling and screaming across 
the narrow valley, it behooves man and beast Jo seek shelter. In- 
stances have been recorded of passenger trains, with their load of 
human freight, being lifted from the rails. 

When the survey of the Massachusetts State boundaries were made, 
a comer of that commonwealth extended over the Taconic range to 
the west. This corner comprised about four hundred acres of arable 
land, and some fifteen hundred of mountain land, and was completely 
isolated from the rest of the state by a practicably impassable moun- 
tain. By traversing a roundabout way some twelve to fifteen miles in 
another state one might get from this fragment of nowhere into Mas- 
sachusetts. 

Here for years lived and prospered a little community, a virtual 
Republic. They paid no taxes to the State, went to no polling place 
to vote, but governed themselves, supported a school, kept up religious 
services, and had they been left to themselves, there had been no blot 
on their escutcheon. 

One day an enterprising Yankee came and opened an inn. Then 
a stranger came and took lodgings, and soon went away. Soon 
others appeared, were entertained, and presently departed, without 
making their business known. Then the people of Boston Corners be- 
gan to open their eyes. These transient guests were refugees from 
the constables of the three commonwealths, whose territory joined 
near this point, who were wanted for chicken stealing, or some other 
local offenses. 

Also the eyes of law-breakers from the outside world were drawn 
to this haven of criminals. In 1811 John Armstrong fought a duel 



386 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

here, where he was immune from the enforcement of the laws of either 
state against dueling. While a Massachusetts constable might have 
made an arrest, the moment he stepped into New York or Connecticut 
with his prisoner he would lose jurisdiction, and there was neither 
judge nor jail at Boston Comers, 

For half a century things went on, when an event occurred which 
led to concerted action being taken by New York, Massachusetts, and 
the National Government. 

October 12, 1852, a heavily loaded train from New York City dis- 
charged its load at Boston Comers, a station on the newly completed 
railroad. Other train loads from Albany and Troy were dumped off 
at the same point, as rough a set of rowdies as ever set foot on any 
soil. People from the country came in wagons, until the crowd was 
immense. 

Two men seemed to be the center of attraction. One was forty-one 
years of age, and looked old enough to be the father of the other who 
was twenty-two, but was three inches taller, looking hke a giant be- 
side the older man. The latter was Yankee Sullivan, long the cham- 
pion prize-fighter of America, while the giant was John Morrisey, 
just then on the threshold of his world-wide notoriety. Morrisey's 
seconds were Tom O'Donnell and "Awful" Gardiner ; Sullivan was es- 
corted by Billy Wilson and another friend. The purse was $2,000 a 
side. 

Forcibly pre-empting the first convenient dwelling house, the prin- 
cipals were quickly dressed for the battle. In an adjacent field was 
an abandoned brickyard. In a large level plot, that had been care- 
fully prepared for the drying of the bricks years before, the grounds 
were selected, and the ropes of the arena drawn, while hundreds of 
spectators looked on from points of vantage. 

Thirty-seven bloody rounds were fought with bare fists. Sullivan 
seemed to have the better of his opponent all through the fight until 
the last round, when he was thrown violently against the ropes, and 
failed to recover before time was called. Morrisey, who had never 
left his place, was proclaimed victor. But the point of interest for 
the people of Northeast, and one reason for the introduction of the 
event in this chapter, is the raid of the hungry hordes on Millerton 
after the battle was over. This was then a mere hamlet, and was 
tight-shut when the invasion came. But locks were nothing; the pri- 



TOWN OF NORTHEAST. 



387 



vacy of pantries was not respected; nothing was respected that came 
between the invaders and anything that could be eaten. Hogs were 
killed and roasted in the highway. MiUerton never forgot that prize 
fight at Boston Corners. 

This event broke the independent spirit of the Boston Corners "Re- 
public." The people clamored to be annexed to some civil authority 
able to cope with the powers of evil, to the end that never should such 
scenes be repeated. Massachusetts, in May of the year following the 
fight, ceded the triangle to New York; the concession was accepted 
by New York July 21, 1853; the transfer was confirmed by Act of 
Congress January 3d, 1855. The soil of Boston Corners has been 
respected ever since. 

The following has been the succession of Supervisors from 1775 to 
1908: * 



177S— '76 


Israel Thompson 


1839- 


-'31 


Douglass Clark 


1777— '78 


Hugh Rea 


1833 




Alanson Colver 


1779— '81 


Lewis Graham 


1833— '34 


Eli Mills 


1782 


Hugh Rea 


1835— '36 


David Seldon 


1783 


Uriah Lawrence 


1837- 


-'38 


John H. Conklin 


1784 


Lewis Graham 


1839- 


-'40 


Moses Clark 


1785— '87 


John White 


1841- 


-'42 


Eben Wheeler 


1788— '93 


Josiah Holly 


1843 




Jeduthan Roe 


1793 


Ebenezer Dibblee 


1844— '45 


Hiram Wheeler 


1794— '96 


Josiah HoUy 


1846 




Abraham Bockee 


1797— '98 


Ebenezer Dibblee 


1847 




James Hammond 


1799— '00 


Peter Husted 


1848 




Abner Brown 


1801 


(No record of this year.) 


1849 




George Douglass 


1802— '03 


Isaac Sherwood 


1850 




Geo. R. Winchell 


1804— '05 


Martin B. Winchell 


1851 




Gerard Pitcher 


1806 


Jonathan Deuel 


1852 




John Winchell 


1807 


Benj. R. Bostwick 


1853 




Edgar Clark 


1808— '09 


Jonathan Deuel 


1854 




Jeremiah W. Paine 


1810— '11 


Enos Hopkins 


1855 




Piatt A. Paine 


1812— '13 


Isaac Sherwood 


1856 




Hiram Rogers 


1814— 'IS 


Uri Judd 


1857 




Edw'd W. Simmons 


1816— '17 


Martin Lawrence 


1858 




John F. Wheeler 


1818— '19 


Fyler Dibblee 


1859 




Phoenix Bodiee 


1820— '21 


Philo M. Winchell 


1860 




Greorge Clark 


1823 


Israel Harri? 


1861 




David Bryan 


1833 


Philo M. WincheU 


1862 




John Campbell 


1834— '35 


David Seldon 


1863 




George F. More 


1836 


Amos Bryan 


1864— '67 


Edw'd W. Simmons 


1827— '28 


Abraham Booker 


1868 




William H. Barton 



388 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1869 


WilUam L. Pratt 


1885 


Wm. Angevine 


1870 


James Collins 


1886— '87 


John Scutt 


1871— '72 


James Collins 


1888— '89 


John W. Pulver 


1873 


George Dakin 


1890 


John Scutt 


1874— '75 


Daniel McElwell 


1891 


Hoffman Sweet 


1876 


Michael Rowe 


1892 


Edward H. Thompson 


1877 


Jeremiah W. Paine 


1893 


Daniel B. McElwee 


1878 


Hiram Rogers 


1894— '97 


Charles A. Cline 


1879 


James M. Winchell 


1898— '99 


Frank A. Hotchkiss 


1880 


George E. Crane 


1900— '01 


Charles A. Cline 


1881— '83 


Wheeler Rowe 


1903— '07 


Lorin J. Eggleston 


1883— '84 


George WiUiams 


1908— '09 


Gideon M. Slee 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 389 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

THE TOWN OF PAWLING. 

By Philip H. Smith. 

THE Town of Pawling is universally described as the southeast 
corner town in Dutchess County. A range of high hiUs, which 
range is locally known as Quaker Hill, ^tends along the east 
border. Another range known as the West Mountain occupies the 
west part. A broad and fertile valley runs through the central por- 
tion. Swamp and Croton Rivers take their rise here, the former 
flowing north into the Housatonic, the latter south into the Hudson. 

Pawling is bounded north by Dover, east by the town of Sherman 
in Connecticut, south by Patterson in Putnam County, and west by 
the town of Beekman. Pawling Precinct was taken from Beekman 
Precinct by an act passed December 31, 1768, and erected into a 
town in 1788, when the State government was subjected to general 
revision in many of its details ; the town limits were then greater than 
at present, as Dover was taken off and made into a separate town- 
ship in 1807. The ancient Pawling town records, which covered a 
period previous to the division of the town, were destroyed by the 
fire of 1869. 

There are four considerable natural bodies of water in the town, 
the dimensions of most of them having been considerably increased 
by artificial means. These are known as Whaley Pond, Lake Nor- 
ton, Green Mountain Lake and Lake Hammersley. All these lakes 
aff'ord excellent fishing, having been stocked from various hatcheries, 
and provided with boats and fishing appliances. In summer the 
islands and shores of these picturesque inland water basins are dotted 
with the tents of city campers. 

Many authorities have described the limits of the town as being 
included in the patent granted to Henry Beekman June 26, 1703. 
This is only partly true, as the south line of the Beekman Patent was 



390 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

approximately that which was afterwards known as the Willis Line, 
or the line advocated by some for the division line when Putnam 
County was taken off in 1812. This hne was run through what is 
now the incorporated limits of the village of Pawling, and is thus 
described: "Beginning on the Oblong line at a large heap of stones 
set up which bears north 25 degrees, west 38 links from a large rock 
on which are cut the letters H. B., B. B,-, and P. P. ; a new house 
built by Adam Chase bears the same course that the rock does. From 
thence due west, the hne runs about 12 feet south of WiUiam Hunt's 
spring, where Col. Henry Beekman made the letters H. B. on the 
rock out of which) the water of the spring runs. Said hne also crosses 
a pretty large pond in the mountains a Httle south of the middle. On 
the east shore a monument is set up about two chains south of one 
Baker's house situated in a hoUow." Now as to the location of these 
monuments. The large rock, with the letters cut in, may be seen in 
the meadow north of Martin Leach's residence as described in the 
colonial records, with the exception that the initials "B. R." have 
been torn away by a blast set off by some workmen who did not 
know the rock was a monument of the ancient patent line divisions. 
The house built by Adam Chase referred to was the one destroyed by 
fire one winter's night many years ago, and occupied the present site 
of Martin Leach's dwelling. William Hunt owned land on which 
PawHng village stands, and "Hunt's Spring" is the one in rear of 
H. S. Wanger's residence. 

The large pond in the mountains is Whaley Pond. This line can 
be traced by the remains of an old wall leading over the south end 
of Purgatory, and also by the stone and rail fence extending along 
the southern declivity of Mount Tom. 

This rock at Martin Leach's was the southeast corner of the Beek- 
man Patent, and this monument until 1731 was in the boundary line 
between Connecticut and New York, at which time the Oblong strip 
was taken off, and the New York State hne established nearly two 
miles further to the eastward. 

The territory comprised in Putnam County was by some styled 
Philipsburgh Manor from the fact that its proprietor, Adolph Philipse, 
was granted certain manorial rights and privileges. It bounds the 
town'bf Pawling on the south. 

Thus we have a wedge-shaped piece of land extending from the 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 391 

Beekman Patent line to the Patterson line, the head of the wedge, 
nearly three miles across, abutting against the Connecticut line, with 
the point marked by a clump of bushes on the Hudson, known as 
"Plum Point." This wedge comprised a mere bagatell of territory, 
say fifteen thousand acres, more or less, that had been overlooked in 
the allottment of lands to the original patentees. Starting from the 
same point on the Hudson, the lines were run, without chain or com- 
pass, "four hours' going into the woods," diverging more and more 
the further the lines were extended. 

The Beekman and the Philipse heirs both laid claim to territory 
within this "gore," which lay outside their lines; and its division was 
the subject of bitter controversy for many years. The dispute was 
finally settled in 1771, and two ancient deeds of land in this town 
bear that date, given by the Philipse heirs, one to Reed Ferris and 
one to William Prendergast — the Dodge- Arnold farm and the Arnold 
homestead. 

Fredericksburgh was at the time of the Revolution a village, after- 
wards called "The City," located near the present residence of Dr. 
Banks in Patterson. The appellation of this village gave the name 
to a large extent of territory, the residence of John Kane being within 
it. Among the old documents. Pawling is referred to by the name of 
Kingston. 

The road leading south from Pawling village, now called the State 
Road, was originally laid out in 1745, and is described as running 
from Beekman's Patent into Westchester. The road running diag- 
onally up the hill toward Mr. Conger's was first built as a turnpike, 
and known as the Philipstown turnpike. The road from Patterson 
through Reynoldsville was called the FIshkill turnpike. 

Spafford's Gazateer, published in 1813, gave the number of looms 
for the weaving of cloth in private families in Pawling as one hundred 
and two. In fact, at a much later date, nearly everything used by 
the farmers was made in town. Abram Thomas made the nails that 
went into the construction of the Hicksite Meeting House. Hiram 
Sherman made coffins and wagons. John Hays was a tailor. Isaac 
Ingersoll carried on the tannery business. Jeptha Sabin was a sad- 
dler and harness maker; and that the most essential needs of the 
ladies should have due recognition, Peter Field, the silversmith, opened 
a shop. John TofFey and Joseph Seely were hatters, while Amos 



392 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Osborn made jugs. Stephen Briggs was a shoemaker, and there is 
the tradition of a forge on the glen stream on Quaker Hill. Miss 
Alicia H. Taber, in "Glimpses of the Past," from which some of the 
foregoing are quotations, says revolving hay rakes were first made 
in this town. There were two carding machines, one at Cole's MiUs 
and the other at the Cyrus Tweedy mill. The Lattimer Iron Foun- 
dry was built later, but was washed away in a freshet. It stood on 
the stream north of Cole's Mill. 

The population of the town in 1810 was 1756. Outside of the vil- 
lages it must have been more thickly inhabited than now. About 
20,000 yards of cloth were produced from the family looms in the 
town that year. Patterson had a fuUing mill, two carding machines 
and a distillery of grain and fruit spirits. 

The fattening of cattle, says Miss Taber, constituted the chief 
business of most farmers in this vicinity. Live cattle were the only 
produce that did not have to go to the river to reach the market. 
The road through Pawling was the main thoroughfare from points 
as far north as Vermont. Monday was the market day in the city, 
and all started in time to reach their destination by Saturday. The 
cattle were started from Pawling on Thursday, taking the better part 
of three days to reach the city. It used to be remarked by cattle 
dealers that they could teU what the Monday's market would be by 
taking note of the droves that passed through Pawling on Thursday. 
The cattle were purchased by drovers, and by them disposed of in the 
city. The drover was something of a personage in those days. Inns 
or taverns were kept, located every few miles along the route, for the 
cattle required feeding every few miles. There was John Preston's, 
near Dover plains ; the Morehouse tavern at South Dover ; there was 
a stopping place at Hurds Comers; next the hostelry at Gideon Slo- 
cum's in Pawling; next an inn at Akins Comers, and another at 
Benjamin V. Haviland's, and so on to the city. The books of the 
latter tavern show that in one year there had been kept 27,784 cattle, 
30,000 sheep and 700 mules; and it is said there would at times be 
as many as 2,000 head between this and the tavern at John Preston's. 

It is many years since public whippings were practiced in this 
vicinity, although in one instance the post itself remains. This par- 
ticular post is the Sycamore tree near the residence of Charles Rob- 
erts, on the John Kane place. This was the one used by Washington 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 393 

for military punishments, and was probably used for the civil as well. 
It was the army custom to administer one-half the number of blows 
ordered, say fifty or so, then wait two or three days until the wounds 
had festered, and then deUver the remainder. Some economic writers 
aver that public whipping was the best antidote for petty thieving of 
any invention of man; but pubHc sentiment could no longer brook 
the cruelty of the practice, even if chicken roosts were the oftener 
looted. 

Another custom, the "Putting out of the Poor," is happily dis- 
continued. This was no less than selling the unfortunate indigent 
into slavery, at times as abject as ever fell to the lot of the negro 
on a southern plantation. The poor people would be delivered into 
the custody of the lowest bidder, and he in turn would compensate 
himself by getting the most work out of his subjects with the least 
outlay of food and clothing. It is intimated that the officials of the 
different towns were not above ridding themselves of their own poor 
at the expense of their neighbor. At any rate a state law was passed 
forbidding the renting of a house to any person from another town 
without the consent of the Overseers of the Poor. 

The first attempt to provide public transportation was the survey- 
ing of a route for a canal through the Harlem Valley; it is said the 
project was abandoned because some of its professed friends mis- 
appropriated the funds. The section of the Harlem railroad from 
Croton Falls to Dover Plains was opened December 31, 1849, teams 
being used to haul the train over a short stretch of road to its des- 
tination in order to meet the requirements of the charter. 

Wilson, in his "Quaker Hill," has given some curious items culled 
from the ledger of the John TofFey store. The principal goods kept 
in stock in those primitive times were cloth, indigo, thread, cambric, 
penknives, "nittenneedles," plaster, fine salt, rum, molasses, tea, apple 
trees, nutmegs and shad. There was hardly an entry of goods sold 
without the item of "rum" was included. During the years 1814!-'16, 
owing to war prices, molasses sold for $2 a gallon ; "tobago" at $2.75 
the pound; flour $18, boots $9, and tea at $2.75 per pound. Ten 
years later molasses sold at 35 cents a gallon, and tobacco at 63 cents 
the pound. 

Pawling has suffered from many conflagrations. Two church edi- 
fices have been burned, and the corner now occupied by the Ferris 



394 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Block has twice been devastated. The first fire on the corner occurred 
in 1859, when E. I. Hurd kept a general store there ; the next took 
place in October of 1&92, when the feed store, of Ehnore Ferris, the 
Pawhng Journal printing office, and six other buildings were de- 
stroyed. 

The principal industry of Pawling now is that of the milk business. 
There are three milk factories, so-called, — ^the Sheffield Farms, Woody- 
crest and the Mutual, — at each of which the milk is received from 
the farmers, bottled for shipment or sent in cans to the metropohs. 
The normal output of the three institutions is about five hundred cans 
daily. Pawling lays claim to being the largest milk receiving station 
in the county. As the commodity is brought into the town in the 
early morning, the streets present a busy appearance with the multi- 
tude of loaded wagons from the country and the groups of happy 
children going to school. 

Pawling village, incorporated in 1893, has about 800 inhabitants. 
Quaker Hill, Reynoldsville or Holmes, and West Pawling are hamlets. 

The high elevations of Quaker HiU and the West Mountain were 
probably settled long before the lands in the valley between were 
occupied. The "Swamp fevers" were greatly feared by the pioneer 
settlers, and they avoided setthng on the low grounds. Three brothers 
named Moshier emigrated to America long before the Revolution; 
one died soon after; another ran a mill in the town of Stanford, while 
a third settled somewhere on the West Mountain. That the west 
part of the town was at one time thickly inhabited is evident from 
the numbers of old cellars that one meets with here, during a day's ramble, 
each with tumble-down chinmey, its old well, remains of garden walls 
and beds of "tansy" to fortify against the Swamp fever. Not unfre- 
quently one comes unexpectedly upon neglected burial places in the 
forest, and there is not a tradition of the people buried there. On the 
other hand it is said there was no house on the post road between 
Alfred Wing's and the Taber homestead; thus Pawling and Hurds 
Corners were not even in embryo. Among the settlers on the east 
side we find the names of Sherman, Merrit, Birdsall, Irish, Akin, 
Craft, Chase and Osborn. Of the valley there occur Shaw, Cary, 
Hunt, Sabin, Salmon, Pearce and Slocum. On the west there once 
dwelt the ancestors of the families by the name of Worden, Moshier, 
Dentory, Dibble, Davis and Turner. It is said there was quite an 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 395 

influx into the town, about 1740. As these who immigrated here were 
not of the "Standing Order," rehgiously speaking, that is to say, 
they were Baptists and Methodists, and came from the east, it may be 
presumed they were attracted here by the promise of freedom of church 
worship. This however, hardly accords with tradition which says 
these early settlers were addicted to drinking, gaming, horse racing, 
cockfighting and wrestling. 

As the military history of the town is embodied in the general his- 
tory of the county, more than a few local incidents of that time would 
be out of place here. 

The official Headquarters of General Washington during his so- 
journ with his army in Pawling in 1778, were at the house of John 
Kane, now the site of the Roberts residence. In September, 1905, a 
copper tablet with an historical inscription was affixed to a large 
sycamore tree near by the house, and was unveiled with interesting 
and appropriate ceremonies. Mr. L. S. Patrick, of Marinette, Wis., 
delivered the historical address. The tablet was draped in the folds 
of a Union Jack intermingled with the Stars and Stripes, and Mrs. 
Laura Sherwood, 97 years of age, officiated at the ceremony of un- 
veiling. Mrs. Van Rensseleer Schuyler, of Sharon, Conn., a descend- 
ant of John Kane, was present by invitation to represent the former 
owner of the soil. Mr. Wilson followed Mr. Patrick's address in some 
remarks on the life and character of John Kane. This gentleman 
was a man owning considerable landed property in this vicinity. His 
sympathies were decidedly in favor of the patriots; but, having little 
faith in the ultimate success of their cause, was moved by considera- 
tions of self interest to side with the loyalists. He, however, took 
occasion to speak favorably of the Whigs on all public occasions, 
which greatly incensed the friends of the King. So when his estate 
was confiscated by the patriot authorities, he petitioned the King to 
reimburse him for his loss, but was met with the charge, "You talked 
too well of the King's rebellious subjects to receive favors at 'his 
hands." Disowned by both sides he was dispossessed of all his prop- 
erty, — ^the officers even stripping the pillows and blankets from a 
cradle in which his youngest child lay critically iU with pneumonia, 
and was drummed out of town. The shock and exposure proved fatal 
to the sick child, while the family suffered all the indignities that could 
be inflicted on the bitterest Tory. The good words he had spoken 



396 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

for them had been forgotten by the patriots, so inflamed they were 
by passion. The Arctic explorer of that name was a descendant of 
this same John Kane. The following is the inscription on the tablet: 

THE RESIDENCE OF JOHN KANE 

ON THIS SITE 

WAS HEADQUARTERS OF WASHINGTON 

FROM SEPTEMBER TWELFTH 

TO NOVEMBER TWENTY-SEVENTH, 1778, 

WHILE THE SECOND LINE 

OF THE CONTINENTAL ARMY 

WAS ENCAMPED ON QUAKER HILL 

AND IN THE VALLEY NEAR. 

The residence of a Quaker by the name of Birch in the south end 
of Quaker Hill was robbed during the Autumn of 1778, by some sol- 
diers. On his promise not to follow them that night, they offered him 
no bodily harm. This promise, though made under duress, he kept 
on the honor of a Quaker, but at the hour the time hmit expired he 
was on their track with a posse. He traced them to the army lines, 
where he recognized the villains, and identified his property on the 
person of one of them. The evidence was so conclusive, that the cul- 
prit was convicted before court-martial, and hung despite the pro- 
tests of Birch, who had no desire to push the matter to that extremity. 

Nathan Pearce, Jun., who lived in the house standing, at the time 
of the Revolution, but since razed, on the bank nearly opposite the 
residence of O. A. Dykeman, was collector of military fines, — an 
office that was as distasteful to the public as could well be imagined. 
One night some robbers broke into the house, struck him with the 
butt of a musket, beat and kicked him into insensibihty, and finally 
suspended him, lacerated and bleeding, by his thumbs to the chamber 
floor. Then after rummaging the house, they left him to be rescued 
by the family. He never saw a well moment thereafter, and survived 
the ordeal but six weeks. Some nights subsequent to this, his brother, 
Capt. William Pearce, with some followers, surprised this robber gang 
at their rendezvous in a cave on Quaker Hill. The robber chief, 
Vaughn by name, had on his person the clothes taken from his brother 
Nathan, and William had the satisfaction of running a sword through 
the body of his enemy in revenge for the murder of his brother. 

Benjamin Sherman came from Massachusetts to Pawling in 1764!, 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 397 

and probably lived in the tenant house on the Dodge- Arnold farm at 
the foot of Quaker Hill. The Shermans were proverbially wagon 
makers and drovers as well as farmers. The "Sherman wagon, the 
box of which was rounded up at both ends, with paneled side boards, 
and half as high again in rear as in front," as I well remember, was 
built by Benjamin. This tenant house has somehow escaped the 
notice of local antiquarians, which is the more singular as it has a 
"room with six doors and one window," lacking only a single door to 
be on a par with its illustrious rival at Newburgh. In this house 
some of Sherman's children were born. No taint of Toryism, or even 
neutrality, ever attached to Sherman or his sons, three of whom were 
in the Continental service. I am inclined to the opinion that Benja- 
min Sherman was Magistrate Sherman of whom, Dr. Fallon speaks 
of so highly in his letter to Governor Chnton. It is a tradition that 
Vaughn and his night riders on one occasion, under cover of dark- 
ness, paid this family a visit, but found the old gentleman and his 
sons so well prepared to receive them that they were glad to depart 
after exchanging a few shots. The Shermans had a keg of gun- 
powder arranged with a train, in readiness to be fired in case they 
were overpowered, with the view to launch friend and foe alike into 
eternity, preferring death to falling into the hands of these "minions 
of the moon." 

The money then in circulation was mostly gold sovereigns. As a 
place of security Sherman bored holes in the bottom of his bedposts, 
into which the sovereigns were dropped until the holes were nearly 
full, then a plug would be nicely fitted into each hole, and the bedr 
stead returned to its place. 

The family afterwards removed to the farm at present owned by 
Mr. Georgfe Ketchum. On a rising knoll to the north of the house is 
a monument marking the last resting place of Benjamin Sherman and 
Deborah his wife, erected to their memory by their appreciative grand- 
son, David H. Sherman. 

Pawling Baptist Church. There is a tradition of a log church 
once standing near the Camp Meeting woods. There are evidences of a 
burial place on the west side of the road at the point, and a marble 
slab with the name, "Sarah, wife of Nathan Cary," may yet be seen 
on the farm. This confirms the supposition that Elder Henry Cary 
preached in this log structure, and that the dead of this community 
were buried in the graveyard contiguous to it. From the record of a 



398 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

marriage ceremony solemnized by Elder Gary in 1766, it is presumable 
this was the period of his residence in this vicinity. 

Elder John Lawrence began preaching here in 1770, and was pas- 
tor of a church organized before the Revolution. In 1775 he was 
succeeded by Elder Phineas Clark. One of Elder Lawrence's con- 
verts was Nehemiah Johnson ; the latter was ordain&l and commenced 
preaching when Elder Clark left, and served the Pawling church as 
its minister fifty-three consecutive years. The pastorate of Elder 
Johnson is not more remarkable for its length than for the peace 
and harmony that prevailed over the entire period. The writer of 
this chapter remembers the deep veneration with which the people of 
this vicinity regarded this sainted man. He had never enjoyed the 
advantages of a hberal education, and his language might not have 
been always grammatical, as measured by modem rules, but "he could 
remember nothing he said after announcing his text, and at the close 
of the sermon his audience Was frequently found in tears." During 
the period of his ministry he labored with his own hands for his tem- 
poral support while administering to the spiritual needs of his people. 

The earliest meeting house of this society was at the top of the 
West Mountain, where the Dug Way road intersects the Penny road 
that follows the crest of the mountain into the town of Dover. This 
was always known as the Johnson Meeting House, and is still remem- 
bered by some of our oldest citizens. Large congregations were ac- 
customed to gather there, and "they found it easy breathing in prayer 
on that high ground where they worshiped." The church at this 
time had a membership of ninety. Azariah CrandeU was chosen deacon 
at its formation, holding the office until his death in 1808. In 1842 
Benjamin Burr and Elijah Booth were deacons. In August, 1841, 
Elders Johnson and Kirby were required to revise the church records 
up to that date, and ascertain how many of those whose names were 
on the church books ought to be considered under the care of the 
church. Unfortunately those records cannot now be found. 

At this period the society were holding meetings half the time in 
the Union Meeting House (the church "over the swamp" as spoken 
of in the Methodist records), that edifice having been completed about 
the year 1839. July 10th, 1841, at a service in this building. Elder 
Johnson gave a summary of his ministerial labors and asked the society 
to relieve him and appoint Elder Seth Higby as his successor. 

The minutes of this church record that meetings were held in two 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 399 

neighborhoods in the spring of 1842 "with evident token of Divine 
Approbation." The first in the Reynolds school house in March; 
the next a month later "near Elder Higby's." The Elder at this time 
lived on the Daniel Dodge "home farm," in the big yellow house after- 
ward torn down. The meetings were held in the upper part of a 
wagon house on the premises. I well remember the seats of rough 
planks supported on pieces of logs sawed to the right length, and 
stood on end. A large accession to the church was made during these 
meetings, the baptisms taking place in the mill-pond near Willet 
Ferris, who, together with his wife and daughter, were among those 
baptized. 

In the Spring of 1852i Elder J. W. Jones began to preach in the 
Temperance Hall (now the residence of Mrs. ^aulding) over the 
store of Robert Wetts, a hotel being conducted in the other end of 
the building. That same year a second church in Pawling was or- 
ganized, to be known as the Central Baptist Church of Pawling. 
Elder Jones agreed to preach for the term of one year on the stipu- 
lated guarantee of Richard Haynes of $50, with use of house as a 
parsonage. That same year Daniel Dodge, Alex Allen, Jr., and 
Orwin Theall were appointed a building committee to buijd a house 
of worship. In the foEowing year the church edifice was dedicated. 

Jones served as pastor two years in the new church; he was suc- 
ceeded by Reverends A. W. Valentine," S. L. Holman, G. W. Barnes, 
and D. T. Hill; Elder Hill began his pastorate in 1870. In the fol- 
lowing year the second Son, David J. Hill (now U. S. Minister to 
Berlin), was licensed to preach the gospel. In 1876 the church edi- 
fice was removed to a central location within the village, and re- 
dedicated. In 1879 this meeting house was destroyed by fire, and in 
1880 the present beautiful edifice was completed on the site of the 
former church. At the present time the society is prosperous and 
enjoying the ministry of Rev. W. W. Barker, formerly of New York. 

Methodist Episcopal, Chuech. The first entry on the minutes is 
of a Quarterly Conference on Pawlingville Circuit held at the church 
in New Fairfield, July 7, 1838. Here the names of Sanford and 
Reynolds first appear. Pawlingville Circuit had recently been taken 
off the Courtlandt Circuit, which included Carmel, and other "classes" 
below. That there was a constant change in boundaries and jurisdic- 
tions is evident from the fact that Archibald Campbell was at one 
time chosen to attend a District Steward's Meeting at Jbhnsville; 



400 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

later Jesse Scudder was appointed to represent the Pawlingville Cir- 
cuit at a similar meeting in Poughkeepsie ; and again James Holmes 
and D. C. Green were sent for a like purpose to Pleasantville. Note, 
too, the change in the names of localities and stations. Pawlingville 
was then the hamlet now known as Hurds Corners. That quaint little 
square structure, standing on a hill, without a gable, the four sides of 
the roof coming to a point in the center, filled the double office of 
a place of secular and of religious instruction for the community, and 
was known far and wide as the "Bellcona." In it the Quarterly 
Conference Meetings dated at Pawlingville were held, and it was 
sacred to the memory of a Rice, a Reynolds, a Martindale and 
a host of pioneer Methodists. What is now Pawling was called Cen- 
terville, and later Pawling Center. Then there was the church "Over 
the Swamp," later known as the Union Church, now used as a bam; 
there was also the old Methodist Church standing on the corner be- 
low the village, its erection having been begun about 1813, but never 
completed. The station at Reynoldsville was designated as Fishkill 
Turnpike. There were meetings held at private houses, making in 
all quite a number of stations, at which the "preacher in charge" was 
expected to hold religious services. 

The following were the official members on Pawling's Circuit, July 
27, 1844. Ministers: William Jewett, Presiding Elder; George C. 
Bancroft, Preacher in Charge; Uriah Mead, Local Preacher; Archi- 
bald Campbell, 8d, recommended to travel. Jesse Scudder, Abraham 
Brown and Henry Ward, Stewards ; Theodorus B. Sheldon, John Nick- 
erson, Isaac Scudder, Talmon Meade, B. S. Trowbridge, Nelson Por- 
ter and John Jewett, Exhorters; Warren Cary, Stephen P. Sher- 
wood, John Adams, Montgomery S. Piatt, William St. John, Heze- 
kiel Wildman, Amos R. Stevens and Enoch Wheeler, Class Leaders. 
About this time the question of repairing the old Methodist Church 
was brought up, and a plan voted on, but the project fell through. 
The next we learn of a committee, composed of Cushing Green and 
Stephen P. Sherwood, being appointed to sell the building. I am in- 
formed that the committee were put to a deal of trouble in giving title, 
but it was finally disposed of to parties in Patterson. Since 1889 
the Methodists had ceased to make use of the old Meeting House, and 
thgir services were held in the church Over the Swamp, which is desig- 
nated in their minutes as the "New Church," and indicates the time 
of its erection. About the year 1853 the society built a church at 




OBLONG MEETING HOUSE. QUAKER HILL, TOWN OF PAWLING, N. Y. 




MEMORIAL STONE AND TABLET. 



TOWN OF PAWLING. 401 

"Pawling Centei-," as the minutes termed the village about the depot. 
At a Quarterly held March 25, 1865, the Trustees at Pawling report 
that they have sold the old church, receiving $1,176 net therefor, and 
have applied the proceeds toward building a new church at a cost of 
$6,809. The last entry in this book is a record of a Quarterly Con- 
ference held June 26, 1869, at South Dover, Presiding Elder A. M. 
Osbom in chair. Revs. Culver J. Burch and M. R. Lent, Preachers in 
Charge. 

These old records show the interest taken by the early Methodist 
denomination in the education of the young. At every Conference 
Meeting the question was brought up : Has the rule concerning the in- 
struction of children been faithfully attended to? and this duty must 
have formed no small part of work of those upon* whom it devolved. 
After the year 1855 the minutes are silent on this subject; which seems 
to indicate that the present public school system had become so per- 
fected as to provide for the secular instruction of the young. At a 
Conference in March, 1866, Brothers Henry Ward's and Archibald 
Campbell's claims for house rent were taken up; Ward's for $19, 
Campbell's for $50. Each gave up his claim, and exonerated thie: 
Circuit. February 28, 1862, Benjamin H. Burch, age 24, not iii 
debt; Phineas R. Hawxhurst, age 24, not in debt, were examined and 
recommended to travel. The present pastor is' Rev. Robert L. Ross. 
The church has recently renovated and decorated the interior of their 
house of worship, and installed a new church organ. 

The unveiling of the copper tablet commemorating the events which 
have served to render the Oblong Meeting House notable took place 
on the grounds in front of the edifice in September, 1904. A huge 
boulder of gneiss had been removed to the church grounds from a 
farm in Connecticut, and fixed to this stone was the memorial tablet 
containing these words : 

OBLONG MEETING HOUSE 

Of The Society Of Friends 

Erected in 1742 South of This Road. 

Present Meeting House Erected in 1760. 

First Effective Action Against Slavery Taken Here in 1767. 

Occupied As Hospital in 1778 

By Revolutionary Soldiers 

Many of Whom Are Buried South of This Road. 

Meeting Divided in 1828. 

Meetings Discontinued in This House 1885. 



402 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The address was delivered by Mrs. Phebe T. Wanzer, herself a 
member of the society who last held meetings in the old meeting house. 
A large concourse of people were present on the occasion, the cere- 
mony having in it an especial interest. 

Akin Hall Association, founded by Albert John Akin,^ was consti- 
tuted under the laws of the State of New York, the Certificate of 
Incorporation being filed August 10th, 1882. The objects of the 
society are the "promotion of benevolence, charity, literature, science 
and mutual improvement in rehgion and all kindred cultivation and 
knowledge and the providing and maintaining of a place or places of 
education, moral training and worship." The number of trustees shall 
be sixteen, its place of business and principal office at Quaker Hill, 
with power to fill vacancies. August 15th, 1892, a reorganization 
was efi'ected, adopting all the aforesaid features of the Association, 
except that the number of trustees to manage the business affairs of 
the organization be hmited to five members. It was further provided 
that when sufficient means shall have come into their hands, the trus- 
tees were authorized to construct, in addition to the Hall, a free 
hbrary and provide for its maintenance. This Hbrary is now com- 
pleted, and a librarian is present stated days of the week. The Asso- 
ciation holds real estates as follows : Akin Hall and Manse, the Library 
Building, Mizzen Top Hotel and cottages adjacent. A liberal en- 
dowment has been provided for the maintenance of the various objects 
of the Association. The official board is now composed as follows: 
Albro Akin, President; George W. Chase, Treasurer; William H. Os- 
born, Secretary. 

The Bank of Pawling was constituted under the laws of New York 
State in 1849. Its chief originator was Albert J. Akin, who for 
forty-four consecutive years held the office of President. In 1865 
it was changed from a State to a National Bank, with the name 
National Bank of Pawhng. The present officers are : John B. Dutcher, 
President; Theron M. Green, Vice President; J. Gerow Dutcher, Sec- 
ond Vice President; George W. Chase, Cashier; Joseph F. Haight, 
Assistant Cashier. 

The Pawling Savings Bank was incorporated in 1870, receiving its 
first deposit in 1871. The first President was David R. Gould, who 
was conspicuous in its organization, and was indefatigable In his 

1. See Part II of this work for Wograplcal sketch of Mr, Akin. 



TOWN OF PAWT^ING. 403 

fendeavors for its advancement. William J. Merwin was the first 
Treasurer, who was succeeded by H. A. Holmes. Its present officers 
are: William H. Taber, President; George A. Daniels, Treasurer; 
Benjamin F. Burr, Secretary. 

Pawhng has a fine water system, the construction of which was be- 
gun in 1895. The reservoir is some two miles distant, located on a 
hill about 220 feet above the village level, and gives a pressure of 
120 pounds to the square inch. The viUage was bonded for its con- 
struction to the amount of $45,000, to be paid in yearly installments, 
all to be liquidated in 1927. Not only is water furnished for house- 
hold purposes, but the fine pressure is made serviceable in the driving 
of water motors and for other mechanical uses, and also for supply- 
ing the locomotives of the New York Central Railroad. Eight of the 
bonds have now (1908) been paid off. The annual income to the 
village from the system is about $2,200, of which the New York Cen- 
tral pays $1,000. A fire company is maintained, with a hose house 
well equipped for the fighting of fire. 

Publication of the Pawling Pioneer was begun in 1870 by Philip H. 
Smith, and by him sold to George W. Tice in 1882. Subsequently 
it was purchased by William Downing, then by Horace Sague, Jr., 
afterward coming into the possession of Dr. F. M. Robinson, when 
the name was changed to the Pawling Journal. It was destroyed 
in the fire which burned the block on which the Ferris Building now 
stands. In 1891 publication of the Harlem Valley Chronicle was 
commenced by Philip H. Smith, sold to William T. Chapman in 1894, 
who conducted it one year, changing the name to the Pawling Chroni- 
£le, and sold the business to Charles Walsh, who is still its proprietor. 

The public school districts of the town, originally ten in number, 
have been reduced to eight; one having been discontinued, the school 
house sold, and the territory divided among districts contiguous to 
it ; and another having been merged into that of the High School at 
Pawling. Two outlying districts — Hurds Corners and Quaker Hill — 
have modern buildings ; the others have school houses more or less par- 
taking of the architecture of the past. 

The books in the office of the town clerk contain no records of 
yearly elections previous to 1854. Many valuable records relating to 
the early days of the town and precinct were destroyed by fire on the 



404 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



night of May 4th, 1859. The succession of Supervisors from 1854 
to 1909 has been as follows: 



1854 




Sherman Howard 


1877— '78 


William J. Mervin 


1855 




James Craft 


1879— '83 


Albert W. Corbin 


1856 




Sherman Howard 


1884 


Edwin B. Dodge 


1857 




WilUam H. Taber 


1885 


James S. Pearce 


1858 




Theron M. Green 


1886 


Edwin B. Dodge 


1859 




James Craft 


1887— '88 


Jeremiah S. Pearce 


1860 




Asa B. Corbin 


1889 


Albert W. Corbin 


1861- 


-'63 


Samuel A. Barnum 


1890 


George F. Lee 


186S— '65 


David R. Gould 


1891— '93 


Jeremiah Mead 


1866 




J. Wesley Stark 


1894— '95 


Morton Haynes 


1867- 


-'68 


John J. Vanderburgh 


1896— '98 


William R. Lee 


1869— '70 


J. Wesley Stark 


1899— '04 


Henry A. Holmes 


1871- 


-'72 


John B. Dutcher 


1905— '06 


William Downing 


1873— '74 


William B. Ross 


1907— '09 


Charles C. Stark 


1875— '76 


Jedediah I. Wanzer 







TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 405 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

THE TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 

By Philip H. Smith. 

THE town of Pine Plains is one of the northern tier of towns 
in Dutchess, bordering the county of Columbia. It is 
bounded on the east by Northeast; on the west by Milan; on 
the south by Stanford and Northeast. Extensive plains originally 
covered by pine forests gave the town its name. 

The territory was included in the Little ,Nine Partners' Patent; 
together with Milan and a portion of present Northeast it was in 
1788 erected into a town, the three being known as Northeast. Milan 
was taken ofiF in 1818, and Pine Plains was erected into a separate 
township in 1823. Before these townships were divided the seat of 
government was at the present village of Pine Plains; here the town 
records were kept; hither the voters from Spencer's Corners and 
Northeast Center had to come over the "West Mountain, which is a 
high ridge of fertile country, well inhabited, stretching from north 
to south, steep in ascent and descent, and is about three miles over;" 
in short, the people of the vicinity of MiUerton had to traverse about 
fifteen miles to reach the place of their annual town meetings, with 
the result that this duty was almost whoUy neglected. The farmers 
of Milan, on their part, were obliged to pass over Stissing Mountain 
to and from the polls, and to transact other necessary business ; hence 
the division of the towns was resolved upon as a matter of general 
convenience. 

The "house of Israel Reynolds" (Stissing House) was designated 
in the early records as the place where town business was transacted, 
and where the first town meeting for Pine Plains was held. 

In the western part is Stissing Mountain, rising to the height of 
nearly a thousand feet above the adjacent valleys. At its foot on 
the east are Thompson's, Stissing and Halcyon Lakes; the principal 
streams are the Wappingers, flowing south, and the Shekomeko, flow- 



406 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ing north. Roeliff Jansen's Kill crosses the extreme northwest cor- 
ner of the town. 

As indicated by the nomenclature of its mountains and streams, 
the territory was occupied by remnants of Indian tribes when the first 
white people settled here. By reason of inability to secure a good 
title to lands, the settlement of Pine Plains was retarded for years; 
when, therefore, in 1744, or thereabouts, the territory of the Little 
Nine Partners was surveyed, and divided among the several proprie- 
tors, so that titles could be legally conveyed, the rights of the Red 
man to the soil were scarcely recognized. In fact, there is no record 
in the early deeds of lands in Pine Plains of Indian titles having been 
first extinguished as a preliminary to the conveyance of property — 
a specification so frequently met with in the deeds of other parts of 
the county. In short, the vices and greed of the white man had con- 
spired to obliterate all traces of the rightful owners of the soil. 

Among the early settlers are the names familiar at the present 
time — ^Winans, Smith, Harris, Reynolds, Hoffman, Pulver, Deuel, 
Dibblee, Husted, Stevenson, Rau (Rowe), Seldon and others. The 
eastern portion of Pine Plains was settled by the Palatines, remnants 
of a colony of German religious refugees, who had sought the pro- 
tection of England, and by that power had been given over into the 
tender hands of land monopolists, who transported them to the vicinity 
of Rhinebeck and the Catskills, and there set them to work to make 
tar, pitch, turpentine and resin from the pitchless, dwarfed white 
pines on Livingston's land grants. Of course the poor Palatines could 
not create what did not exist, and left to themselves to provide for 
themselves, they scattered to various points, some seeking homes in 
Pine Plains. 

About 1760 a settler moved into this toiwi and built a cabin on the 
north side of Little Stissing, near a spring still known as "Hubbell 
Spring." This was on the road to Mount Ross. When the Tories 
from the west of Stissing Mountain raided Pine Plains through this 
pass, Hubbell's cabin was a rallying point for beating them off. His 
was said to have been an important frontier post, and he had many an 
exciting chase after the Tories. 

When Hubbell came he brought with him, on a sled, a cannon which 
housed with effect against the armed Tory lads, and which for half 
a century was on every Fourth of July utilized in all patriotic cele- 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 407 

brations. It was finally taken to the Hotchkiss foundry at Sharon 
Valley and exchanged for a smaller one, which has long since gone. 

It was not until the close of the Revolution that immigration to Pine , 
Plains set in to any great extent, when settlers began to flock in from 
the Oblong, Dover, Amenia, Pawling, and from other points. There 
were Lutherans and Dutch Reformed from the vicinity of the Hud- 
son ; there were Baptists and Methodists from the Oblong ; there were 
Episcopalians and Congregationalists from the Connecticut Colonies; 
then the society of Quakers was established and a house of worship 
erected; and later the denomination of Christians organized a church 
and held stated worship; in a word, nearly every Protestant organi- 
zation is now, or has been, represented in the religious history of the 
town. 

At first one house of worship might sufiice for more than one de- 
nomination, where the congregations would be composed of members 
of distinct societies, who would listen in turn to the exjponents of 
diverse creeds. This did not always tend to unity of heart and belief, 
and as soon as was practicable, each sect worshiped in its own church 
with a stated pastor. 

The prosperity of Pine Plains has been retarded by an adherence 
to that relic of England's custom of land tenures, that is to say, life 
lease-holds. The stranger on his first stop at the village of Pine 
Plains is sure to be impressed with the sight of a prosperous village 
built on one side of the principal street. On account of lease-hold 
tenure the land on the other side was not available for building lots. 
Happily that condition of things is no more, and the abnormal growth 
of the town to one side will in time be remedied. 

At the first town election of Pine Plains, Tuesday, April 1, 1823, 
Israel Harris was elected Supervisor, Reuben W. Bostwick, Town 
Clerk; Samuel Russell and Isaac Sherwood, Overseers of the Poor. 

The company business of the town of Pine Plains and Northeast- 
was settled as far as could be before the spring elections. The Legis- 
lative act authorizing their separation provided for the disposition of 
the highway money, leaving the school money and the division of the 
town paupers and the poor fund to be determined by the towns inter- 
ested. Those constituting the board for the settlement of the latter- 
question were: for Pine Plains, Israel Harris, Supervisor; Samuel 
Russell and Isaac Sherwood, Overseers; for Northeast, Philo M/ 



408 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Winchell, Supervisor; Eben Wheeler and Enos Hopkins, Overseers. 
The settlement was based upon the tax list of the territory before the 
division. 

The early settlers of Pine Plains, such as were of the Lutheran and 
German Reformed creed, were perforce required to attend service at 
points on the Hudson, whither they went in primitive fashion, twenty 
miles and more, on horseback, with a child in front and one or more 
seated behind. Once a settler from Carman's Mill, in fording the 
Shekomeko, met with a mishap, and a child intended for baptism at 
the distant church, fell into the stream and was drowned. Under 
such difficulties were church relations kept up until about the year 
1746, when the "Old Round Top," so named from the shape of its 
roof, was built at what is now "Bethel." This was at one time a 
business center; here is located the oldest cemetery in the town, where 
the forefathers of the hamlet sleep. Here stood the "bark church," 
built by the Moravians, and where those early self-sacrificing preach- 
ers ministered to the Indians — ^when permitted to do so by the Sheriflp 
of the County. To this mission people often came from Rhinebeck to 
hear these missionaries, and the audiences often numbered two hundred. 

The deed for the land on which the "Old Round Top" was erected, 
granted in 1769, twenty-three years after the edifice was built, states 
that the building was designed "for the worship of Almighty God as 
practiced by the Lutheran Evangelical Churches." At the dedica- 
tion in 1840 of the Union Bethel Church, which stands near the site 
of the old building, the Rev. A. Wackerhagen, a Lutheran, was pres- 
ent, and said: "We are on interesting ground; a hundred years ago 
a church was erected to Almighty God on this spot, and to-day, after 
the passing of a century, we have dedicated another to His Most 
Holy Name." 

The road now runs through the land described by this deed, and 
makes two cemeteries; that west of the road being used for a general 
burying ground. The old church site was in the cemetery on the 
east side, where the present monument to William A. Rowe — a de- 
scendant of one of the grantees in the deed — is erected. 

In 1753, Abraham Reinke, a Moravian, was sent to preach to the 
white people at Sharon, at their urgent request. He preached at 
Sali|bury, at Oblong (Amenia Union), in the Round Top at Nine 
Partners (Bethel), and at Livingston Manor. 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 409 

In its day Round Top was widely known. It is now ascertained 
that Dr. Quitman of Rhinebeck preached here in the years previous 
to 1816, at which time the Presbyterian church at Pine Plains was 
completed; then he preached in the latter church, the Lutherans hav- 
ing one-fourth interest in the building. This drew away the interest 
in Round Top as a special center. The old second church was never 
completed inside; benches were used for seats; after a time repairs 
were needed, and money for that purpose was subscribed, but the re- 
pairs were never made. The next year the clapboards were torn off 
and the frame sold at auction. The business of the town had drifted 
to Pine Plains, where was afterward to be the religious center as well. 

The old Red 'Church at Pulvers is of interest in this connection. 
As has been stated, the Lutheran and German. Reformed elements 
came into Pine Plains with the Palatine settlers. At first both used 
the Round Top church. In 1772 the Reformed church built a meet- 
ing house on the present Herman Pulver farm, which was painted 
red, and was known far and wide as the Red Church. Rev. G. D. 
Koch was the first preacher in this building, hence it was called 
"Koch's Meeting House." Like Round Top, it was never finished 
inside ; beside, it was also ,distant from the religious and commercial 
center of the town; which contributed towards hastening the end of 
the old Red Church. This building ceased to be about the year 
1823. 

The chief mover in the establishment of the Society of Friends, or 
Quakers, as they were more commonly called, was Charles Hoag, who 
settled on a farm near Bethel, on which a Quaker church was after- 
wards built. Quite a number of associate Quakers living within go-to- 
meeting distance of each other were "allowed" to hold meeting twice a 
week at the house of Charles Hoag. The parent society that exercised 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over "The Northeast Society of Friends," 
— as the meeting at Charles Hoag's was officially termed — ^was located 
at Stanfordville. A committee had been appointed by the "Quarterly 
Meeting" at Nine Partners to attend the meeting "allowed" at Hoag's, 
which committee reported to the ecclesiastical head that they felt 
"freedom to propose a continuance of the same, under the care of a 
suitable committee." They were therefore allowed to hold meetings 
on the "first' and "fourth" days of the week, except monthly prepara- 
tion and quarterly meeting weeks. 



410 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In due time they set about building a meeting house. On the "19th 
of the fourth month," 1806, a building committee advised that a 
house be built "30 by 20 feet, and 10 feet posts," which was com- 
pleted by the 20th of June following. Ezra Bryan, one of the early 
members of the Society, was its builder — a plain building with long 
steep roof and high gables. There were two doors for entrance, the 
right for "mankind," the left for "womankind." There were long 
seats with comfortable back rails, the distinguishing feature being the 
high wood partition running through the center to "hide the women 
from the men and the girls from the boys." A small raised platform 
was at the rear and with seats facing the audience; these were for 
the oiBcials and preachers. It was about this time that Elias Hicks 
appeared on the arena; but the doctrine he advanced, which rent the 
society in twain finally, did not do its full work until some years later. 

Thomas Ellison was a prominent Quaker preacher here. There 
was a pleasing melody in his voice, and this together with that jpeculiar 
"chaunt" in the Quaker preacher's custom of speaking in meeting, 
made him popular with the public. This manner of speaking is de- 
scribed as a kind of singing oratory, so natural to some people, and 
hence pleasant to listen to. 

In 1812 Charles Hoag opened a boarding school for boys and 
girls at his own dwelling. Jacob Willett and his wife, Deborah Rog- 
ers, were employed by him as teachers. These instructors afterward 
became prominent in the county as leaders in education; the Nine 
Partners School is still spoken of with the highest esteem; Willett's 
Arithmetic had a high place in the curriculum of the schools of 
that day. 

As has been said, there were not, among the various adherents of 
the several rehgious denominations, in early Pine Plains, enough of 
any one sect to biiild and support a church; hence, "Articles of Asso- 
ciation for the building of- the Union Meeting House on Pine Plains" 
were entered into. A lot was purchased at the price of one hundred 
and fifty dollars on which to build it. Silas Harris and William 
Woodin were chosen to go to Catskills to purchase lumber and material, 
for which purpose they were on February 13, 1815, paid $222. 
Great was the enthusiasm over the building of the church; it was the 
special enterprise of that year. 

The building was begun in April. Ten steps were required to get 




JACOB S. HINSDALE. 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 411 

into the high pulpit. A •window was in the rear of this to facilitate 
the reading of the scripture and the written sermon. This window 
was removed, as it was unpleasant for the pew-sitters to gaze at the 
preacher in its glare. As was then the custom, there was a gallery 
on three sides, and the heating was by stoves. The pews were offered 
at public sale February 14<, 1816, and the proceeds amounted to over 
$4,000. In March of that year a meeting was called, at which the 
following was passed: 

Resolved, That the ministers hereafter to be employed to preach in 
this meeting house shall be selected either from the Presbyterian 
Society, from the Dutch Reformed Church, from the German Lutheran 
Church, or from the Episcopal Church, and no other. 

This exclusiveness was subsequently relaxed, inasmuch as a min- 
ister of any denomination was allowed to preach in this house, but 
the "preached to" must pay the preacher. 

In 1836 the first church bell in Pine Plains was hung in the square 
belfry of this church. It was rung on all occasions of celebration, 
and tolled the age of each citizen at his death, in addition to the 
call for church services. Previous to 1840 a church organ was pur- 
chased at $400 ; this organ is still doing service after the lapse of over 
half a century. 

The church underwent extensive repairs in 1879. Huntting says 
there were mingled feelings of regret and joy, at the last service in 
the old edifice. Its antique internal architecture, hallowed by asso- 
ciations of more than a generation, was to be marred by vandal hands ; 
something "modern" in structure and convenience was to take its 
place. Dr. Bevan of New York preached the sermon at its rededica- 
tion. The drift of his discourse was to the effect that the building 
was no longer a union meeting house; that it was to be thereafter 
strictly a Presbyterian Church. 

In June, 1833, William N. Sayre and Sarah A. Marshall were 
married. Shortly after he was ordained to preach by the North 
River Presbytery. On the way to fill an appointment he stopped at 
the Stissing House, where he learned there was no stated preaching 
in this church. He made an appointment for Pine Plains, with the 
result that in September of 1833 he preached the first sermon of an 
unbroken pastorate of fifty years. 

When Mr. Sayre first came the building was used by four denomi- 



412 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

nations, so he occupied the pulpit but one Sunday in each month, 
unless a vacancy occurred. In 1847 the resolution was passed "that 
Rev. W. N. Sayre occupy the pulpit of the Pine Plains church state(My 
every Sabbath." June 24th, 1883, Mr. Sayre preached his fiftieth 
annual sermon, when he resigned. 

In this, his semi-centennial sermon, he said that during his min- 
istry he had united in wedlock 700 persons, and conducted service at 
800 funerals. In three houses on adjoining farms in Ancram he had 
attended 21 funerals. Three-fourths of the village had been built 
since he began to preach. The greater part of his congregations 
of the first years of his ministry have died or removed. Two heads of 
families only survive who were here in 1833< The church now enjoys 
the ministrations of Rev. C. E. Doane. 

It was through the influence of Freeborn Garretson that Methodism 
received its first impetus in Pine Plains and adjoining towns. Meet- 
ings in these early years were held in farm houses and in groves, in 
the old Round Top Church, and wherever opportunity offered. 
Their prayers were none the less pleasing to their Maker because they 
had no church home. They had no privileges in the Union Meeting 
House. "So they took to the school houses and work shops in winter, 
and to the groves in summer, where they could have camp-meetings, 
free air, a free gospel, free grace and a free shout." 

In 1835, with thirteen members, the building of a Methodist church 
in Pine Plains was commenced. The house was dedicated in 1837. 
In 1891 the building was repaired and enlarged, and an excellent 
pipe organ placed in the choir gallery. The present pastor is Rev. 
W. C. Oliver. 

The meeting for constituting the Baptist Society of Pine Plains 
was held in a log building, then the home of Alfred Brush, May 4th, 
1836. Some early Baptists who had been identified with the church 
at Spencers Corners (near present Millerton), having removed to 
Pine Plains in the earlier years of that century, united with some 
others in establishing a society of Baptists. These brethren con- 
tributed to the erection of the "Union Meeting House," — now Presby- 
terian — ^with the understanding that they were to occupy it one- 
fourth of the time. Elder John Buttolph, of Spencers Corners, 
serv«d the church some two years, Rev. R. G. Armstrong, of the Pres- 
byterian Society, also preaching from the same pulpit one-fourth of the 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 413 

time. In those days the diverse church doctrines were plied with 
vigor, and the advocacy of immersion and sprinkling from the same 
pulpit is probably one of the causes which led to the withdrawal of 
the Baptists. Elder Luman Burtch succeeded Buttolph, and came up 
from Bangall once in four weeks. 

At this time the Baptists set about building a house of worship. A 
lot was purchased for six hundred dollars, the frame of the edifice was 
put up and enclosed, the roof and belfry nearly completed, when late one 
Saturday afternoon in June a cyclone passed through Pine Plains 
leaving destruction in its wake. The new church edifice was directly 
in its path, and when the storm had passed those early worshipers 
beheld thie work of their hands leveled with the ground. 

This was disheartening to the struggling SQciety. In this ex- 
tremity Elder Burtch came to their assistance. Through his influ- 
ence the churches of the county contributed liberally of their means 
towards rebuilding. -^ 

The Baptist churches at Bangall, Spencers Comers, Amenia, Dover, 
Stanford, Fishkill and Pleasant Valley each sent substantial tokens 
of their good will, and after persistent effort the building was com- 
pleted, and in May of 18S8 was formally dedicated. 

Next year Elder Nathan D. Benedict, of Connecticut, accepted a 
call from the church, and became its first settled pastor. His salary 
was three hundred and fifty dollars a year and house rent. 

Up to this period the society had been considered as a sort of 
branch of the Stanford church. But in May of this year the neigh- 
boring Baptist- organizations were convened in ecclesiastical council 
and the Baptist church of Pine Plains was organized with twenty-six 
constituent members. Since that time ,the church has supported a 
number of able and self-sacrificing ministers, and maintained during 
the succeeding years religious services that have led to the saving of 
souls. 

The primitive Episcopal Society of Pine Plains is closely identified 
with the Dibblee (Dibble) family, who were among the staunch pioneer 
settlers. The Episcopalians at first aflSliated with the church in 
Sharon, Conn., whither they w^ent twenty miles to enjoy religious ser- 
vices in accordance with their belief. They, too, held a part interest 
in the "Union Meeting House" so frequently referred to in the pre- 
ceding pages, and they maintained service there. Their number hav- 



414 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ing suffered depletion by the death of some and the removal of others, 
Episcopal services in the town nearly ceased for a considerable time. 
Mainly through the efforts of Theron Wilber, who moved into the 
town about 1850, the dormant society was revived. In this work 
he was assisted by Rev. Sheldon Davis, a missionary of the county. 
Rev. Homer Wheaton, of Lithgow, held services for a time in the 
Union Bethel Church, followed by Rev. Frederick Sill, of Red Hook. 
On the evening of July 9, 1858, Dr. Potter visited this place, when 
three persons received the rite of confirmation — ^the first solemnization 
of this rite in the town of Pine Plains. Owing, doubtless, to jealousy, 
the "Union" church doors then were closed to them; but the seed was 
kept aUve, and a Parish was organized according to statute in No- 
vember of 1859, the title to be the Church of the Regeneration. 

In May, 1860, subscriptions were first sohcited for a church build- 
ing, and the edifice was completed in the spring of the following year. 
At the laying of the corner stone a paper was deposited, bearing 
among other interesting matters the following chronological facts: 
"At the time of the laying of this corner stone James Buchanan is 
President of the United States, and Edwin D. Morgan is Governor of 
New York. The Right Rev. Thomas Church Brownell, D.D., LL.D., 
is the presiding Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the 
United States of America ; the Right Rev. Benj amin Tredwell Onder- 
donk, D.D., is Bishop of the Diocese of New York, and the Right Rev. 
Horatio Potter, D.D., LL.D., is provisional Bishop of the same." Rev. 
Henry L. Ziegenfuss was among the Rectors who have been in author- 
ity over this church. The present incumbent is Rev. Thomas Burrows. 

The Bethel Church was built on the old Round Top property, less 
than ten miles below the village of Pine Plains, a few years after the 
old meeting house was removed. It was in 1838 that the first tan- 
gible effort was made towards the erection of the new. In March, 
1840, the church was ready for dedication. Although undenomina- 
tional in its avowed purposes, it was deemed altogether appropriate 
that a Lutheran should dedicate it, because of the associations with 
old Round Top, whose rightful successor it was. Rev. J. Berger, of 
Mellenville, Columbia County, accepted an invitation to conduct the 
services. Religious affairs moved smoothly for some twenty years 
v/heft the disadvantages of a "Union Church" were made unpleasantly 
manifest. Friends and families were estranged over questions un- 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 415 

worthy of notice, and the church, instead of constituting itself a 
mental and moral "uplift" to the community, may have been rather 
a vehicle of harm. 

As previously stated the present village of Pine Plains was the seat 
of government of the original town of Northeast. It had an oiBcial 
name as a postoffice a few years prior to its organization as a town, 
Dr. Israel Reynolds receiving the appointment of postmaster in 1818. 
Dr. Reynolds was instrumental in establishing a post route, in 1796, 
from Rhinebeck to Sharon, passing through the hamlets of Pine 
Plains and North Amenia. In 1830 a direct stage route twice a 
week was established from Poughkeepsie to Pine Plains, by way of 
Pleasant Valley. Since the construction of the Newburgh, Dutchess 
& Connecticut railroad, in 1869, the mail has bee^ carried by steam. 

One of the institutions in which Pine Plains takes a pardonable pride 
is the Seymour Smith Academy. This school was established in 1877, 
and a building erected capable of accommodating forty boarding 
pupils. Rev. Abraham Mattice, A.M., was the first and only prin- 
cipal, and conducted the school successfully seventeen years. The 
higher standards attained by our Union Free Schools have placed the 
old time Academy in the background, and the Seymour Smith Acad- 
emy, as such, was forced to close its doors. The trustees have placed 
the building under charge of the State Board of Regents, and a Union 
Free School with an academic department is now conducted in it, with 
Mr. Emery Ricart as principal. 

The Seymour Smith Academy was erected through the generosity 
of Seymour Smith, a former resident of the town, who left his entire 
estate to the town of Pine Plains for that purpose. A special act of 
Legislature was necessary to make the bequest available. Mr. Smith 
was a bachelor. He raised a company in the War of 1812, and was 
stationed at Staten Island. His subsequent life was spent as a far- 
mer. He died November 26, 1863, and was buried in Evergreen 
cemetery. 

As stated in the chapter on Northeast the family of Bryans were 
the original makers of fanning mills, and supplied the demand for 
them within a radius of many miles. In like manner the Harris fam- 
ily were the originators of the famous Harris scythe. Strange to say, 
the factories of these two pioneer industries were located at the same 
place at the same time, at, or near, Shekomeko station. John Harris, 



416 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the founder of the scythe industry, commenced making scythes here 
by hand on an anvil. He learned the art from a mulatto slave be- 
longing to his uncle. 

John afterward married and removed to the vicinity of Fort Ann, 
N. Y. In constant fear of Indians, some special alarm caused him to 
place what household goods he could collect on an ox sled and start 
for Dutchess County. He was not out of sight of his house when 
he saw the savages had already applied the torch to his doomed dwell- 
ing. He had taken the precaution to send away hfs wife and two 
daughters a day or two before. 

On his return John Harris resumed the business of scythe making, 
taking others into partnership with him. The iron which finally be- 
came the component factor of his scythes was carted in pigs from 
Livingston's Ancram Furnace to the Steel Works at Wassaic, and the 
refined steel conveyed from thence to Hammertown, near Pine Plains 
village, where the business was carried on for many years. 

In 1814! the business was left to Seth Harris and his two sons, John 
and Silas. Two years later a stove shop was built and a second finish- 
ing trip hammer added to the plant. The works had an annual out- 
put of about five hundred dozen. The Harris Scythe Works long 
since went into decay. Stones from the crumbling walls do duty in 
adjacent foundations. 

Pine Plains has a public library of nearly 3,000 volumes. A meet- 
ing for its establishment was held at the Stissing House December 14, 
1797. Subscription papers were drawn up and circulated. The 
shares were estimated at two dollars and a half. Forty-seven shares 
were taken, the library was incorporated under the laws of the State, 
trustees were chosen, by-laws passed, and the institution fully estab- 
lished. This was in the eighteenth century. Now, in the twentieth 
century, the library continues on its mission of enlightment, spreading 
its benefits among all who come within its influence. 

The first meeting for the organization of the Pine Plains Bank was 
held at the Stissing House February 15, 1839. Aaron E. Winchell 
was Chairman, and F. I. Curtis, Secretary. Seventeen directors were 
named. In March articles of association were adopted. Reuben W. 
Bostwick was the first President; William Eno, Vice President; F. W. 
Davis, Cashier, at one thousand dollars salary and house rent. It 
began with a capital of one hundred thousand dollars. This bank 



TOWN OF PINE PLAINS. 



417 



closed business in 1857j voluntarily, but maintained its good name to 
the last. ; 

May 29tli of the followiiyg year the Stissing Bank was organized, 
capital stock to be one hundred and twenty thousand dollars, Justus 
Boothe, President, and Reuben Bostwick, Cashier. In 1865 it was 
changed to the National Bank and the stock reduced to eighty thou- 
sand dollars. Reuben Bostwick was cashier until his death in 1870, 
when his son Frederick was chosen as his successor. The bank at 
present has a capital stock of $45,000, and individual deposits of 
more than $115,000. The present officers are: President, Wm. Bost- 
wick; Vice President, Edward Bryan; Cashier, J. H. Bostwick. 

Mount Ross received its appelation from a resident of that name. 
The splendid water power afforded by the Roeliff <|^ansen at this place 
made it a point much sought after by those desiring to locate mills. 
Saw miUs, grist mills, carding machines, and cloth-weaving and full- 
ing mills were established there at different times. Huntting mentions 
a weaver there named Matthew Winter who sued a dehnquent customer 
for weaving forty-four yards of cloth at eight pence a yard. This 
was in 1788. Early in 1800 Stephen Carroll was a blacksmith here, 
and Isaac Parsons hooped barrels and casks. 

The following has been the succession of Supervisors since the or- 
ganization of the town: 



1833 


Israel Harris 


1853— '54 


Anthony Pulver 


1824— '25 


Reuben W. Bostwick 


1855 


Walter Herrick 


1826— '27 


Israel Harris 


1856 


John Righter / 


1828 


Ely Hamblin 


1857 


John H. Hosier 


1829 


Samuel RusseU 


1858 


Harman W/Pulver 


1830— '33 


Reuben W. Bostwick 


1859— '60 


Eli Knapp 


1RS3 


Daniel Sherwood 


1861 


John Thompson 


1834 


Edward Huntting 


1862— '63 


Cornelius Pitcher 


183S 


William H. Bostwick 


1864 


Walter W. Husted 


1836 


Daniel Sherwood 


1865 


Cornelius Pitcher 


1837 


William H. Bostwick 


1866— '67 


A. D. MiUer 


1838— '39 


Abraham Dibble 


1868— '70 


Caleb H. Reynolds. 


1840 


Backus Culver 


1871 


John A. Herrick 


1841— '42 


Henry R. Hammond 


1872 


Phoenix N. Deuel 


1843 


Frederick T. Ham 


1873 


John A. Herrick 


1844.-'46 


William Eno ' 


1874 


Henry H. Ham 


1847— '49 


John H. Mosher 


1875— '77 


William Toms 


18S0— '52 


Edward Huntting 


1878— '80 


William B. Jordan 



418 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1881— '83 


James T. Germain 


1892 


Ja«ob S. Bowman 


1884 


Isaac P. Carman 


1893 


Jacob S. Hinsdale 


1885— '87 


John A. Herrlck 


1894— '96 


Isaac P. Carman 


1888 


Albert Bowman 


1897— '02 


William B. Jordan 


1889- '90 


John A. Herrick 


1903— '09 


Jacob S. Hinsdale 


1891 


Albert Bowman 







In 1897 Isaac Huntting published a compilation and rcTision of sketches that 
had been printed on different occasions in the Amenia Times, the Dutchess Far- 
mer, the Poughkeepsie Telegram and the Pine Plains Register. 

He states in his preface that "A little preserved is better than all lost," and 
he did some excellent work in preserving and publishing various documentary 
evidence and maps, as well as many traditions of the neighborhood of Northeast 
and Pine Plains. 

His book is entitled "History of Little Nine Partners of North East Precinct 
and Pine Plains, New York, Dutchess County. By Isaac Huntting, Pine Plains, 
N. Y. Vol. I. Amenia. Chas. Walsh & Co., Printers, 1897." 

It can be found in the public library of Poughkeepsie in the Adriance Memorial 
Library Building. — (Eduob.) 



TOWN OF PLEASANT VALLEY. 419 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 
THE TOWN OF PLEASANT VALLEY. 

THE town of Pleasant Valley, as a separate municipality, dates 
from 1821, when the Legislature took territory from Clinton 
and formed the new town. The town of Clinton being Ifirge, 
and political objects and interests becoming weightier, it was con- 
sidered advisable by the citizens of the villages of Pleasant Valley and 
Hyde Park, in union with those in the y^cinity of each, to petition for 
the division of the town. Accordingly upon the 26th day of January, 
1821, a bill was passed by the State Legislature creating the towns 
of Hyde Park and Pleasant Valley, which, after defining the bounda- 
ries of the former town, reads : 

"And be it further enacted that the remaining part of the said town of Clinton 
shall be divided into two separate towns by the fojlowing division line to, wit: 

Beginning on the west line of the town of Washii^gton in the corner made by 
lots nmnber five and six in the great division of the Nine Partners Patent and 
running westerly along said lot line until it intersects the east line of the aforesaid 
town of Hyde Park, and that the north of the two last mentioned towns shall be 
known by the name of Clinton, • * * and that the south of the two last men- 
tioned towns shall be known by the name of Pleasant VaUey, and that the first 
town meeting in said town last mentioned shall b? held at the house qf Cyrus 
Berry, on the first Tuesday of April next." 

The surface of the town is a rolling and hilly upland, covering 
20,255 acres. This territory is almost equally divided by Wapping- 
er's Creek, which flows in a southwesterly direction. The town is 
bounded on the north by Clinton; east by Washington; south by La- 
Grange; west by Hyde Park, and for a short distance on the south- 
west by the town of Poughkeepsie. 

The village of Pleasant Valley, with a population of about seven 
hundred, is the commercial center of the town. Salt Point and Wash- 
ington Hollow are hamlets. 

The settlement of Pleasant Valley took place during the time it was 
a part of Crom Elbow precinct^l737-1762. Among the pioneers 



420 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

who located in the vicinity of Washington Hollow were the New- 
combs, FiUdns, Humphreys, Halls and Jacksons. These families 
were Presbyterians, and in IT*? erected a substantial meeting house 
at the Hollow, which during the Revolution became the headquarters 
of numerous bands of Tories. 

The next settlement of importance within the town was near the 
village of Pleasant Valley, about the year 174>0, by both Presbyterians 
and Quakers. Among the earhest names recorded were the Aliens, 
Flaglers, Formans, MarshaUs, Beadles, Deans, Sellecks and Abbotts, 
who began to make use, in a primitive way, of the mill privileges 
afforded by the Wappinger creek. The famihes of Van Voorhees, 
Harris and Frost settled in the north part of the town in 1765. 

A fulling mill east of the village of Pleasant Valley was built by 
John Kenyon in 1808. It was later operated by Wilham Buckley. 
The carding mill of Thomas Carpenter and the woolen miU of George 
Evarson were erected in 1809. The same year Robert Abbott estab- 
lished a cotton factory near the bridge. He erected two buildings, one 
a grist and cotton miU, the other for mechanical shops. Both buildings 
were destroyed by fire in 1815. They were immediately rebuilt by De- 
lavergne & Thwing, who, either as owners of the property, or building 
contractors, failed. The property was purchased in 1820 by Gib- 
bons & Evartson, and. from that time to the purchase by Garner & 
Company it oscUlated from individual to stock control. The cloth 
manufactured here compared favorably with other American products 
of the kind. It was printed at Wappingers Falls. For several years 
the plant has been in idleness, which somewhat retarded the growth of 
the village. In the spring of 1909 it was reopened, and the 3,500 
spindles again set in motion. 

The village becoming quite a manufacturing center, and increasing 
in population, the inhabitants in 1818 petitioned the government for 
a postoffice, which was granted. Another petition went to the Legis- 
lature for an act of incorporation. By this act the following village 
trustees were appointed: John Robert Abbott, John Beadle, Israel 
Dean, Hubby Adee and Joshua Ward, to serve until the second Tues- 
day of May, 1815. 

Apparently httle attention was given to the official affairs of the 
village following its incorporation, as there is no record of elections 
until May 9, 1843, when William Thorne, Franklin Dudley, Zachariah 









»?■'■' 


jb -'--^^B^i 


r^#% 


' ' '^'^'HHI^^^^IrP!^! 


1 



GEORGE LAMOREE. 



TOWN OF PLEASANT VALLEY. 421 

S. Flagler, Gilbert Noxon and Joel Terrill were elected trustees. A 
meeting of the freeholders was called in 1844! for the election of vil- 
lage officers. The attendance was so small that the election was 
postponed. 

When the excise law was passed in 1862, it required that "special 
proceedings should be taken in incorporated villages." Zachariah 
Flagler was then the only member left of the 1843 board. He called 
a meeting, and the following were duly elected: David L. Jackson, 
William Patton, Joel O. Hohnes, John C. Vehe and George W. For- 
man. The next election was held May 13, 1863, when the excise law 
was acted upon. John B. Duncan was chosen village president and 
Albert Devine, clerk. 

The village was re-incorporated March 21, 1903.» Charles L. Cole 
was elected president, and Wright Devine and Edward C. Drake trus- 
tees. Isaac J. Noxon is now village president. 

A free hbrary was organized July 1, 1903, as a voluntary associa- 
tion. A site for a new building at the corner of Main street and the 
South road has been donated, and the village has voted the removal of 
the old No. 4 school building to this location for the purpose of a 
library hall. 

A number of farms in the neighborhood of the village, containing 
limestone from which cement can be made, have recently been pur- 
chased by the American Cement Company. A force of one hundred 
men will be required to quarry the rock, which will be shipped to 
Poughkeepsie to be ground. 
s, 

CHURCHES. 

Among the ancient religious associations in the county was the 
"Pittsburgh Church" at Washington Hollow. This edifice was 
erected in 1747, pursuant to the following resolution: 

"Crom Elbow Precinct in Dutchess County, September 19th, 1746, we the sub- 
scribers do Covenant and Promise for ourselves Heirs and Assigns to pay towards 
Building and Erecting of a Presbyterian meeting house the sum or sums annexed 
to each of our names Under Written and it is to be understood that said meeting 
house is to stand about twenty or thirty rods to the south east from Henry Fil- 
kins Sherifi and said money is to be paid to Mr. Jacob HaU, Capt. Samuel Jack- 
son, Joseph Barber, Esqr. Henry Lott and Thomas New Court who being a com- 
mitty chosen to Receive said money and it to be understood that any of the 
Subscribers Under Written have liberty to pay what they subscribe in work accord- 



422 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ing to the acceptance of the said committy and Said Committy are Obliged to 
Render a true account of their disbursements of the money to a committy which 
shall be hereafter chosen." 

No record can be found of the early pastors, but there is evidence 
that one Deliverance Smith ministered to this congregation previous 
to 1763, in which year Joseph Hoff was chosen "Clark to Keep the 
Records of the Society's Proceedings." At a meeting of the trustees 
held August 30, 1769, it was agreed that John Piatt, John Carpenter 
and Melancthon Smith "be chosen to carry on, seat and repair said 
meeting house, and that after said work be accomplished the seats be 
sold at PubUc Vendue to the highest bidder." Among those who pur- 
chased pews at the sale held in December following were Simon Flag- 
ler, £5, 10s; Frederick Ham, £6; Israel Piatt and Wilmott Oakley, 
£4, 10s ; William Beedle, £4 ; William Allen, £4 ; Eliphalet Piatt and 
Jacob Everson, £4, and Samuel and Melancthon Smith, £3, 15s. The 
building was again repaired in 1805, and with that year the records 
close. Shortly thereafter the society united with the Presbyterian 
Church at Pleasant VaUey. The old building stood Until the year 
1858, when it was taken down, and the Methodist Society purchased 
the property. 

It was in this church building that a band of Tories, in the summer 
of 1777, assembled. They numbered about four hundred, and came 
principally from the southern part of the county. Parties were sent 
to the bordering settlements to intimidate the patriots, and obtain 
supplies for the British army. While the Tories were thus showing 
authority, they were surprised by a company of American soldiers 
from Sharon, Connecticut. Upon their attempt to escape, the 
Yankees gave them a broadside and killed several. About thirty in 
iluiiiber were captured and marched to Sharon, from whence they were 
taken to New Hampshire and held until the close of the war. 

PK.ESBYTEEIAN Chuech OF Pleasant Valley. This organization 
dates from 1765, and is an outgrowth of the "Pittsburgh Church" at 
Washington Hollow, and the one that absorbed it, through the village 
becoming the business ceiiter. Their edifice, which was a wooden struc- 
ture, was not erected until 1770. The church site and ground for 
burial purposes was deeded to the society, April 10, 1770, in consid- 
eration of ten shillings, by Jacob Everson and his wife, neither of 
Whom appear to have been members of this congregation at the time. 



TOWN OF PLEASANT VALLEY. 423 

The society was incorporated under the name of the "Presbyterian 
Congregation of Pleasant Valley," January 28, 1785, and Cornelius 
Humphrey, Eliphalet Piatt, Lemuel Conklin, John M. Thurston, 
John Everson and Joshua Ward were chosen trustees. In 1812 the 
first house of worship was enlarged and improved at a cost of $2,500. 
The present brick edifice was erected in 1848. The congregation 
secured a parsonage with about twenty acres of land attached, in 
1801, and in 1840, a new parsonage was built on the site of the old 
one. This farm was sold in 1870, and in the same year the present 
parsonage near the church was erected at a cost of $4,500. 

Upon the organization of the society in 1765, the Rev. Wheeler 
Case was installed as pastor. His labors with this congregation 
extended over a period of twenty-six years, u^til his death, which 
Occurred August 31, 1791. 

Succeeding pastors were: Reverends Methusaleh Baldwin, 1792- 
'99; John Clark, 1800-'29; Benjamin F. Wile, 1829-'67; Henry J. 
Acker, 1868-'73; William Whittaker, 1873-'79; Augustus B. Pritch- 
ard, 1800-'87; Edgar Beckwith, 1887-'01 ; George T. Galbraith, 
stated supply, 1901-'04 ; Frank W. Townsend, 1904-'08 ; Rev. R. H. 
Steams, 1908. 

The Baptist Chukch. The settlers in the vicinity of Salt Point 
were principally of the Baptist faith, and organized a society previous 
to the Revolution. It was not until 1790 that their first house of 
worship was built, on a half acre of ground given by John Van Voor- 
hees. The records begin with the year 1793, and Elder John Dodge 
became the first pastor. He continued until 1813, and was followed 
by Elder Roberts, who officiated seven years at difi'erent periods. The 
membership has dwindled and with the exception of a few years the 
pulpit has been filled by "supplies." 

The Methodist Episcopal Church. It is not known when Meth- 
odism was introduced in Pleasant Valley, but probably about 1788, 
the year the Dutchess drcuit was formed. Meetings were held for 
several years in a school house on the hill one mile east of the village. 
In 1825 the society bought of James Odell for $150.00, one acre of 
land situated on the "Dutchess Turnpike" and proceeded at once to 
build a church. In 1845 the edifice was removed from the hill to the 
village, during the pastorate of Rev. Jeremiah Ham. Tliis church 



424 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



and the Methodist Church at Washington Hollow are now supplied by 
the Rev. Mr. Hawley, of Poughkeepsie. 

St. Paul's Chuech, Pleasant Valley. This society was organized 
through the efforts of Rev. F. W. Hatch, Mr. Homer Wheaton and 
Bishop Onderdonk in 1837. A lot was obtained from James Odell 
and John Newcomb in 1842, and a church edifice erected, which was 
consecrated January 25, 1843. Up to this time the Rev. Mr. Hatch 
was in charge of the parish. He was succeeded in 1842 by the Rev. 
Sheldon Davis, who remained until 1862. He held services in various 
parts of the county, and left to this parish a rectory and $600 in 
trust. The church has been repaired and improved under the rector- 
ship of the Rev. Dr. Richard Russell Upjohn, who has been in charge 
since 1903. 

The Westminster Pkesbtteman Chukch at Salt Point was or- 
ganized December 20, 1860, by seventeen members of the Presbyterian 
Church at Pleasant Valley, who had requested their dismissal from 
the parent society for that purpose. 

A church site was donated by Mr. Charles Brown, and the edifice 
erected in 1862. Rev. A. C. Frissell was installed the first pastor. 
The church is now prospering under the care of the Rev. J. A. Mac- 
Growan. 

According to the Friends' records which occupy a chapter in this 
work, the Quaker meeting house at Pleasant Valley was erected in 
1802. Among the early members were the Deans, Flaglers, Drakes, 
Stringhams, Hicks and Farringtons. Regular meetings were dis- 
continued in 1856. 

The following have been the successive Supervisors of the town since 
1824: 



1824— '25 Samuel M. Thurston 

1826— '27 Peter K. Du Bois 

1828— '32 Anthony Badgley 

1833 — '34 Robert Laurence 

1835 Charles Brown 

1836 Thomas Welling 
1837— '39 Charles Brown 
1840— '41 John H. Newcomb 
1842 — '43 Isaac Van Wagner 
1844 — '46 OUver Devine 

1846 • Daniel O. Ward 



1847— '48 George Holmes 

1849— '50 Franklin Dudley 

1851— '62 Isaac P. Smith 

1853— '54 Isaac Van Wagner 

1855 Isaac P. Marshall 

1856— '58 (Records lost) 

1859 William H«rrick 

1860 Gteorge Lamoree 
1861— '62 John W. Lattin 
1863— '64 V. M. Townsend 
1865 Thomas Alley 



TOWN OF PLEASANT VALLEY. 



425 



1866 


V. M. Townsend 


1888— '89 


John W. Edwards 


1867 


Dewitt Webb 


1890— '91 


E. Wright Vail 


1868— '70 


Isaac P. Marshall 


1893 


Edward C. Drake 


1871— '73 


George E. Brower 


1893 


Calvin Coon 


1873 


Anthony Briggs 


1894 


Anthony Briggs 


1874— '78 


John M. Bowman 


189fi 


Samuel Lynch 


1879— '80 


Abram Devine 


1896— '97 


William H. Bower 


1881— '83 


Prank L. Akerley 


1898— '99 


Benjamin Van Wagner 


1883— '84 


Theron H. Marshall 


1900— '03 


Joseph Doty 


1886— '86 


Edward C. Drake 


1904— '05 


William G. Lary 


1887 


Theron Marshall 


1906— '09 


Charles L. Cole 



426 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 
THE TOWN OF RED HOOK." 

THE town of Red Hook was formed from Rhinebeck, June 2, 
1812, and its early history is more or less blended in that 
of the latter town. 

It lies in the extreme northwest comer of Dutchess, bordering 
Columbia County, which forms its northern boundary. It is bounded 
on the east by Milan; on the south by Rhinebeck; while along the 
western border flows the matchless Hudson. 

The surface of the town is a rolling upland, and the soil chiefly a 
gravelly loam, except in the broad and fertile valleys of the Sawkill 
and Stony creek, where it is clayey. Spring Lake, in the eastern 
part, formerly called Long Pond, is the largest body of water in the 
town, and forms the source of the Sawkill. 

Overlooking the Hudson are several beautiful country seats of 
historic interest; while the interior of the town is devoted principally 
to agriculture and the cultivation of fruits. 

The town has changed but little since the publication of the last 
history of Dutchess County. The villages of Red Hook and Tivoli- 
Madalin continue to be the chief centers of population, and Barry- 
town maintains its importance as a railroad depot for the surround- 
ing country. 

Tradition relates, and has been supported by some evidence, that 
about the year 1700 an aboriginal battle was fought on Magdalen, 
now Cruger's Island, between fifty chosen warriors of each of the 
tribes composing the "Six Nations," namely, the Oneidas, Onondagas, 
Mowhawks, Cayugas, Senecas and the Tuscaroras. It was arranged 
that but one man from each tribe should enter the conflict at a time. 



1. We are Indebted to Mr. John N. Lewis, of Annandale, for tlie greater portion of the 
material embodied In thia chapter. 



TOWN OF RED HOOK. 427 

At its close there were only a few of the Mohawks and Tuscaroras 
left, with the advantage in favor of the latter. The Mohawks fled in 
their canoes to the island about a mile north, then called Shpsteen, 
now Goat Island. There they lighted their camp fires and spread 
their blankets over sticks of wood and stones, expecting the visitors 
to fall upon them during the night. As they imagined, the vic- 
torious Tuscaroras came and proceeded to attack, as they supposed, 
their sleeping enemies. But they sprang from their hiding places 
behind the rocks, and in turn vanquished the Tuscaroras. The Mo- 
hawks thus went home victorious, and held the supremacy of the Six 
Nations, over which the dispute had arisen. 

The last accounts of Indians located in this vicinity were of those 
in the Northwest portion of the town facing the North Cove. There 
they remained long after it was settled by the white people. In some 
of the deeds of the early settlers the lands are described as bounded on 
the north and west by the Red Man's Corners, and from this, it is 
presumed, originated the name of Red Hook. The land they occu- 
pied being hook shaped, and in possession of the red men, the Dutch 
settlers called it Roed Hoek. 

In 1688 Col. Peter Schuyler obtained from Governor Dongan a 
patent to lands in this neighborhood, the boundaries of which are 
defined iii Chapter IV. The following year Schuyler disposed of a 
portion of his patent to Harme Gansevoort, who in turn sold it to 
the Knickerbacker family in 1704. Other divisions of the patent 
Col. Schuyler sold to Tierk De Witt of Ulster County, Joachem 
Staats of the manor of Rensselaerswick, and Barent Van Benthuysen 
of Dutchess County, in 1719. 

The reservation of mill sites on the SaWkill, which was found to 
[have three falls of water, and the right to cut and haul timber there- 
for over any of the adjoining lands, all of which is clearly set forth 
in the deeds, would indicate that there were no mills in this vicinity 
in 1720, nor highways, except the Post Road. 

Magdalen Island (now CrUger's), which was included in the Schuy- 
ler grant,' was sold to the Van Benthuysens. When Hudson sailed 
up the river, in the Hali Moon, he anchored oflF the north end of the 
island aild passed the night there. Dr. John Masten, of Kingston, 
purchased the island from the Van Benthuysens. He built a house 
at the south end and gave himself up to a life of ease and luxury on 



428 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

this island until 1835, when he removed to Buffalo, where his sons were 
engaged in the practice of law. 

Mr. John C. Cruger then purchased the island, but did not spend 
much of his time there for the first few years, though his father, Mr. 
Peter Cruger, was there most of the time. The Crugers were a noted 
New York family. In 1739 John Cruger was Mayor of New York 
City, and his son subsequently was also Mayor. Another son was a 
colleague of the celebrated Edmund Burke, a representative in Parlia- 
ment for the city of Bristol, England. Mr. John C. Cruger died in 
New York, November 16, 1879, a few days after his return with his 
family from Europe, beloved and lamented by everyone. His wife, 
the daughter of Stephen Van Rensselaer of Albany, died April 27, 
1888, and was buried beside her husband, beneath Trinity Church, 
New York. 

The mills that were built subsequent to 1725 on the Sawkill and the 
White Clay Kill (now Stony creek) were a prominent feature of the 
earlier times. On the former stream at one time stood Judge Livings- 
ton's mill at the river; General Armstrong's mill at Cedar HiU; Van 
Benthuysen's mill, and a woolen factory in the same place; the Chan- 
cellor's mill, in the interior, and Robert G. Livingston's miU on the 
Rock City branch. 

At the mouth of Stony creek was the miU of Jannetje Bradt, Park's 
mill at Myersville (MadaUn), Cook's factory, and Zachariah Hoff- 
man's mill. Several of the above mentioned mills and adjoining build- 
ings were burned by a detachment of British troops immediately after 
the destruction of Kingston in 1777. The only dwelling spared was 
the home of Gilbert Robert Livingston, who remained loyal to the 
crown during the Revolutionary War. 

A large portion of the land about what is now known as Tivoli was 
owned by the Hoffmans, who built the Hoffman mills northeast of 
Tivoh, nearly a century and a half ago. They were freighters, store- 
keepers, and millers before and after the Revolution. 

Nicholas Bonesteel and Anna Margretha Kuhn, his wife, with some 
of their children, were among the early settlers. A portion of the 
village of Red Hook is now on the easterly part of their farm. Of 
their descendants, Philip N. Bonesteel was a merchant, magistrate and 
postaaster in Red Hook for many years. His son, Virgil D., was 
Surrogate of Dutchess County in 1844. 



TOWN OF RED HOOK. 429 

Peter Contine and his wife Eleanor, daughter of Jacob Heermance 
of Kingston, lived at Upper Red Hook previous to the Revolution. 
In 1791 he kept a store at what is now Barrytown Landing. 

John, James, Daniel and Robert Wilson, four brothers, settled in 
the vicinity of Upper Red Hook before 1770, and engaged in farm- 
ing. The two eldest married the Kuhn sisters, daughters of Simon 
Kuhn. 

Another early resident of the town was Hendrick Weidman, after- 
wards written Whiteman. He came from Zurich, Switzerland, about 
1736, and ten years later settled on a farm here, acting as land agent. 
His son Jacob, in 1796, purchased the fee of the farm. Both father 
and son warmly supported the cause of the Colonists during the 
Revolution, and the night of October 15, 1777 ,» a band of Tories 
attacked the Whiteman homestead, but were effectually repulsed. 

The history of the fine old estates bordering the Hudson is linked 
with prominent families of revolutionary days. The Montgomery 
place, which is identified, in a measure, with our national history, was 
the home of the widow of General Richard Montgomery, as well as 
of Edward Livingston. Shortly after Montgomery married Miss 
Janet Livingston, he settled on his wife's estate, "Grasmere," near 
Rhinebeck. When hostilities commenced between England and the 
colonies he warmly espoused our cause. When he was ordered to join 
Arnold at Ticonderoga and proceed to Canada, his wife accompanied 
ihim as far as Lake Champlain. His last words in bidding her good- 
bye were: "You shall never blush for your Montgomery." She was 
never permitted to see him again, for he fell within a few weeks while 
leading the advance on Quebec. His widow then bought of Abram 
Van Benthuysen the estate now called "Montgomery Place." She im- 
mediately built the house at present occupied by Carleton Hunt, 
Esq., and sisters, where she spent the rest of her days in quiet and 
comparative seclusion. She died in 1828, leaving the place by will 
to her youngest brother, Edward Livingston, who at that time was in 
the United, States Senate. He had previously served two terms in 
Congress, and in 1801 was elected Mayor of New York. 

Almont was built by General John Armstrong, who helped to cap- 
ture Burgoyne at the battle of Saratoga. The mansion was destroyed 
by fire thirty years ago, and the beautiful and extensive forest of 
giant white oaks and chestnuts will soon be converted into timber for 



430 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the New York market. A corporation, in 1908, paid $10,000 for the 
lumber rights of this property. 

The estate was purchased from General Armstrong about 1800 by 
Col, Andrew De Vaux, a native of South Carohna. After the death 
of Col. De Vaux in 1812 his widow and her two daughters resided at 
Almont until 1816, when the place was purchased by John C. Stevens 
for his brother-in-law, Robert Swift Livingston, who held the prop- 
erty tmtil his death. It then passed to his two sons, Frank and 
and Clarence. They sold it in partition to Gen. James H. Van Alen, 
but the transaction was not completed and Almont remained in the 
Livingston family, and finally passed to the two sons of Frank Liv- 
ingston, Robert and Charles, who sold it a year ago to Cord A. 
Meyer, of Brooklyn, the present owner. 

The estate known as "Rokeby," now owned by Mrs. Richard Al^ 
drich, and containing some three hundred acres, was first established 
under the name of "La Bergerie" by General John Armstrong, who 
built the house and so named the place after he returned from France, 
where he was American Ambassador, 1804-1811. Mrs. Armstrong 
was the daughter of Robert Livingston, of Clermont, in Columbia 
County, and a grand-daughter of Henry Beekman, of Rhinebeck. 

General Armstrong employed to build the house a Scotch carpenter, 
named Warner Richards, whom he moved from Cedar Hill to a cot- 
tage near the site. There was a quantity of panelling in the ample 
halls and many of the twenty rooms, all of which this skillful work- 
man made and placed, besides being the master builder. No archi- 
tect's name has been connected with the plans, but there is a tradition 
that one or more French country houses were freely copied by the 
General. Letters and bills of lading relating to the material, which 
came in sloops, are in the house; but the records are incomplete; it is 
impossible to arrive at any conclusion as to the relative cost of build- 
ing then and now. 

The War of 1812, during which General Armstrong was Secretary 
of War, his two grown sons being engaged upon the Canadian fron- 
tier, delayed the building, and placed the responsibiHty of its slow 
progress upon Mrs. Armstrong, who received many letters concern- 
ing flooring and beams, cellars and farm buildings, from her absent 
husband. On March 18, in 1816, General Armstrong wrote to Judge 
Ambrose Spencer: 



TOWN OF RED HOOK. 431 

"I have bpen entirely occupied devising ways and means to make my family 
comfortable in their new quarters. We were driven out of our old ones rather 
prematurely, and with a loss, the extent of which every day makes us better ac- 
quainted with. Of my papers all were saved excepting one box brought from 
France. Most of its contents was literary lumber, but my memorials of conver- 
sation with French functionaries, some of which were very curious, and might have 
been useful in illustrating the character of Buonaparte and his Ministers, are lost, 
and no exertion of memory can now replace them. We are tolerably lodged in the 
new house, and have the music of saws and hammers to wake us at daybreak, and 
to keep us awake through the day. In another month we shall have the additional 
felicity of mortar within and without." 

As the name La Bergerie implies, this plaqe was designed to be a 
sheep-fold. The Armstrongs imported merinos from France, on the 
advice of Napoleon, and sheep of this breed brougjht good prices in 
the hands of a lady who understood them, for Mrs. Armstrong sold 
five for fifteen hundred dollars. 

It is commonplace in the talk of the neighborhood that the Erie 
Canal ruined the husbandry of Bed Hook. Once the central part of 
the State could reach New York's market, a rich and more virgin 
soil produced better crops, animials and fruit. The peach crop, long 
very successful, lost its security of ripening, whether owing to 
changes in the soil, as it was longer under , constant cultivation, or 
to changes in the climate, is not certain, but after this last staple 
passed from the neighborhood the estates ceased to be productive, and 
have been sold by all who could not afford to run them without employ- 
ing labor regardless of what its return might be. 

General and Mrs. Armstrong were the parents of five sons and one 
daughter. The latter married William B. Astor, and in 1836 the 
house and grounds of "La Bergerie" were sold to Mr. Astor, the 
French Empire furniture which it contained, as well as the price, 
being reserved for the brothers. 

In 1813 was pubhshed Sir Walter Scott's poem of Rokeby. Just 
when a resemblance between the scenery of this poem and that of "La 
Bergerie" was first fancied, we do not know, but because of such re- 
semblance the name was changed to Rokeby. Mr. and Mrs. Astor 
lived to enjoy their inheritance until after their golden wedding, Mr. 
Astqr dying in 1875, three years later than his wife. Rokeby was 
bequeathed by him to the child of their long-deceased eldest daughter 
Emily, wife of Samuel Ward, Esq,, namely to Margaret Astor Chan- 



432 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ler. Mrs. Chanler only outKved her grandfather a few weeks. In 
December, 1875, her ten children, among them the present owner, 
inherited Rokeby, and there lived during a long minority. The place 
was again a sheep-fold. 

It was at Rokeby that Lewis Stuyvesant Chanler, formerly Lieu- 
tenant-Governor of the State of New York, and brother of Mrs. 
Aldrich, received the official notification of his nomination by the 
Democratic party in 1908, for the high office of Grovemor of this 
State, and it was here that he delivered his speech of acceptance. 

Others members of this family who have been prominent in public 
affairs of the State and Nation are WiUiam Astor Chanler, formerly 
Congressman from New York City, who, during the Spanish-American 
war presented the United States Government with a mountain battery, 
fully equipped, for use in the Philippine army; and Robert Winthrop 
Chanler, member of the State Legislature in 1904, and the present 
Sheriff of Dutchess County. Mrs. Aldrich (Margaret Astor Chanler) 
rendered faithful service to her country as an army nurse in the Cuban 
campaign. Her sister, Elizabeth, is the wife of John Jay Chapman. 
Their country seat, "Sylvania," occupies a portion of the Rokeby estate. 

The chateau of Tivoli, now occupied by Mrs. J. L. de Peyster, was 
built shortly after the Revolution by a Frenchman who spelled his 
name Delabegarre, but tradition says this was an Americanism for 
L'Abbe de Seguard, which would indicate that he was a waif of the 
French Revolution. He was ambitious, and in 1795 laid out his farm 
of sixty acres into lots for a proposed city. His enwalled dwelling 
was styled "Le Chateau de Tivoli," and from this chateau and illusory 
town, the name of the present village was derived. 

This old home in time came into the possession of Col. Johnston 
Livingston de Peyster, who remodeled it so that merely the original 
octagon center remains. 

The CaUendar House was built by Henry Gilbert Livingston, who, 
in October, 1795, sold it to Philip Henry Livingston. Mr. Livings- 
ton and his wife called this seat "Simning Hill," and occupied it until 
18S8, when it was purchased by Robert Tillotson, who sold it to 
Richard T. Auchmuty in 1835. It passed into the hands of William 
E. Toler in 1854, and ten years later into those of Jacob R. LeRoy, 
who presented it to his daughter, the wife of the Rev. Henry de Koven. 
In 1860 it became the property of Mr. Johnston Livingston, who, 



TOWN OF RED HOOK. 433 

with his son-in-law, Mr. Geraldwyn Redmond, at present occupy it. 

A portion of the homestead at Annandale now occupied by Mr. 
Jolin N. Lewis, president of the First National Bank of Red Hook, 
was built by his grandfather, Thomas Lewis, in 1754<, who occupied 
it until his death. It then passed to his son Peter, who married Mary 
Neher, the parents of John N. Lewis. 

Blithewood, the country seat of Captain Andrew C. Zabriskie, was 
formerly the property of Mr. John Bard. After the death of Mr. 
Bard the estate was sold to St. Stephen's College. Li 1904 Captain 
Zabriskie purchased the property, and the old house was replaced by 
the present mansion. 

Annandale was originally only the name of Mr. Bard's estate. It 
has now come to designate the site of St. Steph^'s College and the 
immediate neighborhood. 

The College grew out of the Church of the Holy Innocents and its 
parish school, of which the Rev. George F. Seymour was the rector 
in 1855. In connection with his parochial work he gave instruction 
to several young men who were preparing themselves to enter the 
General Theological Seminary. Through the interest and financial 
aid of Mr. and Mrs. Bard it became possible to make this class the 
nucleus of a training school, where young men looking forward to 
Holy Orders might obtain their preparation for the study of theology 
at a minimum cost, and amidst healthful surroundings. The need 
of such an institution had been keenly felt by both Bishop Wainwright 
and Bishop Potter. 

Mr. Bard agreed to convey to the proposed college the Holy Inno- 
cents Church which he had erected, the parish school house, some 
eighteen acres of land, and other property, valued in all at sixty 
thousand dollars, and to pay an annual subscription of one thousand 
dollars during his hfe and ability. In recognition of this gift the 
Diocese of New York, assembled in convention in 1859, adopted reso- 
lutions recognizing the training school as a Diocesan institution, and 
tendering the thanks of the Church to Mr. Bard. 

March 20, 1860, the Hon. John V. L. Pruyn, LL.D., obtained from 
the Legislature a charter which conferred upon the trustees of St. 
Stephen's College full collegiate powers and privileges. The trustees 
organized under the charter April 11, 1860, and appointed the Rev. 
George F. Seymour warden. He was succeeded in 1861 by the Rev. 



434 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Thomas Richey. Two years later the Rev. Robert B. Fairbairn, 
who had been professor of mathematics and natural philosophy the 
previous year, was chosen as his successor. During his able warden- 
ship of thirty-five years, the college increased in numbers and influ- 
ence. Valuable buildings were erected, endowments were secured, and 
students were attracted to the college from all parts of the country. 
He was succeeded in 1899 by the Rev. Laurence T. Cole, Ph.D., who 
resigned in the summer of 1903, and was followed by the Rev. Thomas 
R. Harris, D.D., who held the wardenship for three years and a half. 
The Rev. George B. Hopson, D.D., D.C.L., professor of the Latin 
language and literature, became acting warden until the spring of 
1909, when Rev. Dr. Rogers was elected warden. 

CHUaCHES. 

Methodist Episcopai, Chukch. Red Hook was originally an 
appointment on the Milan circuit, supplied with only occasional 
preaching. In the year 1840 this appointment was made a station, 
and was called the Red Hook Mission. The church edifice was erected 
in 1849. Among the earliest and most active members were Samuel 
Fancher, Mrs. Christian Mowl and Mrs. Jane Nicks. The first min- 
ister stationed here was Albert Nash. He was succeeded in 1841 by 
Rev. Bartholomew Creagh, who drew to the church some of the wealth- 
ier and aristocratic families of the neighborhood and town, including 
Mrs. William B. Astor and Mrs. Col. Armstrong and daughter. Mr. 
Creagh's labors were also blessed with a revival, and this favorable 
combination of circumstances gave the church a standing which it has 
since maintained. The Rev. W. T. Brush is the present minister. 

St. Paul's Evangelical Church is an butgrowth from the old 
"Pink's Corner" Church, which was the parent body and was German 
Reformed. The baptismal record runs back to 1730. About the 
year 1800 a new church was built at Lower Red Hook village, and 
its members being largely affiliated with the Lutherans by association 
and intermarriage, it became a Lutheran church, during the pastorate 
of the Rev. Dr. N. W. Goertner. The present pastor is the Rev. 
George Hipsley. 

Christ Church, The edifice of the Episcopal society was erected 
in J854 during the rectorship of the Rev. Henry de Koven, who was 
in charge of St. Paul's Church at Tivoli. The building was conse- 





S.^-.M'art/'.ie^z. /-''"&? (s A. iir 



TOWN OF RED HOOK. 435 

crated July 21, 1855, under the name of Christ Church, Lower Red 
Hook, by Bishop Potter. The Rev. Frederick Sill was appointed 
Dr. de Koven's assistant, and was succeeded in 1861 by the Rev. John 
W. Moore. In 1867 Dr. de Koven, who was sole trustee of the church 
property, resigned his trust and deeded the same to the following 
trustees: Rev. John W. Moore, Hon. John W. Chanler, William 
Chamberlain, Henry Astor, Andrew Crane, John H. Lord, and Dr. 
John Bates. Rev. R. V. K. Harris is the present rector. 

St. Paul's Chtjech, Tivoh. This church was admitted into the 
Union of the Protestant Episcopal Church, October 21, 1817. It 
was until 1820 under the charge of Rev. Henry Anthon, afterwards 
rector of St. Mark's, New York City. On the 27th of May, 1819, 
St. Paul's was consecrated by Bishop Hobart, <tand was the second 
Episcopal congregation organized in Dutchess County; that of St. 
James of Hyde Park, being the first. 

The first church building was an unpretending structure of wood, 
and was replaced in 1868 by, the present substantial stone edifice. 

Rev. Richard D. Pope, who was appointed rector of St. Paul's in 
1903, also has charge of Trinity parish at Madalin. 

Methodist Episcopal Chuech, Tivoli. The earliest members of 
this society, which was organized in 1842, were George Gleason, Jacob 
Van Steenburgh and wife, James Kent and wife, and R. Gleason. The 
society belonged to the Lower Red Hook charge. A meeting house 
was built in 1843, on land given by Eugene Livingston. This in 
time became too small, and in 1860 the present edifice was erected. 
The society is in a flourishing condition to-day. 

A sketch of the Roman Catholic Church at Barrytown will be found 
in another chapter. 

The records of the town have been carefully preserved and are in 
possession of the present town clerk, Mr. John Troy. The first an- 
nual town meeting was held at the house of Henry Watter, the first 
Tuesday in April, 1813, when the following persons were duly elected 
town officers for the ensuing year: David Van Ness, Supervisor; 
Matthias Row, Town Clerk; Peter Contine, Nicholas Allendorpt, 
George Shook, Henry Cooper, Jacob C. Miller, Assessors; Philip N. 
Bonisteel, Jacob Stall, Overseers of the Poor; Simon Hermanse, Col- 
lector. 

The succession of Supervisors from 1814 is as follows: 



436 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1814— 'IS 


Peter T. B. Myer 


1858— '59 


1816 


Philip N. Bonisteel 


I860— '61 


1817 


Peter T. B. Myer 


1863— '63 


1818 


Cornelius J. Elmondorph 


1864 


1819— '20 


Peter Van Allen 


1865— '68 


1821— '35 


Nathan Beekwith 


1869— '70 


182fr— '28 


George Shook 


1871 


1839— '30 


Henry Staats 


1872 


1831— '34 


Jacob Benner 


1873 


1835— '36 


Heniy Staats 


1874— '76 


1837— '38 


Philip H. Knickerbacker 


1877 


1839— '40 


Henry Lambert 


1878 


1841 


John V. A. Lyle 


1879 


1842 


Philip H. Lasher 


1880 


1843— '44 


John V. A. Lyle 


1881— '83 


1845— '46 


James Outwater 


1883 


1847 


John Bates 


1884 


1848— '49 


Augustln Martin 


1885— '87 


1850— '51 


Jeremiah Hendricks 


1888— '89 


1853— '53 


Cornelius E. Elmondorf 


1890— '91 


1854 


Henry Staats 


1893— '01 


1855 


Egbert Staats 


1903— '03 


1856 


Edmund Green 


1904— '09 


1857 


Egbert Staats 





Uriah Fuller 
Peter H. Fraleigh 
George Shoemaker 
Thomas Elmendorf 
Edward Salpaugh 
Lewis Salpaugh 
James A. Stoutenburgh 
Peter G. Fraleigh 
James A. Stoutenburgh 
Edward Feller 
Edgar L. Traver 
Charles E. Sands 
Philip H. Stickle 
Thomas J. Barton 
Frank S. Ormsbee 
Fred E. Ackerman 
W. S. Beekwith 
Henry E. Miller 
Clinton J. Rockfeller 
Edward Sturgess 
Clinton J. Rockfeller 
Daniel Van de Bogart 
Lewis S. Chanler 




Egbert Benson. 
Jacob Radclipfe. 
Levi P. Morton. 



Col. p. J. Schuyler. 

Robert Schell. 

Col. John Jacob Astor. 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK. 437 



CHAPTER XXX. 
THE TOWN OF RHINEBECK^ 

THE territorial limits of the present town of Shinebeck embrace 
18,94!6 acres in the northwestern part of the county border- 
ing the Hudson River. The town is bounded on the north 
by Red Hook; on the east by Milan and Clinton; and on the south 
by Hyde Park. 

Landsman Kill, the principal stream, was so named by Casper 
Landsman, who explored its course in search of miU sites. It flows in 
a southwesterly direction to the Hudson, and receives several smaller 
streams, notably KipskiU, or Rhinebeck creek. At Buttermilk Falls 
these waters pour over a precipice some sixty feet in height. 

Rhinebeck was formed as a town, March 17, 1788. Red Hook was 
taken off and formed into a separate township in 1812. These two 
towns comprised the greater part of Rynbeck precinct, organized De- 
cember 16, 17S7, which contained 

"all the lands purchased of the Widow Pawling and her children, by Dr. Samuel 
Staats, deceased; all the land granted to Adria Koosa and company. That land 
patented to Col. Henry Beekman, deceased, and the lands granted by patent to 
Col. Peter Schuyler, commonly called Magdalen's Island purchase." 

The first deed for lands described in Rynbeck precinct bears date 
of June 8, 1686, and is recorded in Book AA, Ulster County Clerk's 
office, in Kingston, N. Y. It is a transfer on the part of Aran Kee, 
Kreme Much, and Korra Kee, young Indians, to Gerritt Artsen, Arie 
Rosa and Jan Elton, of 

"a certain parcell of land, lying upon the east shore, right over against the mouth 
of Redout Creek, bounded between a small creek and the river, the which said creek 
is sold to the purchasers." 

The considerations of this purchase were a variety of articles useful 
to the Indians, and included blankets, kettles, guns, powder, axes and 

knives. 



1. The materials for this chapter are drawn mainly from SistoHe Old RMnebeek, by 
Howard H. Morse, 1908. We are also indebted to Mr. Morse for the use of several copy- 
righted illustrations. 



438 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Another Indian deed for land in this vicinity, conveys to Hendrick 
Kip, of Kingston, 

"a parcel of land lying over against the Redout Kill, on the north side of Arie 
Rosa, on the river." 

It bears the marks of the owners, Ankony, Anamaton and Calycoon, 
Esopus Indians. This deed, not of record, is dated July 28, 1686. 
It is written in English, and is in the possession of Henry Spies Kip. 
It states no consideration or boundaries. 

Confirming these sales a patent was issued by King James II on 
the 2d day of June, 1688. The patentees, Gerritt Artsen, Arie 
Roosa, Jan Elton, Hendrick Kip and Jacob Kip, divided the lands 
into five equal portions, made up of eight separate parcels to cover 
their individual shares, and deeds thereto were recorded in Ulster 
County, May 26, 1702. The whole tract containing about 2,200 
acres, received the name of "Kipsbergen," which it retained until the 
organization of Rynbeck Precinct in 1737. 

The lands thus patented lie between Landsman and Rhinbeck 
creeks and the river, and extend from Vanderburgh's Cove north to 
a line drawn directly west from the Hog Bridge to the Hudson. The 
patent, which is of parchment, has been carefully preserved and is 
now in the possession of Hon. Levi P. Morton. It was originally in 
the hands of the Roosa family, and was subsequently owned by Hon. 
John N. Cramer, a descendant, and later by the Hon. William Kelly. 

The Beekman patent, granted to Henry Beekman, April 22, 1697, 
covered only a small frontage on the river between the Kip and 
Schuyler lands. Beekman was not satisfied with his grant and ob- 
tained another patent in 1703, which covered all of Kipsbergen and 
pkrt of the Schuyler tract, the boundaries of which are described in 
Chapter IV. Schuyler crowded Beekman down from the Sawkill to 
"Steen Valet je," the small brook which divides the present towns of 
Rhinebeck and Red Hook. August 9, 1715, Beekman's son, Col. 
Henry, bought of Peek De Witt and Maritje, his wife, then owners, 
6,541 acres of the Col. Schuyler land to the north of the Beekman 
patent. This gave the Beekmans title to all the land in the present 
town of Rhinebeck, except the 2,200 acres patented to Artsen, Roosa, 
Eltcwi and Kip, and it is not known whether Beekman, senior, ever 
asserted any claim to this tract; but on March 9, 1726, Col. Henry 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK. 439 

executed a formal release and quit claim of his paper title to Kips- 
bergen. 

Following the grant of the patent covering Kipsbergen, the paten- 
tees engaged in clearing their lands and preparing it for occupancy, 
but we have no evidence of a settlement in the town previous to the 
year 1700, when Hendrick Kip built a small stone house on his south 
lot. It is still standing, and is now known as the "Heermance House." 
On the east side is a stone lintel with this inscription distinctly cut: 
"Ao 1700 H K A K," evidently the initials of the owner and his wife. 
In 1728 this house was the residence of Col. Henry Beekman, who 
enlarged, improved and occupied it until his death in 1776. 

Jacob Kip, the other patentee, built in 1708, on the west side of his 
lot, a stone house which is also standing. 

Gerrit Artsen, with a family of ten children, came to live upon and 
cultivate his land in 1702. One of Artsen's daughters married Hen- 
drickus Heermance, and another Jacob Vradenburgh. Both sons-in- 
law located on the Artsen land. 

The Boos a tracts were occupied by Laurens Osterhout, a son-in-law 
of Captain Roosa; and also by a Van Etten and an Ostrander, each 
related to the Captain by the marriage of sons. 

Jan Elton had four sons-in-law, Newkirk, Wynkoop, Paulding and 
DuBois, among whom the Elton portion of the patent was partitioned. 

The elder Beekman early sought settlers for his lands. He foresaw 
the necessity and advantage of a grist and saw mill near the river, 
accessible from the settlements on the Artsen, Roosa, Elton and Kip's 
lands, and below. A mill site convenient to the settlers was very im- 
portant; these numbered in 1709 about thirty famihes. Beekman 
bought land of Captain Roosa in 1710, built a dam on his land adjoin- 
ing, and a saw and grist mill on the Roosa land, utilizing the water 
of Landsman creek to turn the wheels. These mills were among the 
earliest in Dutchess County. 

In 1715 Beekman induced many Palatine families, then living at 
East Camp on Livingston Manor, to locate on his lands, which he had 
laid out for these "High Butchers," principally in the vicinity of the 
old German Church. Along the King's highway north and south of the 
church, the Neher, Bearinger, Teder, Polver, Drum, Zipperley, Hainor, 
Stickell, Shever and other families took up land under life leases, re- 
quiring them to make all improvements and to "pay an annual rent of 



440 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

a schepel of wheat to the acre," and to lose the fruit of their toil at 
the expiration of their leases. Others who entered upon land in the 
south end of the patent, under the same conditions, were the families 
of Froelick (Fraleigh), Hegeman, Schryver, Ostrom, Ackert, Bergh, 
Schultz and Uhl. To the east, skirting and on the Wurtemburgh hills, 
early leases were held on farms by Cookingham, Eighmie, Lown, Mar- 
kel, Moore, Marquart, Progue, Pier, Teal, Westfall and others. 

Judge Henry Beekman succeeded in scattering these settlers well 
over his land. In the erection of mills and the development of his 
property, he had brought to his aid two sturdy, capable men, who 
proved valuable acquisitions to the neighborhood. One was William 
Traphagen, who planned and built the miUs; the other was Casper 
Landsman, soon installed as the miller. 

Traphagen purchased of Beekman, in 1711, a large tract described 
in the deed as "plain." It was about a mile in length, extending 
northward from the junction of Landsman and Rhinebeck creeks; the 
easterly boundary was along the post road. Traphagen called his 
purchase "the flatts," by which name it has been known for more than 
a century. He settled upon it four or five years before he got his 
deed, and built in 1709 a stone house on the north side of the Sepasco 
trail or path, now West Market street, and between Garden and Oak 
streets, in the village. This house, which served many years as a 
tavern, was torn down in 1882. 

Judge Beekman apphed the name Ryn Beck to his patent as early 
as 1713, and in a deed dated November 29, 1714, conveying 124 acres 
of his land to Peter and William Ostrander, of Esopus, he says that 
the land is in "Ryn Beck." John Beatty, a surveyor, on a map 
which he made of these lands in 1714, spelled it "Rieneback." It has 
been generally supposed that the origin of the name Rhinebeck was 
a combination of "Rhine" in honor of the river of that name, and 
"Beek," for the owner of the land. The Palatines are reputed spon- 
sors for this derivation. Mr. H. H. Morse, author of Historic Old 
Rhinebeck, declares the name can be traced to a more certain source. 
He says : 

"The name most likely Intended, and, in fact, given the locality, is 'Rheinbach.' 
This is the name of a small village in Rhenish-Prussia, about fifty miles south of 
the nq|t:ed city of Cologne, and some eight miles back of the river Rhine. It is in 
the Palatinate. Several of the early settlers came from this locality. Karl Neher, 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK. 441 

a list master, was one of them. He was a leader and had considerable following." 
"Judge Beekman may have had this in mind in laying out the land for the 
'high Dutchers.' Spelling it Ryn Beck did not change the actual name." 

The county was divided into three wards in 1714, and the territory 
between Crom Elbow creek and Roelaff Jansen's Kill comprised the 
North ward. The list of taxpayers in this ward, in 1718, numbered 
sixty-four persons, with the total assessed valuation of property placed 
&t £426. Their names and the amount of individual assessment will 
be found in Chapter V. 

William Traphagen (Wellem Trophage) was one of the largest 
taxpayers. He opened a blacksmith shop adjacent to his tavern, and 
«arly craftsmen found the locality convenient for their trades. This 
formed the nucleus of the present village of Rhinebeck. Nearby was 
a grist mill, operated by Schut. By 1722 the neighborhood had de- 
veloped in a marked degree. The assessor's list of that year numer- 
ates ninety-six taxpayers, most of whom lived within the present town 
limits. In 1730 it was decided to have a church in the immediate 
vicinity, which was erected on the site of the present "Old Dutch 
Church." Simon Cole (Kool), son of Isaac and Geesje (Tropage) 
Kool, was the first merchant in the town. He was a grandson of 
WiUiam Traphagen. John Kip was a carpenter; Ananias Teel, a 
wheelwright; Laurence Teder, a mason; Henry Shop, a harnessmaker ; 
■Jacob Van Ostrander, a hnen weaver. 

The erection of several grist, saw and woolen mills on the Lands- 
man KjU, were potent factors in the early development of Rhinebeck. 
The Beekman miU, built in 1710, near the river, was followed in 1715 
by the Beekman-Livingston mills, below "the flatts." The Rutsen 
mills, on the turnpike east of "the flatts," were built in 1742, and the 
Traphagen mill in 1750. The General Montgomery and the Gov- 
ernor Lewis mills were built in 1774 and 1800, respectively. 

The establishment of ferry service at Rhinebeck in 1752, brought 
the inhabitants in closer connection with Rondout. The charter was 
granted to Abraham Kip on the east side of the river, and to Moses 
Contine on the west side 

"to run a feny across the Hudson between the landing place of said Kip on the 
•east shore of said river, and the landing place of said Contine on the west shore 
of said river, exclusive of all others within the space of two miles below the said 
landings, and to take toUs." 



442 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The grant was perpetual on condition that two sufficient ferry boats 
were to be kept, one on each side of the river. The Kips owned it 
until 1790, when it passed into the hands of the Elmendorfs, who sold 
it in 1851 to the present company. The earlier ferry boats were 
operated with oars and sails. Captain Elmendorf introduced first the 
open horse boat, and later the steam ferry boat. 

Before the close of the eighteenth century the little village at the 
intersection of the King's highway with the Sepasco road to the river, 
was fast becoming a business center. Evardus Bogardus had suc- 
ceeded the Traphagens, father and son, in the ownership of the tavern. 
Koert and Henry Du Bois were merchants. Asa Potter was post- 
master, and occupied the "red store on the corner," the property of 
John T. Schryver and Tunis Conklin. Dr. Ananias Cooper and Dr. 
Hans Kiersted administered to the sick of the town. Henry B. Liv- 
ingston and William A. Duer were early legal practitioners. 

The village of Rhinebeck was incorporated April 23, 1834, and a 
month later the following officers were elected: Trustees, EHphalet 
Piatt, Peter Pultz, John Drury, John I. Smith, John T. Schryver, 
Jacob Heermance, John Jennings ; Assessors, John A. Drum, Theophi- 
lus Nelson, Stephen McCarty; Treasurer, Nicholas Drury. John T. 
Schryver was chosen president of the Board of Trustees. The act of 
incorporation was amended in 1867, and the village limits extended. 

One half of the business section of the village was destroyed by fire 
May 8, 1864. It was soon rebuilt with substantial brick structures. 

The Bank of Rhinebeck was organized in 1853, with a capital of 
$125,000. Henry De Lamater was elected president; Wilham B. 
Piatt, vice-president; DeWitt C. Marshall, cashier. This institution 
was one of two banks in the State of New York that did not suspend 
specie payment during the great panic of 1857. It became a national 
bank in 1865, following the enactment of that banking law. The list 
of presidents from its organization to the present time have been as 
as follows: Henry De Lamater, 1853 to 1868; William B. Piatt, 
1868 to 1880 ; Edwin Hill, 1880 to 1895 ; John D. Judson, 1895. 

The Rhinebeck Savings Bank was organized in 1862. Joshua C. 
Bowne was its first president, and Simon Welch its treasurer. These 
offices are now filled respectively by Augustus M. and Thaddeus A. 
Traver. July 1, 1908, its resources were $826,913.42. Its surplus- 
$39,430.73. It had on deposit $774,117.62. 



444 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The Starr Institute is a gift to the people from Mrs. Mary R. 
Miller, as a memorial to her husband, the Hon. William Starr Miller, 
a prominent citizen of New York, who died in 1854. The building 
was erected and furnished in 1862, at a cost of $15,000. It contains 
a reference and circulating library, and a large hall for public pur- 
poses. The building was enlarged in 1907, to meet the requirements 
of a branch of the Young Men's Christian Association, then organized. 

In 1805, the district school system was introduced, and one district 
followed another to meet the demand of population. There are now 
twelve school districts in the town. In 1869, after much controversy, 
a Union Free School was erected, now the Rhinebeck High School. 
It was enlarged in 1901. The RhineclifF school is the second largest 
in the town. 

The Rhinebeck Academy, incorporated in 1840, was the successor 
of Rev. Samuel Bell's Classical School, which had existed for several 
years. The property was purchased in 1860, by James E. De Garmo, 
who continued the educational institution until 1890, when he removed 
to Fishkill-on-Hudson. 

The Memorial Building at Rhinechff contains a library, a reading 
room, and an auditorium. It is a spacious structure, and was erected 
in 1907 by Hon. Levi P. Morton, as a memorial to his deceased daugh- 
ter. It is the only public building in Rhinechff. 

CHURCHES. 

The first church in Rhinebeck, and one of the earHest in the county, 
was the Old German Church, which stood until the year 1800, on the 
post road, three miles north of the present village of Rhinebeck. It 
was erected by the Palatines in 1716, on the land of Judge Beekman. 
It was a union church, because these settlers were both Lutherans and 
Calvinists. December 10, 1729, the Lutheran people sold out to the 
Reformers, receiving for their interest in the church and four acres 
of ground, "twenty-five pounds current money of New York." 

During the period it was a union church. Rev. John Frederick 
Hager, a Calvinist, and Rev. Johannes SpaUer, a Lutheran, ministered 
there. The Calvinists then secured the services of the Rev. George 
Michael Weiss. The records are in his handwriting from 1734 to 
174g. He was followed by Rev. Casper L. Schnorr, who remained 
until 1756. Rev. Johan C. Rubel was the next pastor. During his 
pastorate of four years he baptized two hundred and twenty children. 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK, 445 

and added eighty members to the church. The next settled pastor was 
Rev. Gerhard Daniel Koock, who came to America in 1763, and at once 
took charge of this church. His pastorate here covered an unbroken 
period of twenty-eight years. He baptized one thousand eight hun- 
dred and nineteen children. Rev. Koock died in 1790, and is buried 
at Germantown, Columbia County, N. Y. He was succeeded by Rev. 
Johan Daniel Schefer. Prior to 1801 the German society built a new 
church in Red Hook village, and the "Old German Church" passed out 
of existence. 

The Lutheean (Stone) Church. When the Lutherans disposed 
of their interest in the German church, they applied to Gilbert Liv- 
ingston for a lot for a church and cemetery near the German church. 
Mr. Livingston granted their request, and the .edifice was built in 
1730. In the cemetery is the gravestone of Carl Neher, which gives 
the date of his death as the 26th of January, 1733. The original 
building was replaced shortly before the Revolution by the present 
"Stone Church," which was remodelled and enlarged in 1824. The 
parsonage was built in 1798, and is well preserved. Among the 
pastors from 1730 to 1850 were Reverends SpaUer, Hagadorn, Hart- 
wig, Berkemeyer, Reis, Pfeiffer, Quitman, Eyer, Goertner, and Schaef- 
fer. Subsequent pastors were WiUiam D. Strobel, F. M. Bird, G. W. 
Schumacker, Charles Koerner, S. G. Finkle, J. A. Earnest, Chester H. 
Traver, C. L. Barringer and D. W. Laurence. 

The Refoemed Dutch Chuech, on the "Flatts," had practically 
its origin in 1730, when Henry Beekman presented to Laurence Oster- 
hout, Jacob Kip and William Traphagen "and the rest of the inhabi- 
tants of the North Ward" a deed for two pieces of land, one contain- 
ing two acres, and the other forty-four acres, for church and burial 
purposes. With the exception of the Catholic church property on 
the corner of East Market and Mulberry streets, aU of the village of 
Rhinebeck lying east of Mulberry street and south of Chestnut street, 
is built on the church land. The lots have all been sold under leases, 
subject to a yearly rent. There are over one hundred houses on this 
land, from which the church collects rent. 

The church was built before 1733, as required by the terms of the 
deed. It was in charge of Rev. Petrus Vas, of Kingston, until 1742, 
when it found itself "in quality" to support a minister in connection 
with the German church, a few miles north. 



446 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Rev. George Michael Weiss served it until 1746. From that year 
until 1760 there was no settled dominie. Then Eggo Toukens Van 
Hovenburg came into the pastorate and remained until 1763. Until 
1769 the church was served at intervals by Dominie Koock of the 
German church. March 26, 1769, Rev. Warmaldus Kuypers came 
into the pastorate and remained until September, 1771. He added 
fifty members to the church. For nearly five years the church was 
again without a settled pastor. On the 2d of June, 1776, Rev. 
Stephen Van Vorhees, the first candidate licensed by the American 
Synod, was called. He remained until December, 1786. His records 
of the church are in the English language. Dominie Petrus De Witt 
was the next pastor. During his pastorate the church became a body 
■corporate by an act of the State Legislature, passed March 7, 1788. 
It took the name of The Reformed Protestamt Dutch Church of Rhyn- 
beck Flats. John Broadhead Romeyn succeeded De Witt in 1799, 
and was followed in 1804 by Rev. Jacob Broadhead. During his min- 
istry the present church edifice was built in 1808. The largest sub- 
scriptions to the building fund came from the heirs of Col. Henry 
Beekman, the children of his only child and daughter Margaret. 

Dominie Broadhead had William McMurry for his successor in 
1812. Then came David Parker in 1820; then the eminent divine, 
■George W. Bethune, in 1827. The present parsonage was built for 
Dr. Bethune. He laid out the grounds, planted the trees, and directed 
the interior arrangement of the house. He kept a span of good horses, 
and a colored groom to care for them. He took no one's dust when 
out driving. He was an eloquent preacher, and well hked by the 
people. After him Rev. James B. Hardenburgh served from 1830 to 
1836. Then Dr. James Lillie from 1837 to 1841. He was a gradu- 
ate of Edinburgh University, a profound scholar, and a magnetic 
speaker. Subsequent pastors were Brogan HofF, Peter Stryker, W. 
A. Miller, H. R. Timlow, Goyn Talmage, brother of the famous 
Brooklyn clergyman, Alonzo Peake, L. Walter Lott, J. Romeyn 
Berry, Dr. J. Howard Suydam, and the present incumbent, Charles 
G. Mallery, who is continuing the good work of his predecessors. 

St. Paul's op Wurtembeegh. By 1759 the residents of that por- 
tion of the precinct then called "Whitaberger Land," and now Wur- 
temburgh, applied to Col. Beekman for permission to build a church, 
and for a gift of the land required, which Beekman willingly granted. 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK. 447 

The church edifice was erected, and the Rev. J. F. Ries installed as 
pastor. The records begin with a baptism under date of October 22, 
1760. Rev. Ries served this church until 1785. He was followed by 
George H. Pefifer, who remained until 1794. Dr. Frederick H. Quit- 
man supplied the pastorate from 1798 to 1825 in conjunction with the 
Lutheran Stone church. Toward the close of his ministry he became 
very feeble, and had to be carried to the pulpit and retained his seat 
while preaching. William J. Eyer was his successor, and remained 
until September, 1839. He preached in the English language and 
ministered exclusively to the Wurtemburgh church. The succession 
of pastors from 1839 are A. T. Geissenhainer, Charles A. Smith, W. 
N. SchoU, George Neff, Joseph G. GriflSth, John Kling, George W. 
Fortney, C. W. Deifendorf and Roscoe C. Wrigfet. The Rev. John 
Kling was recalled February 1, 1908, and is now the pastor. 

A new church building was erected in 1802. It was thoroughly 
repaired and improved in 1832, and in 1861 was enlarged and re- 
modeled into its present condition. 

The Methodist Chuech. This sect was introduced in Rhinebeck 
in 1792 by Rev. Freeborn Garretson of Maryland, then on a visit to 
his friend, Dr. Thomas Tillotson, at "Linwood." He married Mar- 
garet, daughter of Judge Robert R. and Margaret (Beekman) Liv- 
ingston, in 1793, and became a resident of Rhinebeck. 

A map made in 1797 shows a Methodist church on a hiU facing the 
road to Milan. It was near the home of the Garretsons, but no rec- 
ords can be found pertaining to it. The first record of a Methodist 
organization in the town is contained in a deed from Mrs. Janet Mont- 
gomery to Rev. Freeborn Garretson and others, trustees of the Metho- 
dist Episcopal Church at Rhinebeck Flatts, dated August 1, 1801, 
covering a lot on the east side of what is now Centre street, between 
East Market and South streets. Tradition relates that the church 
on the road to Milan was taken down and rebuilt on this lot. The 
lot on which the present church edifice stands was also a gift of Mrs. 
Janet Montgomery, in 1822, in which year the edifice was completed. 
The parsonage was built in 1829, on a lot presented to the church 
by Hon. Edward Livingston. The church edifice was enlarged in 
1863, and the parsonage reconstructed in 1871. The church build- 
ing was destroyed by fire originating in a defective furnace flue, Feb- 



448 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ruary 12, 1899. Within a year it was rebuilt at a cost of $16,200. 
The records were also burned in the fire of 1899. 

The Methodists had so increased in numbers by 1855 that chapels 
were erected at Rhinecllff and HiUside. The churches are now served 
jointly by Rev. John Wesley Bohlmann. 

The Baptist Church. This society was founded in the town by 
Rev. Robert Scott in 1821. It had no local habitation until 1825, 
when a "small, convenient house was made ready," on ground donated 
by Mrs. Janet Montgomery. The society struggled along until 1841, 
when the Hon. William Kelly became a resident of Rhinebeck. He 
was a Baptist and wealthy, and his support gave the church new 
life. In 1869 he purchased land adjoining the church, and added 
it, a gift to the church lot. In 1890 the present modern and sub- 
stantial church building was erected, largely through the efforts of 
the Reed family. Dr. George Fuller of Baltimore, Dr. William R. 
Williams of New York, Dr. Martin B. Anderson, president of the 
University of Rochester, and Dr. Kendrick, professor of Greek in 
the same, have preached from the pulpit of this church. 

The Village Luthekan Chtjech was founded by Rev. Charles A. 
Smith, a former pastor of the Wurtemburgh church. The edifice 
was built in 1842, on a lot, the gift of John T. Schryver. In 1876 
important alterations were made in the interior of the church. Rev. 
Smith ministered to this society until 1851. L. D. Wells, the present 
pastor, began his labors in 1899. 

The Episcopal Church. Episcopal services were held in Rhine- 
beck as early as 1846, first in the Methodist and Baptist churches, 
once a month, and later in the "Baker building." In 1852 the society 
was incorporated and a church building erected on ground given by 
Mr. Rutsen Suckley. The church was consecrated October 6, 1856, 
by the Right Rev. Horatio Potter, D. D., provisional bishop of the 
diocese. The Rev. Richard S. Adams was the first rector. He was 
followed in 1854 by Rev. ,G. H. Walsh, who remained until 1866. The 
lecture room and the chapel at Rhinecliff were built, and the rectory 
purchased during Mr. Walsh's term. The Rev. A. F. Olmstead was 
the next rector, continuing his duties here until his death in 1895, 
when Rev. E. C. Saunders, the present incumbent, was called. 

In 1895 the vestry purchased the Schell property for a new church 
site, and a year later the present massive edifice — Church op the 



TOWN OF RHINEBECK. 



449 



Messiah — ^was erected thereon. The building costs $70,000. It con- 
tains several appropriate and expensive memorial windows: one to 
William Astor, in his lifetime a liberal supporter of the church; one to 
Susan Watts Street, daughter of Mrs. Levi P. Morton; one to Flor- 
ence Adele Kip-Humbert; one to Rev. Aaron F. Olmsted, for thirty 
years rector of the parish; one to Miss Julia Ann Traver. The 
pulpit was a memorial gift of Mrs. William Astor to the memory of 
her husband. A new organ was placed in the church in 1908, by 
Hon. Levi P. Morton and Mrs. Morton, as a memorial to their 
daughter. 

The following persons have been large contributors to the support 
of the church: Mrs. Mary R. Miller, Mrs. Franklin Delano, Miss 
Elizabeth Jones, Horatio Miller, Edward Jones, William Astor, Lewis 
Livingston, Ambrose Wager, John Jacob Astor, Levi P. Morton, 
George N. Miller, Ernest H. Crosby, Douglas Merritt and Robert B. 
Suckley. 

A sketch of the Catholic churches at Rhinecliff and Rhinebect will 
be found in another chapter. 

A list of Ward and Precinct Supervisors, beginning with the year 
1720, appears in Chapter IV. The following is the succession of 
town Supervisors: 



1788 


Peter Contine 


1845 


Moses Ring 


1789— '91 


William RadcUff 


1846— '47 


Tunis Workman 


1792— '94 


David Van Ness 


1848 


James Montfort 


179S— '97 


Peter Contine, Jr. 


1849 


Isaac I. Piatt 


1798— '00 


Isaac Stoutenburgh 


1850 


Jacob G. Lambert 


1801— '03 


Andrew Heermance 


1851 


Ambrose Wager 


1804— 'OS 


Peter Contine, Jr. 


1853 


James C. McCarty 


1806— '08 


David "Van Ness 


1853 


James Montfort 


1808— '18 


John Cox, Jr. 


1854--'5S 


John H. Cramer 


1819— '30 


Koert Da Boise 


1856 


Richard R. Sylands 


1821— '24 


Christian Schell 


185Y 


Theophilns Nelson 


1825— '29 


Garret Van Keuren 


1858— '59 


Richard J. Garrettson 


1830— '33 


Isaac F. Russell 


I860— '61 


James C. MeCa,rty 


1833— '34 


Frederick I. Pultz 


1863— '63 


Andrew J. Heermance 


1835— '36 


Henry S. Quitman 


1864— '65 


Ambrose Wager 


1837— '39 


Conrad Ring 


1866 


Smith Quick 


1840 


John Armstrong, Jr. 


1867 


William M. Sayer 


1841— '43 


J. A. A. Cowles 


1868 


Robert L. Garrettson 


1844 


N. B. Van Steenburgh 


1869— '73 


Virgil C. Traver 



450 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



1873 


John G. Ostrom 


1886— '87 


Jolm C. Milroy 


1874— '76 


Joseph H. Baldwin 


1888— '89 


George Esselstyn 


1877— '78 


James H. Kip 


1890— '91 


John C. Milrof 


1879— '80 


William B. Kip 


1892— '97 


John A. Traver 


1881— '83 


Martin Heermance 


1898— '03 


James H. Kipp 


1883— '84 


Andrew J. Odell 


1904^'09 


Mandeville S. Frost 


1885 


James H. Kipp 







There was published in 1881, by Edward M. Smith, n Documentarj History of 
Rhinebeck, which includes genealogical records of the early settlers. In 1908 
Howard H. Morse published "Historic Old Rhinebeck." For more particulars than 
can be found in the foregoing article, the reader ii referred to these excellent his- 
tories of Rhinebeck, which can be found in the libraries of the Starr Institute, 
Rhinebeck, N. Y., and of the City of Foughkeepsie in the Adriance Memorial 
Library Building. — Editor. 




THE RHINEBECK HOTEL. 
Erected by Arent Traphagen, about 1766. 



TOWN OF STANFORD. 451 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

THE TOWN OF STANFORD. 

By Philip H. Smith. 

THIS town is included in the Great Nine Partners tract, granted 
in 1697 to Caleb Heathcote and others, and was formed 
from Washington, March 12, 1793. It is bounded on the 
north by Milan and Pine Plains; east by Northeast and Amenia; 
south by Washington, and west by Clinton. It hes a little north and 
east of the center of the county. Its surface Is a broken and hilly 
upland; Carpenter HiU, in the northeast corner, is the highest point. 

Thompson's Pond (Hunn's Lake) and Upton's Lake are the prin- 
cipal bodies of water, and Wappingers creek the principal stream. 
The soil is a good quality of gravelly and slaty loam. 

Among the pioneers was Paul Upton, who came from Massachu- 
setts and settled in the southwest part of the town, near the lake 
which still bears his name. He was a Quaker, and as he Uved near 
the meeting house, and was noted for his hospitality, his home was 
thronged at the time of quarterly meetings. 

Christopher Dibble, the ancestor of that family in this vicinity, 
came from Long Island and settled in the north part of the town, 
building a house on what was later the Titus farm, about the year 
1782. In the old family burial ground this is recorded: "In memory 
of Christopher Dibble, who died May 27, 1804, in the 63d year of his 
age." Also, "In memory of Elizabeth Dibble (wife of Christopher), 
who died December 1, 1803, AE 70 yrs." 

Three brothers, Samuel, Amos and Enos Thompson, great grand- 
sons of Anthony Thompson, original planter in the New Haven 
Colony, came into Dutchess County about 1750. Samuel and Amos 
had been connected with the Goshen, Conn, settlement. Enos came 
direct from New Haven. Tradition says they acquired 2,800 acres 
between them, around the shores of the beautiful sheet of water long 
known as Thompson's Pond. 

Samuel Thompson was the grandfather of Judge Smith Thompson. 



452 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

He was Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New York in 1814, 
Secretary of the Navy from November 9, 1818, to March 5, 1823, 
under the presidency of Martin Van Beuren, and Associate Judge of 
the Supreme Court of the United States from this time until his death, 
December 18, 1843. 

A grandson of Enos Thompson, Enos Thompson Throop, was Gov- 
ernor of the State of New York, 1829-'33. A later Governor of 
New York State connected with this family was John Thompson 
Hoffman, who occupied the executive chair in the early seventies. 

Many members of this family filled responsible positions in political 
and military life. Owing to the allurements of western emigration a 
large number left their native section, and the name has almost died 
out in places where it was once a power. The inland body of water 
once bearing the name has been called Hunn's Lake, which antiqua- 
rians consider an unfortunate change, since the old name perpetuates 
the courage and ability of a worthy band of settlers of the old New 
England stock, and the original owners of the soil. 

Bangall, Stanfordville, Stissing, Mclntyre, Hull's Mills and Bare 
Market are villages of varying size and importance. Bangall is a 
village, much of whose growth is the result of its being a railroad sta- 
tion. There is a fine level highway leading to Stanfordville, nearly 
a mile distant, along which are strewn fine residences, so that the two 
places might be called one village. The history of Stanfordville is 
the old story of the decadence of small inland manufacturing towns 
throughout the county. Facilities of transportation from different 
points, the growth of competition, together with the adoption of new 
and superior methods, have caused the patronage of the little shops 
to flow into the insatiate maw of the immense manufactories in the 
large cities. Hence, along the banks of the Wappingers, where stood 
the busy factories, that stream is no longer harnessed to turn wheels 
and spindles. The foundations alone mark the spot from which the 
buildings have been removed, and the water flows unrestrained in its 
course. 

In 1843 Silas Rogers founded the wagon axle manufacturing busi- 
ness, which was carried on extensively until the western competition 
became too strong. He began first in a little shop by manufacturing 
wagons and edged tools. A cotton mill had a brief existence here. 
A paper mill was established some time previous to 1840, and in 1844 
was burned down. The mill was rebuilt by a man named Gildersleeve, 



TOWN OF STANFORD. 453 

who began the manufacture of wrapping paper, and in 1865 the mill 
was again burned. He immediately rebuilt the mill, but the business 
was subsequently abandoned and the building and machinery removed. 

The grist mill was established about the middle of the last century 
by Seaman & Northrop; afterward it came into the possession of 
George T. Pierce, and was by him transferred to other parties. In 
the great freshet of 1865 the dam was swept away, and the property 
came into possession of the City National Bank of Poughkeepsie. The 
mortgagees rebuilt the dam and disposed of the property to Alonzo 
DueU. It is now conducted by H. Haight & Co. Buckwheat flour is 
a staple product of this miU. 

The early church history of Stanford is replete with material such 
as is ever a delight to the antiquarian. It is a* compendium of the 
early struggles of the pioneers in the wilderness; of a striving for 
religious liberty, while denying that right to a neighbor of a differ- 
ent creed; a record of bitter jealousies and heart burnings, when all 
should have joined shoulder to shoulder in the labor of settling a new 
country. Yet these early pioneers were loyal to their principles; 
they believed they were truly serving God when they persecuted those 
who dissented from the established rules of faith. Nothing in their 
eyes was more to be despised and feared than a heretic. The day of 
true religious liberty had not yet dawned. 

In the year 1755, so reads the record, a few brethren of the Baptist 
faith, residing in the wilderness, agreed to meet for prayer, which 
they continued to do for four years. Others joined them, and in 
October, 1759, they were constituted into a branch church by the 
Baptist church of Swanzey, Massachusetts Bay. Ephraim and 
Comer BuUock were chosen to administer the church ordinances, and 
Richard Bullock to serve as deacon. There is no further record until 
1771, when a serious trouble occurred. At this time the mother 
church at Swanzey adopted the singing of Watt's Hymns in their ser- 
vices. This singing "by rule" was to the Stanford church "a great 
grief," and they labored to convince the Swanzey church of their 
error. Their efforts were of no avail, so they withdrew from fellow- 
ship. Soon the Stanford church became divided on the question of 
Watt's Hymns, Elder Comer Bullock siding with the mother church, 
and Elder Ephraim and others dissenting, and withdrawing from 
church attendance. Comer Bullock remained faithful to his charge 



4S4 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

until his death in 1804. He is said to have baptized one thousand 
persons during his ministry. 

Elder Luman Burtch was ordained their minister in 1806. The 
ministers in those days were styled Elders. They had not the ad- 
vantages of a liberal education ; their graces of oratory may not have 
been what would pass at the present time; but such sainted men as 
Elder Burtch of Bangall, Elder Waldo of Dover, and Elder Johnson 
of Pawling, found a ready means to reach the hearts of their hearers, 
as evidenced by the religious awakenings under their preaching. 

These men labored with their hands for the support of their families, 
and we read of them absenting themselves from home for weeks to- 
gether, travelling on horseback with their belongings in a saddle- 
bag, carrying the Gospel to distant points. 

To go back in our records of events — on October 17, 1779, a letter 
was received from Kinderhook, asking help. The church at Bangall 
sent Elder Comer Bullock in response, who preached to them and 
administered the ordinance of baptism. The day "was remarkable 
for the convicting power manifested, and which was visible to the 
entire auditory." 

The self-denial of the pioneer preachers is evident from the follow- 
ing entry in the minutes wherein it is stated a member called upon 
the Elder to bring in an account of his expenses, amounting to over 
six pounds, which he had expended of his own money. 

April 28, 1780, "one of the brethren gave his new discovery of 
duty, which was to plough, plant and hoe the Elder's corn, mow and 
secure his hay, plough and prepare the fallow ground for sowing 
wheat for him, judging it most convenient for us, in our low circum- 
stances, to redeem what time we can in order that the Elder might 
use such redeemed time to his ministerial functions." The idea of a 
salaried minister at this time was entirely foreign to the minds of 
those early worshipers. 

In response to the request of the brethren at Dover and places 
adjacent, "Elder Bullock and messengers of the Bangall church visited 
those quarters," preaching the Gospel, baptizing both men and women. 

Li June, 1782, in response to an earnest request from brethren at 
Little Hoosic to come to them. Elder Bullock journeyed there and 
bajAized four persons, receiving two others ; the six were taken under 
the watch and care of the church at Bangall. 



TOWN OF STANFORD. 455 

In September, 1787, an invitation came frpm the neighborhood of 
Mabbettsville. The Elder and some brethren went to them, heard 
their experiences ; nearly forty of them were baptized, and by their 
request were constituted into a branch of the Bangall church. 

In June, 1790, some candidates "residing at a place called Hud- 
son" sent a messenger — there were no adequate postal facilities in 
those days — asking for Elder Bullock to come and administer the Gos- 
pel ordinances. "August 26, 1791, being the first day of the week, 
a great number of people came together, when the Elder preached the 
Word with great boldness and engagedness." After which he bap- 
tized a number, who were added to the church. 

December 29, 1790, at a regular meeting of the church at Bangall, 
Deacon Canfield expressed a desire that the bretjiren would consider 
the Elder in his present needful circumstances in respect to bread and 
wood, when the church agreed to relieve his wants. Such a decision, 
says the chronicler of those days, was a just one, in Adew of the fact 
that he had fed so many, and provided fuel for the people to be com- 
fortable so many winters when assembled at his house, the church 
being too cold, especially as we do not find it on record that he ever 
received a penny as a salary. 

In August, 1790, the church voted to send Elder Bullock to preach 
at Oswego once a month for one year. And later that he should 
preach at home three Sabbaths, and the fourth to the people at Mab- 
betsville, and where there were five Sundays he could go where he liked. 
In the next entry we learn that the Elder, in a response to a call from 
Rhinebeck, had gone thither to preach and baptize. The last record 
of this exemplary man is that he presided at a church meeting in his 
own house February 29, 1804. 

Thus for fifty years did Elder Comer Bullock serve the church at 
Bangall. During this time he had established branches at Kinder- 
hook, Mabbettsville, Oswego, Dover, Noble Town, Rhinebeck, and 
assisted at other places, without compensation. At one time he was 
tendered a contribution, which he accepted, and for so doing was called 
hireling. As elsewhere stated, his successor was Elder Luman Burtch, 
who was ordained June 15, 1806, in a grove near where the first meet- 
ing house stood. For another period of fifty years, like his prede- 
cessor, Elder Burtch served the church at Bangall. The two were 
the only pastors for a century, from 1755 to 1865, at which latter 



456 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

date Elder Burtch was struck down with paky. He died two years 
afterwards at the age of 81. 

The present house of worship was dedicated May 26, 1869. The 
house is located one-half mile south of the first church, and one-fourth 
mile south of the second building; this being the third edifice the 
society has built in its history of upwards of a century and a half. 
In the second house, the Dutchess Baptist Association was organized, 
the first meeting being held in 1835. 

In 1843 the Methodist society erected their house of worship. Pre- 
vious to that year their gatherings were held at schoolhouses, or in 
some of the more roomy dwellings. Their first preacher was a Rev. 
Mr. Thatcher, who assisted in the organization of the church. The 
meeting was held for this purpose at the residence of B. P. Meyers. 
Leonard Winans gave the timber for the frame of the new church. 
During the first twenty years or so of its existence, this society was 
under one pastorate with the Methodist church at Pine Plains ; but 
was subsequently for many years united with the society at Milan. 
The present pastor is Rev. W. B. Sleep. 

There is a neat Catholic church in the village of Bangall, at which 
regular services are held. This is an outlying mission of the church 
at Milbrook, and the services are conducted by the resident priest of 
that parish. 

The Quaker Society was organized very early in the history of the 
town. They have a substantial house of worship, and services are 
held with good attendance. The pulpit is supplied by Rev. A. G. 
Shepard, of the Society of Friends at Clinton Corners. The Friends 
burying ground is at a little distance from the church, and the number 
of marble slabs betokens that the membership during the century of 
its history must have been considerable. The Wings, the Hulls, the 
Guernseys and Uptons were members of this church. The present 
house of worship was built by the orthodox faction after the "Sepa- 
ration" in 1828, and stands on a commanding knoll on the banks of 
the Wappingers, in the village of Stanfordville. 

The Christian church of Stanfordville was established some time 
previous to 1840. The parent church was at Milan, whose pastor, 
Rev. Joseph Marsh, did mission work here, finally organizing the 
church. Mrs. Abigail Hoag Roberts administered to the spiritual 
and temporal wants of the people throughout this and adjacent locali- 



TOWN OF STANFORD, 457 

ties. Her son, Rev. Philetus Roberts, was pastor of this church for 
thirty years. 

Among its first members were Amos Knapp, and a Mr. Sherrill, the 
former giving the land on which the church was built, to be used by 
them whenever they chose, and when not in use by them the church 
could be used by any denomination, and In the event of the Christian 
denomination ceasing to exist, then the property should revert to him 
or to his heirs. Rev. Mr. Butler of Poughkeepsie supplies the pulpit. 

The Christian Biblical Institute at Stanfordville was formed at a 
session of the American Christian Convention held at Marshall, Mich., 
in 1866. The school was first opened at Starkey, Yates County, N. 
Y., and in 1872 was removed to Stanfordville, or rather to a location 
on the avenue between the villages of Stanfordsville and BangaU. The 
Institute was incorporated in 1868. The property consists of a farm 
of sixty acres, on which are farm buildings, a house for the president 
of the school, and several houses for the students, and the building 
called the Christian Biblical Institute. The latter was a gift in 1874 
from the Hon. David Clark of Hartford, Conn. 

The school was dedicated to the free instruction of Christian men 
and women, of suitable capacity and recommendation, and whose 
chosen life work was the Gospel ministry, without restriction as to 
denomination. Another institution of similar purpose also being con- 
ducted in a western city under the supervision of the American Chris- 
tian Convention, it was deemed best to consolidate the two colleges, 
and Stanford regretfully saw the school closed. The buildings and 
farm are now on the market. 

Families by the names of Thompson, Hunn, and Pugsley were for- 
merly great land owners in the eastern part of the town. This sec- 
tion furnishes some of the best land in the State, and their holdings 
were valuable and productive. Now by reason of deaths and removal 
there is scarcely a trace, by name at least, of those families, and the 
farms are managed by tenant farmers. 

The Carpenters, another leading family, still retain their property 
in their own name, their business being managed by Mr. Wilson Car- 
penter. Of this numerous family born in ancestral homes, may be 
mentioned B. Piatt Carpenter, ex-County Judge and at one time Terri- 
torial Governor of Montana, Jacob B, Carpenter, ex-Mayor of Pough- 



458 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



keepsie, and Isaac S. Carpenter, three brothers, natives of the town, 
and all achieving distinction. 

Congressman Sherwood, of Ohio, frequently mentioned in Con- 
gressional reports, is a native of this town. 

Daniel and Stephen Guernsey were in their boyhood playing ball 
and chasing cows barefooted over their pastures of Stanford. The 
Butts family were among the ancient settlers of the town. Allison 
Butts can tell you, if he wiU, of the cold spring on the ancestral farm, 
where he quaffed the purest water at many a noontide, and from which 
runs a stream large enough to turn a mill. 

Upton's Lake was at one time quite a pleasure resort for Pough- 
keepsians, fostered by the managers of the Poughkeepsie & Eastern 
Railroad. 

There are two grist mills at Bangall, one being run by John Knoed- 
ler, and the other by William Haight. A mill near the Separate is 
run by a Mr. Mosher; another at the outlet of Hunn's Lake is man- 
aged by one Schmidt. 

The Bordens have a plant at Bangall, established a few years ago, 
which is doing a thriving business. 

There are three stores at Bangall. G. E. Pulse conducts a general 
merchandise store, as also do Andrew C. Smith and C. Couse & Son, 
the latter having added a feed department. The postmaster here is 
Samuel Cox. 

Almon M. Harrison is a merchant at Stanfordville, and is also post- 
master, having received his first appointment under Grover Cleveland 
in May, 1894. 

The Case Brothers are merchants also, doing business at Stanford- 
ville. 

There is a store and postoffice at Stissing, Charles Arnold, post- 
master. 

The following is the list of Supervisors of the town of Stanford from 
its organization to the present time: 



1795 


Ezra Thompson 


1816— '17 


Jehiel Sherril 


1796 


Joseph Carpenter 


1818— '20 


Leonard Barton 


1797— '02 


Zachariah Mosher 


1821— '23 


Gilbert Thorne 


1803— '04 


Isaac Huntling 


1824 


Leonard Thompson 


1905-S-'06 


John Thompson 


182S— '26 


Jonathan Haight 


1807— '16 


Jeremiah Sherril 


1827— '28 


Jacob Sisson 



TOWN OF STANFORD, 



459 



1829— '30 


Leonard Barton 


1863 


WiUiam H. Tripp 


1831— '33 


Gilbert Thorne 


1864 


George Peck 


1833 


Isaac Thompson 


1865 


Mulford ConkUn 


1834r-'3S 


Benjamin Conger 


1866— '67 


Andrew C. Warren 


1836 


Morgan Huntting 


1868— '69 


William H. Tripp 


1837— '38 


John Thompson 


1870 


Mulford Conklin 


1839— '40 


William H. Stewart 


1871— '73 


Andrew C. Warren 


1841 


Harris Smith 


1874 


Silas W. Germond 


1842— '43 


Egbert Austin 


1875 


Silas O. Rogers 


1844 


Rufus Smith 


1876 


OUver K. Smith 


1845 


Stephen G. Guernsey 


1877— '79 


Isaac Carpenter 


1846— '47 


John H. Otis 


1880— '83 


John W. Butts 


1848— '49 


OrriUe Sackett 


1883 


Andrew C. Warren 


1850 


Amos B. Knapp 


188*-'86 


Charles H. Humphrey 


1851 


Alfred Mosher 


1887— '88 


Smith Knapp 

Charles H. Humphrey 


1852 


Henry Rikert 


1889— '90 


1853— '64 


Ezra Bryan 


1891 


Smith Knapp 


1855 


Jacob B. Carpenter 


1893 


George E. Rodgers 


1856 


C. N. CampbeU 


1893-'99 


Edwin Knickerbocker 


1857- '58 


E. M. Vanderburgh 


1900— '03 


Creorge H. Kinney 


1859 


Isaac S. Carpenter 


1904— 'OS 


Edwin Coflto 


1860 


C. N. Campbell 


1906— '07 


William Stewart 


1861— '63 


Isaac G. Sands 


1908— '09 


Willett Hicks 



460 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXXn. 

THE TOWN OF UNION VALE. 

Bt Philip H. Smith. 

THE town of Union Vale was erected March 1, 1827, and in- 
cludes territory formerly comprised in the towns of Beek- 
man and "Freedom," now La Grange. Its surface is a hilly 
upland, intersected by a broad valley extending north and south. 
This valley is known far and wide as "The Clove," its limits extending 
beyond the town borders, and was an important landmark in the early 
history of the region. 

The Clove Kill is a tributary of the Fishkill, flowing southwesterly 
through the town. This territory was a portion of the Beekman 
Patent, and settlement is supposed to have begun about the year 1716. 
Oswego and Verbank are hamlets. Among the early settlers we find 
the names of Livingston, Potter, Abel, Morey, Reed, Uhl, Cline and 
Wilkinson. 

William Coe and Peter Emigh settled on adjoining farms here in 
1740. In that year the stone house was built, now standing, on the 
Emigh homestead, at present iu possession of a grandson of William. 
Many people every season make a pilgrimage to this relic of by-gone 
days. It is a large, two-story structure, in good repair notwithstand- 
ing its age. It was built when slaves were employed on the farm. In 
front of this house, exactly eight feet distant, stood the slave house, 
with doors opposite. In this latter the slaves lived. A peculiarity 
of this building was, that although it was the home of the farm slaves, 
there was not a window in it. 

On the farm is the Emigh family burying ground, in the center of 
a large cultivated field, with walls broken down, and monument stones 
of slate slabs taken from tjie fields, and names and dates rudely 
chiseled thereon. In a comer of the same field was the burial place 
of the slaves, but now all evidence of graves has disappeared. The 
descendants are many of the pioneer Emigh, who redeemed this farm 



TOWN OF UNION VALE. 461 

from the wilderness, whose broad acres are now owned by William V. 
Coe, grandson of the pioneer settler of the farm adjoining. 

William Coe, the neighbor of Peter Emigh, was a tan currier, who 
had a tannery near David Moore's hotel, and marketed his sides of 
leather (which took months of soaking in his vats to prepare, instead 
of a few hours of preparation as at present) in New York, driving 
over the country to Poughkeepsie or Low Point, and shipping by 
sloop. 

On this Emigh homestead is the far-famed Clove Spring. This is 
a natural fountain of the purest water, from which flows a stream 
equivalent to an ordinary mill-race. The spring itself is seventy- 
five feet across. 

The Clove Spring Trout Company, an association of New York 
gentlemen, have utilized the waters of this spring in the construction 
of ten ponds, each fourteen by sixty feet, in which are twenty-two 
thousand trout, assorted into five sizes; the last pond containing two 
thousand two-pound trout. These are soon to be let loose in the ad- 
jacent streams, to be angled for when the "law is up." About eighty 
pounds of fresh beef is ground up daily for their consumption. 

The Clove Valley Rod and Gun Club is another association of 
wealthy gentlemen of sportsman taste, as the name implies. They 
have leased the old ore mine property for a term of years, and erected 
a large club house, where they are at liberty to come at pleasure. By 
a payment of a small annual fee to the farmers they have secured the 
right to hunt and fish over miles of adjacent territory. The com- 
pany has lately invested thousands of dollars in the acquisition of 
rights and in erecting buildings for the use of the club. 

The Watts de Peyster Home for Invalid Children is located three 
and one-half miles east of Verbank. The property of one hundred 
acres and a large brick and stone building with capacity for fifty 
children was given by the late General John Watts de Peyster. The 
Home is open to all children eligible to admission, regardless of race, 
color, or religious belief. Children between two and twelve years of 
age having any ailment that is not acute, contagious, or infectious, 
may be received. Boys may remain until fourteen years of age, girls 
until eighteen. 

The property is held in trust, and the work is mnged by deacon- 
esses of the Methodist Episcopal Church. It is supported by volun- 
tary contributions. 



462 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The Patrons of Husbandry of the town have a commodious hall, 
and the society is growing in numbers and strength. 

The Ebenezer Methodist Church was built in 1837, the original 
cost, exclusive of labor, being about $800.00. William Coe, Peter 
G. Emigh and Jonathan G. Vincent were the original trustees. From 
the date of the erection of the church edifice to the present time, up- 
wards of seventy years, the society has enjoyed unbroken services. 
The pulpit is now supplied by Rev. N. O. Lent, of Lagrangeville. 

South of this is a Catholic church, its attendants forming an out- 
lying mission of the Sylvan Lake Church. Meetings are held here at 
stated intervals. 

The "Old Union Church" at Green Haven, frequently referred to 
in the ecclesiastical documents of the county, and which was called the 
"Old Union" as early as 1820, when there was not a house of worship 
in the present town limits of Union Vale, is described to the writer as 
a large building for the time, with a gallery at one end, a high pulpit 
with seven or eight steps leading up to it, and a sounding board poised 
over the preacher's head. In later years it was used only for enter- 
tainments. Another "Old Union" stood on the Amos Denton farm, 
perhaps older than the one at Green Haven. The materials of this 
were removed to the farm of Vincent Williams, and converted into a 
bam, where it still stands, good to battle with the storms of a half 
century to come. 

Li the early twenties of the last century a great revival occurred 
in the old church at Green Haven. Farmers took their families a 
distance of eight and ten miles. The religious enthusiasm reached 
all over the town of Union Vale. This finally culminated in the erec- 
tion of the first house of worship in the town, which was of the Chris- 
tian denomination, and was erected in the field east of the residence 
of William V. Coe, the site now marked by a gravestone laid flat on 
the ground. The house was completed in the fall of 1824. About 
this time a large class of believers had been organized under what they 
termed the "Christian Liberty Departure," holding their meetings in 
the "Old Union," just mentioned. Abigail Hoag Roberts came into 
the vicinity; she was a preacher and a comforter; crowds came to 
hear her, and calls for her services came from every quarter. Her 
woTJt also contributed to the religious awakening throughout the 
region. 



TOWN OF UNION VALE. 463 

Soon after the Civil War some of the members of the Clove Ceme- 
tery Association began to discuss the expediency of having a church 
edifice at the entrance to the cemetery. It was not convenient in bad 
weather to hold funeral services two or three miles from the place of 
burial. They therefore made the proposal that the Christian church 
be taken down and removed some three miles south to its present loca- 
tion. This was favorably considered by the church people, and in 
1871 or '72 the removal was affected. 

The Clove Cemetery is one of the neatest of rural cemeteries. There 
are several fine monuments, and the walks and flowering plants are 
kept in fine condition. A miniature lake is included within it. 

Some score or more years ago a little chapel stood in the bend of 
the road leading from Gardner Hollow to Beeknaan Furnace. This 
unpretending house of worship was first erected, I am told, in the 
town of Beekman. It was moved to this locality where it was used 
for some time by some people of the Quaker denomination, and was 
called the little Quaker church. It afterward passed into the hands 
of another denomination, and was then known as the Union Cuyler 
Mission. The edifice is now doing duty as an ordinary out-building, 
"fallen from its high estate." 

There are two ore mines here, neither of which is now being 
operated. One is what is locally known as the "Brown Ore Mine," 
now a part of the estate of Frederick Mills, of Copake. This was 
first opened in 1856 by Jeremiah and William Emigh. The other 
mine is under the management of the Towers of Poughkeepsie when 
in operation. Only a few years ago a hundred tons of ore were un- 
earthed daily at these mines. Now, rusted machinery and buildings 
falling rapidly into decay mark a spot once resonant with the hum 
of industry. 

The Factory Woods were so named because of a factory that once 
stood on the stream above the Furnace Ford, where carding and 
spinning were done; a fulling mill was established here at the same 
time. 

Verbank Station is a pretty little village that has sprung up on 
the line of railroad, with its stores, residences, church and cemetery. 
The old village lies a short distance from the station on the verdant 
banks of the stream ; hence its name, Verbank. Formerly a cotton 
mill and a paper mill were operated here ; the stream is now harnessed 
to mills of another sort. 



464 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Some years ago Quaker City, or Oswego, was the home of a fine 
school for boys and girls. This was subsequent to the closing of the 
boarding school at Nine Partners. The school was managed by the 
Quakers; and a church of that denomination flourished here also. 

The following is a Ust of Supervisors of the town of Union Vale 
from its organization to the present time: 



18S8 


John WiUdnson 


1863— '66 


David D. Vincent 


1829 


Wmiam D. Wmiams 


1867— '70 


Joseph M. Cutler 


1830— '31 


Allen Butler 


1871 


Edward Congdon 


1833— '34 


Stoddard Judd 


1873— '73 


Weslejr Butts 


1835— '36 


Richard Vincent 


1874r-'75 


Henry L. Campbell 


1837 


John D. Snedecor 


1876 


Henry Bostwick 


1838— '39 


Leonard Vincent 


1877 


John U. Abel 


1840— '41 


James Uhle 


1878 


Frederick Hicks 


1843 


Andrew Northrop 


1879 


John U. Abel 


1843 


Richard Vincent 


1880— '83 


Isaac P. Vincent 


1844— '45 


David D. Vincent 


1883 


John W. Ross 


1846 


Isaac Vail 


1884 


Samuel D. Brownell 


1847— '48 


Jarvis Hall 


1885 


Chauncey P. Colwell 


1849 


Reuben L. Coe 


188ft— '87 


Prank T. Hall 


1850 


Robert Bennett 


1888— '89 


Heniy Bostwick 


1861 


Leonard Vincent 


1890— '91 


John U. Abel 


1853 


William W. Abd 


1892— '93 


Rutsen S. Hall 


1853 


Joseph M. Cutler 


1894— '95 


David B. Knapp 


1854 


David D. Vincent 


1896— '98 


Edwin G. Vail 


1855— '56 


Wilson Hawley 


1899— '03 


Elsworth L. Winans 


1857 


Lewis S. Davis 


1903— '06 


Frank F. Oakley 


1858— '60 


Daniel W. Odell 


1907— '09 


George H. Barlow 


1861— '62 


WiUiam R. Bagley 








CLINTON W. CLAPP. 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 465 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

THE TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 

By Clinton W. Clapp. 

THE town of Wappinger, originally a part of the town of Fish- 
kill, was erected May 20, 1875, and lies wholly within the 
limits of the Rombout patent granted in 1685. It is bounded 
on the north by LaGrange; east by Sprout creek, which separates it 
from East FishkiU; south by Fishkill, and on the west by Wappinger 
creek and the Hudson river. 

Territorially it is the smallest town in Dutchess County, covering 
16,025 acres, but in point of population and industrial activity it is 
one of the most important. 

Wappingers Falls, the principal village. in the town, is situated at 
the head of navigation on Wappinger creek, about two miles above 
its confluence with the Hudson, and the same distance from New Ham- 
burgh, a station on the N. Y. C. & H. R. railroad, with which it is 
connected by stage. An ielectric railway connects the village with 
the city of Poughkeepsie. 

The village lies on both sides of the creek, having been made to 
include the village of Channingville, in the town of Poughkeepsie, by 
its incorporation, September 22, 1871. The first board of trustees 
was composed of Samuel Brown, Joseph D. Harcourt and R. W. Nel- 
son. Matthew Cottam was chosen the first village president. 

The locality of the first projected settlement in the county was at 
the mouth of the Wappinger creek in the year 1659, and, had it been 
successful, would doubtless have changed the preponderant character 
of the pioneers. In that year Massachusetts, claiming, under her 
charter the country north of the 42d° of latitude from the Atlantic 
to the Pacific, granted "a plantation in the neighborhood of Fort 
Orange, to several persons of respectability residing within her juris- 
diction." With a view to locating this grant, an exploring party 



466 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

proceeded during the summer to Beverwyck (Albany), and after ex- 
amining the east bank of the Hudson, they announced their intention 
to establish a village near the mouth of the Wappinger creek. As 
this spot was difficult of access overland from the settled parts of 
New England, the projectors applied to the Dutch authorities solicit- 
ing the right of passage through the Hudson. Director Stuyvesant, 
forseeing the injury which such settlement would work on the Dutch 
interests in New Netherland, declined the right of free passage, and 
the New Englanders, after a wordy encounter, abandoned the project. 

Among the earliest land-holders within the present town limits were 
the Van Benschotens, who located in the neighborhood of New Hacken- 
sack. The name of "Elias Van Benschoten" appears in the list of 
inhabitants in the county in 1714. An early land transfer in the 
northeast part of the town bears date of August 15, 1728, wherein 
Gulian, Mary and Anne Verplanck, in right of their deceased father, 
conveyed a tract of three hundred acres to "John Muntross" of Dutch- 
ess County, the consideration being £83. In the same year Stephen 
Van Rensselaer, a son-in-law of Stephanus Van Cortlandt, who was one 
of the partners of the Rombout purchase, sold to Gideon Ver Valin 
745 acres of land north of the Verplanck tract. Johannes Schurrie 
was another early settler in the north part of the town. He came, 
about 1740, from Hackensack, N. J., from which the hamlet of New 
Hackensack derives its name. He settled on the land which subse- 
quently became the Diddle, Rowe and Wicks farms, and built three 
stone houses. The Diddle farmhouse is standing to-day, on which are 
inscribed the figures 1753. 

Others who settled on the Van Cortlandt and Verplanck tracts 
about the middle of the eighteenth century were Adolphus and Nicho- 
las Brewer, John Schuyler, Peter Teller, Samuel Bayard, Samuel 
Thorn and Joseph Vail. Later arrivals were Peter Mesier, John 
Hughson and the Rev. William Seward. 

The Mesier family were natives of France and fled to Holland to 
escape religious persecution. Pierre Mesier came to New Amster- 
dam in 1659. His descendants, Adam and Peter Mesier, were mer- 
chants in New York City, and accumulated much wealth during the 
Revolution. They were ardent Tories and gave much aid to the 
British army. Peter came to Wappinger in 1777, and through 
Malthew Van Benschoten purchased 422 acres of land of Nicholas 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 467 

Brewer, which included the house now known as the Mesier home- 
stead in the village park at Wappingers Falls. The land was con- 
veyed to Van Benschoten April 14th, and May 1st, 1777, was trans- 
ferred to Mesier. When the American army regained possession of 
New York City, the Mesier property in Barclay and Cortlandt 
streets was confiscated, and shortly thereafter the Mesier family made 
their home at Wappinger, where Peter maintained his thrift and added 
to his estate by other purchases, including the "Yellow' and the "Red" 
mills on the east side of Wappinger creek with 160 acres of land. 
He died in 1805, and left his property to his three sons, Mathew, 
Abram and Peter, Jr., with the provision that they give to each of 
their five sisters $6,000. Mesier Park and Mesier Avenue perpetuate 
the name in the village. • 

Adolphus Brewer was a miller and millwright from Holland. He 
built the "Yellow" mill at Wappingers Falls, which had a capacity of 
one hundred barrels of flour per day, and also erected several dwell- 
ing. He died in early life. His brother, Nicholas, built the Mesier 
homestead and the old hbrary building. The latter was a large two- 
story house, and had the appearance of a hotel. It was partially de- 
stroyed by fire and was replaced by what is now known as the "Smith 
Block." Nicholas also built the "Red" mill and dock at the head of 
tide water. Vessels drawing six feet of water could come to this dock. 
Nicholas Brewer died in 1787. His sons, John D. and Nicholas, Jr., 
came into possession of his property. Nicholas, Jr., and Henry Ter 
Boss were shipbuilders and had a shipyard near the present plant of 
the Gas Company. Vessels drawing sixteen feet of water could come 
up to this shipyard. Mathew Mesier had a sloop built there for the 
shipment of flour, and a number of gunboats were built at this yard 
in 1812 for the United States Government. 

February 28, 1819, a freshet of extraordinary force destroyed 
many mills on the banks of the Wappinger, and carried away every 
bridge from Salt Point to the Hudson. The Main street bridge at 
Wappingers Falls was immediately rebuilt. It was a covered struc- 
ture with windows on each side. It was replaced in 1852 by a stone 
bridge thirty feet wide, which in 1884 was widened to sixty feet. 

Another serious freshet occurred January 3, 1841. It swept away 
Given's cotton mill, the print works dam, and a house below the foun- 
dry. The bridges, however, remained intact. 



468 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In 1832, Mr. James Ingham, a native of Manchester, England, 
established at "the Falls," a plant for calico printing, now known as 
the Dutchess Print Works. In 1835 the business was sold to the 
"Dutchess Company," in which Thomas Gamer, who had been Mr. 
Ingham's agent, was the principal owner. Mr. Garner's associates 
were D. R. Mangam and L. M. Thorn. In 1866 Mangam & Thorn 
withdrew and were succeeded by S. W. Johnson. Shortly afterwards 
Mr. Garner died, and his real estate and business interests were trans- 
ferred by will to his son, William T. Gamer, who was drowned by the 
capsizing of his yacht in June, 1876. The same year William Bogle 
assimied the management of the plant, and later became superintendent 
of all of Garner & Company's interests in Wappinger. In 1898 Mr. 
Bogle died, and the management of the business has since been in the 
hands of his son, John Bogle. 

The industry has become one of the most important and extensive 
in Dutchess County. The business received a great impetus with the 
invention of machines for printing from copper rollers. Originally 
occupying but a single building of small dimensions, the plant now 
covers many acres of ground, and new buildings have been repeatedly 
erected in response to the increased demands for the productions of 
this concern. Over one thousand persons are given employment, and 
the daily output averages from twenty-five to thirty tons of calicoes 
and ahittings. 

The Franklindale Cotton Company, whose plant was destroyed by 
fire in 1885, was also the property of Messrs. Gamer & Co., by whom 
it was purchased in 184)4, The site and water power was first utilized 
by Benjamin Clapp, who bought the site from the Mesiers and erected 
a building, the lower floor of which he occupied in the manufacture of 
mahogany veneering. The second floor was rented to Cook & Low, 
who were engaged in the manufacture of combs, while the upper story 
was used as a drying room foi* the print works. 

The cotton mill operated 10,000 spindles, and produced 250,000 
yards of cloth per week. It gave employment to about 126 persons. 
Peter MeKinley was the first agent after the mill came into the hands 
of the Franklindale Company, and his brother, Daiiiel, was superin- 
tendent. Peter died in 1869, and was succeeded by Matthew Cottam. 
The plant was under the management of William Bogle at the time of 
its destruction. 




THOMSON E. GORING. 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 469 

The Clinton Company was organized in 1846 with a capital of 
$100,000, for the purpose of manufacturing cotton goods. Thomas 
Garner was the principal stockholder. A three-story stone building, 
50 by 210 feet, was erected on the site of the "Yellow" flour mill. The 
capacity of the plant was about the same as that of the Franklindale 
Company. It was burned June 19, 1855, and never rebuilt. The 
name, however, exists in the supervision of all the tenement property 
of Gamer & Co., numbering several hundred buildings, which are 
rented mainly to the operators in the print works. 

The Independent Comb Company, composed of Levi Cook and 
Emery Low, was formed in 1828. The business was later conducted 
by James Shields, Israel T. Nichols, and E. D. Sweet. They em- 
ployed at one time about three hundred hands, and tjie industry became 
quite lucrative. In 1854 the partnership was dissolved, and the mem- 
bers of the firm retired. The business finally passed into the hands of 
Elias Brown, who erected a new building for it ^t the comer of Fulton 
and Prospect streets. It was burned in 1868, and immediately re- 
built. Brown was succeeded by his sons, James and Samuel. Upon 
the repeal of the tariff during Cleveland's second administration they 
found that they could not compete with the German-made combs, and 
the business was discontinued. 

The R. J. Stuart Foundry, north of Drake's drawbridge on the 
Wappinger creek, was originally located at Hughsonville. The in- 
dustry was established by William Taylor, and has changed owner- 
ship several times since it was sold to Hunt & Disbrow in 1852. The 
plant was removed to its present location in 1873. 

Sweet, Orr & Company. This firm was founded by James Orr, who 
was the pioneer of the overall business. He commenced making over- 
alls in California in 1849, and in 1871, came east and started a small 
factory at Wappinger's Falls in company with his nephews, Clayton 
E. and Clinton W. Sweet. The original factory was enlarged in 
1876. There were then 250 employees, and a weekly product of 
1,000 dozen pairs. 

In 1880 there was need of greater faciHties for manufacturing, and 
the firm decided to start an additional and larger factory in New- 
burgh. Factories were subsequently opened in New York, Brooklyn, 
Philadelphia, Port Jervis and Joliet, HI. Main ofiices and warerooms 
of the company are situated in New York, Philadelphia and Chicago. 



470 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The product now includes coats, trousers, and flannel and outing 
shirts. Mr. T. E. Goring, formerly superintendent of the Wappinger 
plant, is now manager of the Baanufacturing department. Mr. Orr 
died in 1899, and Mr. Clayton E. Sweet died in 1909. The firm name 
is still carried on as originally adopted. 

The village of Chelsea, formerly known as Low Point or Carthage 
Landing postoffice, had at one time a shipyard owned by Cornelius 
Carman, where sloops and steamboats were launched. Its importance 
as a place of river commerce was equal to that of the two landings, or 
docks, at Fishkill, but it could not withstand the competition with 
FishkiU Landing after John Peter De Wint had completed the Long 
Dock, about 1815, with facilities for the shipment of produce from 
the back country, notwithstanding Chelsea's deep water and other 
advantages. 

In the County Clerk's office at Poughkeepsie there is a map made 
in 1812, entitled "A map of Carthage, in Dutchess County, at a place 
called Low Point, on the Hudson, or North River." It shows the 
plottings of a proposed village with several streets, including Liberty, 
Spring, Union, Market, and North; also a Broadway. 

Captain Charles P. Adriance, Solomon P. Hopkins and Gilbert S. 
Hopkins conducted a freighting business from Low Point until 1856. 

A large flour miU, operated by the late Starr B. Knox, stood on 
the dock. The business proved unsuccessful, and the mill was allowed 
to fall to ruin. Later an industry for the maniifactiire of cement, 
for use in the first Poughkeepsie bridge, was started here. The busi- 
ness was discontinued with the failure of the first bridge project in 
1873. 

Among the early residents of the neighborhood was Jacob Sebring, 
who lived in a large white house overlooking the river, and built a 
dock where he kept a yacht. He died about 1860. His widow, who 
was formerly Miss Margaret Ackerman, survived him many years, 
and gave the house and land to her nephew, Sebring Ackerman. 

Another large house in the village was Gilbert Budd's, a cousin of 
Underbill Budd, whose farm lay in the vicinity. Gilbert Budd had a 
lumber yard, and was interested in the freighting business. 

Starr B. Knox, the miller and Justice of the Peace, married for his 
first wife the daughter of Benjamin Hopkins, of StormviUe, and his 
second wife was Amy B., the daughter of John L. CoUyer. One of 
their sons is now a mechanical engineer, and the other a clergyman. 



4-:,. ■-, ., '- ■ w-.'' „. i/-^ 


i 




&:S-i^fir 




14 


-^■-|||j3.'.-.j^.y;,.:^, -^.~ i^ 




^\ 


ws^ifz. 




*,■ . ■^■'^f::i''*3B|PI Ijjj^ .,.,vi,./ 


1 


r. -^K?v^'"!s«:^'::?S| §' :.r^^S^^ 


1 I-' 


^B^BHB^^EjglBMg j^B/.^^pK ^^Bt'Mw^ J^^^Bira Brfw^ .1.11 II 


f 


aT^M 


1. . ■■■ 



i-i 

<; 

CO 

Pi 

O 

HH 

PL, 
Ph' 

o 
I— ( 

Pi 
I— I 

H 
HI 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 471 

recently appointed chaplain of Columbia University. The house now 
owned by Captain Moses CoUyer was formerly the rectory of St. 
Mark's Church, and stands on the site of the old one destroyed by fire. 

CHUECHES. 

The Rbpoemed Chuech or New Hackensack was organized in 
1768. For several years services were held in private houses. In 
1766 there were thirty-three members in full communion, and a wooden 
church edifice built. This building was taken down in 1834, when the 
present brick church was erected. 

The first settled pastor was the Rev. Isaac Rysdyck, who served the 
church from 1765 to 1789. He also ministered to the congregations 
at Poughkeepsie, Fishkill and Hopewell. Dr. Rygdyck died in 1791, 
and was buried beneath this church. In 1834 his remains were re- 
moved to a plot in the adjoining graveyard. 

The next pastor was the Rev. Nicholas Van Vraken, who was called 
in 1791 and remained until 1804. He was followed by Rev. John 
Barkalo, 1805-1810; Thomas De Witt, 1812-1826; W. W. Dwight, 
1826-1833; Cornelius Van Cleef, 1833-1866; Henry Ward, 1867- 
1887 ; William A. Dumont, 1888, who continues his labors to the pres- 
ent time. 

In the winter of 1900 Ellessdie Chapel, situated two miles north of 
New Hamburg, on the river road, and which was built by Mr. James 
Lenox in 1840, was taken down and removed to New Hackensack as 
an auxiliary building to the Reformed Church. It was re-dedicated 
to its present use October 21, 1901, the services being conducted by 
the Rev. J. K. Wight, who for many years had supplied the pulpit of 
Ellessdie at its former location. 

Methodist Episcopai. Chuech of Wappingee's Falls. In 1824 
preachers in the Dutchess circuit held Methodist services at the house 
of Joseph G. Smith, near Middlebush. February 21, 1830, the "Mid- 
dlebush M. E. Church" was organized, and Matthias Randolph, James 
S. Green and John Finch were elected trustees. A lot with a build- 
ing thereon suitable for a meeting house was purchased from William 
B. and Caroline Phillips. For several years the pulpit was supplied 
by circuit preachers. 

In 1845 a Methodist Episcopal Society was organized at Wap- 
pinger's Falls, and a small edifice erected on the west side of the creek 
in what was then the village of Channingville. 



472 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

It was decided in 1867 to consolidate the Middlebush and Wapping- 
er's Falls churches. The former was too far from the rapidly grow- 
ing village, and that at Channingville not large enough to meet the 
demands of both. Accordingly, in April of the following year, the 
lot now occupied by the Wappinger's Falls Methodist Episcopal 
Church was purchased from the estate of Margaret Reese, for 
$902.50, and the present church building erected at a cost of $14,- 
866.83, the funds for which were mainly raised by the exertions of 
Rev. A. C. Morehouse, who was appointed to the circuit in the spring 
of 1869. Rev. F. A. Coons is the present pastor. 

ZioN Peotestant Episcopal CHtracH. This church was estab- 
lished at Wappinger's Falls in 1833, through the efforts of Rev. 
Greorge B. Andrews, Matthew Mesier and Benjamin Clapp. The 
corner stone of the edifice was laid November 15, 1834, and the church 
consecrated by Bishop Onderdonk, of New York, May 6, 1836. Mat- 
thew Mesier and Benjamin Clapp were chosen wardens; the vestry- 
men were: Dr. J'eter D. Sch enck^ Henry Mesier, William I, Hugh- 
son, James Ingham, Daniel S. jGox, Emory Low and E. D. Sweet. 
Rev. George B. Andrews, the first rector, served this church for a 
period of forty-one years. He died August 20, 1874, and was buried 
in the Wappinger's Falls cemetery. Subsequent rectors were H. Y. 
Satterlee, J. N. Steele, Prescott Evarts and Rev. Dr. Pott. 

The Pbesbyteeian Chtjuch at Wappinger's Falls owes its existence 
and for many years much of its support, to Mrs. John Fisher Sheafe, 
whose country seat was near New Hamburgh. She instructed the 
Rev. John D. Wells, who was then preaching at Ellessdie Chapel, to 
investigate the field at Wappingers and see if there was a call for a 
church. This resulted in the organization of a Presbyterian Society 
in 1848, and in the same year a church edifice was built for the con- 
gregation by Mrs. Sheafe, on Fulton street. She also built the par- 
sonage, gave it rent free, with $200.00 a year in addition toward the 
support of the pastor. During the pastorate of Rev. O. A. Kings- 
bury — 1870 to '73 — the property on Fulton street was sold, and the 
present brick edifice on South avenue erected, to the expense of which 
Mrs. Sheafe contributed generously. The new church was dedicated 
July 25, 1872. Rev. William Parker is the present pastor. 

T^E Baptist Church was organized at Wappinger's Falls in 1838. 
Samuel Cushman, John Hodge and Peter Laurence were elected dea- 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 473 

cons, and Benjamin Clapp, clerk. Mr. Clapp, who was formerly a 
warden in Zion Episcopal Church, became converted to the Baptist 
faith. He supplied a building for the use of the society, in which 
services were held for nine years. The first pastor was the Rev. John 
Johns. In 1846 the society decided to erect an edifice, and Mr. Clapp 
donated a lot at the corner of South avenue and Prospect street. The 
church was dedicated December 5, 1847, at which time Rev. Nathan 
A. Reed was pastor. Mr. Clapp died in 1872, and bequeathed to the 
church $2,500.00 for a parsonage. Mr. Clapp's heirs added $2,000 
to the bequest, and the parsonage was built in 1873. Extensive im- 
provements were made to the church building in 1883. The present 
pastor. Rev. Charles S. Hutchinson, was installed May 1, 1907. 

Ths Methodist Episcopal Chttrch at Chelsea. This society was 
organized in 1823, and erected a house of worship in 1833, at a cost 
of $950.00, at which time the following trustees were in office: Elijah 
Budd, John H. Brinckerhoff, Felix Shurter, Henry I. Brinckerhoff 
and Garret B. Brinckerhoff. In 1870, under the pastorate of Rev. 
Samuel MacCutcheon, about $1,600.00 was expended on improvements 
to the church building. The parw)nage was built and furnished in 
1890, at a cost of $2,200. Rev. Samuel P. Gallaway is the present 
pastor. 

St. Makk's Chtiech, Chelsea, was built about 1867, and consecrated 
soon after by the late Horatio Potter, Bishop of New York. The 
church owes its origin to the efforts of Mr. William Henry Merritt, 
who met an untimely death, together with his wife {nee Scrysmer), 
and his sister, when passengers on the Steamship Atlantic in 1873. 
Mr. and Mrs. Richard P. Hart, Mrs. Gilbert Collins and her daugh- 
ters, Mr. and Mrs. William S. Verplanck and daughters, Mr. Samuel 
Verplanck, Captain Charles Adriance and his daughters, Mr and Mrs. 
John Shurter, Mr. and Mrs. TapHn and daughters, the Misses Hop- 
kins, the family of Captain John L. CoUyer, Mr. Starr B. Knox, Miss 
Pauline MacKinnon and others also took prominent parts in estab- 
lishing the church. 

Dr. Frederick W. Shelton was the first resident rector, and he con- 
tinued such until his death in 1881. Dr. Shelton was a graduate of 
Princeton, and soon became a writer of distinction. His "Up River 
Letters," "Salander and the Dragon," and several poems, are among 
his noteworthy works. The church has lost support and attendance 



474 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

during the past fifteen years, owing to the removal or death of many 
of its former parishioners, and it is now a mission under the arch- 
deaconary of Dutchess County. 

The Pbesbtteeian Chuech at Hughsonville. In 1840 the Rev. 
Eliphalet Price, pastor of the Presbyterian Church at New Ham- 
burgh, built a meeting house at Hughsonville, to be used as a mission 
in connection with the New Hamburgh church. Services were con- 
ducted by supplies from various churches until 1892, when the Rev. 
Calvin Wright was installed as pastor, and new life given to the 
church. The Rev. Mr. Dowerty supplied the pulpit from October, 
1908, to March, 1909, when he was installed as pastor. 

A sketch of the Roman Catholic Church at Wappinger's Falls will 
be found in a subsequent chapter. 

The Geinnell Libeaey Association. The Griimell Library is a 
local institution in which the people of Wappinger's Falls deservedly 
take much pride. This beautiful Swiss-chalet like library building 
crowning Main street hiU at the entrance to the village park, was the 
joint gift of Mr. and Mrs. Irving Grinnell to the people of Wap- 
pinger's Falls. 

For some years Mr. Grinnell maintained a library and reading room 
in the old Mesier residence at the comer of Main and Market streets. 
Mrs. E. A. Howarth was its librarian, and its limited accommodations 
were soon outgrown. In 1887 Mr. Grinnell built the present build- 
ing, and April ^(^,- 1888, transferred to the trustees of the Grinnell 
Library Association the control and management of the library, to be 
held by them in trust for the village. The original board of trustees 
consisted of the following: Hon. John Thompson, Francis R. Rives, 
Dr. Clarence Satterlee, William Henry Reese, Samuel Mansfield, Elias 
Brown, William Bogle, Clinton W. Clapp, James Marlor, William 
Halliwell, John Brennan, Hugh B. Dougherty, William K. Roy and 
Arminius W. Armstrong. A charter, approved by Justice Joseph 
F. Barnard, had been granted under the laws of the State of New 
York on January SO, 1888. The board organized by electing the 
Hon. Francis R. Rives, president; Arminus W. Armstrong, vice- 
president; William Bogle, treasurer, and Wilham K. Roy, secretary. 
Dr. Clarence Satterlee was chairman of the Library Committee, and 
WiHiam Halliwell, chairman of the Real Estate Committee. Mrs. E. 
A. Howarth was appointed librarian, and the Hbrary, well organized 




WALTER P. MILLARD. 



TOWN OF WAPPINGER. 475 

and equipped, started on its career of ever increasing prosperity and 
usefulness. 

It is a subscription library, with the price of tickets placed at a 
nominal sum. The library is entirely self-supporting, and according 
to its last quarterly report, had 323 subscribers. There were 7,769 
volumes on its shelves. The total circulation of the three months was 
3,000. The present officers are: W. Henry Reese, president; Wil- 
liam Halliwell, vice-president; William A. Brewster, treasurer, and 
William K. Roy, secretary. 

The Wappingers Savings Bank was incorporated April 23, 1869, 
with the following officers: Samuel W. Johnson, president; Israel T. 
Nichols and Dennis Sheehan, vice-presidents; Clayton E. Sweet, sec- 
retary and treasurer. Of the original board of trustees, Irving Grin- 
nell and William B. Millard are the only two now living. Mr. James 
S. Roy is president of the institution, and William A. Brewster is the 
treasurer. 

The Wappinger's Falls National Bank, incorporated February 1, 
1909, with a capital of $25,000, is a great accommodation to the 
citizens of Wappinger's Falls and vicinity. Mr. John C. DuBois is 
president, and William Tanner, cashier. 

The following is the succession of Supervisors for the thirty-four 
years of the town's existence: 



1875— '77 


James A. Seward 


1889— '90 


George Wood 


1877— '79 


James W. P. Lawson 


1891 


William A. Brewster 


1880 


Elias Brown 


1893 


William J. Brown 


1881— '84 


Isaac O. Norris 


189S— '95 


William A. Parker 


188S— '86 


Clinton W. Clapp 


1896— '99 


James R. Barlow 


1887 


John P. Monfort 


1900— '01 


Reginald W. Rives 


1888 


William H. H. Stoutenburgh 


1903— '09 


John O. Farrell 



[The sketches of the village of Chelsea and of St. Mark's Church were con- 
tributed by William E. Verplanck, Fishkill-on-the-Hudson.] 



476 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

THE TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 

By Rev. John Edwaed Ltall. 

LOCATION. The town of Washington has a central position in the 
county. Its territory belonged to the tract known as the Lower, 
or Great Nine Partners' Patent, which was granted by royal 
charter to Col. Caleb Heathcote, James Emmott, Henry Filkins, Hen- 
drick Ten Eyck, Augustus Graham, William Creed, John Aertson, 
David Marshall and David Jameson. 

This fact is stated on page 409 in the first book of deeds, in the 
County Clerk's office, as follows: "Whereas, by letters patent under 
the broad seal of the Province of New York, being dated May 27, in 
the year of our Lord 1697, remaining of record in the Secretary's 
office in the City of New York, his late Majesty, King William III, did 
grant and confirm unto Col. Caleb Heathcote and eight other persons 
in the same letters patent mentioned, all that certain tract of vacant 
land situate and lying on the Hudson River," then follows a descrip- 
tion of the tract. 

A map of the tract, dated 1734, is also to be seen there, together with 
a blue copy of it. Both show the divisions into mile-wide strips east 
and west (and the sub-divisions of each strip), extending from the 
boundary liae between the Province of New York and the Colony of 
Connecticut, to and including "Fishe Creeke" (now known as Crum 
Elbow Creek). Then, of course, must be added the nine narrow 
"water lots" which extend to the river shore, below the mouth of the 
creek. 

At the first organization of Dutchess County by the provincial gov- 
ernment on November 1, 1683, its divisions were called precincts, and 
contained much more territory than our towns. This town, with 
St^ford, Clinton and Pleasant Valley, was constituted a precinct just 
previous to the Revolution, and was named Charlotte Precinct, after 
Charlotte of Mecklenburg, who became queen to George III. 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 477 

The name Washington was given on March 7, 1788, by the State 
Legislature when the State was reorganized into twelve counties, one 
of which retained the name of Dutchess (which then included Putnam). 
The county was divided into twelve towns and here is the description 
of Washington: 

"All that part of the County of Dutchess bounded southerly by the town of 
Beekman, westerly by Poughkeepsie and Clinton (now Pleasant Valley), northerly 
by the north bounds of a tract of land called the Lower or Great Nine Partners, 
easterly by the easternmost line of lots of the general division heretofore made of 
the said tract of land called the Lower or Great Nine Partners, shall be and hereby 
is erected into a town by the name of Washington." 

The origin of the name is obviouSj but it is not certain that Wash- 
ington was ever in the town, though the writer has been told many 
times that he spent a night in a house in Washmgton Hollow, as he 
was crossing from some point on the Hudson to his headquarters on 
Quaker Hill. The town was reduced to its present limits when by an 
act of the Legislature, March 12, 1798, the northern part was erected 
into the town of Stanford. 

The Pkesent Limits. According to the latest survey, Washing- 
ton contains a little less than sixty square miles, 36,256 acres, being 
about eight and a half miles east and west and seven miles north and 
south. Its general average elevation, from six to eight hundred feet, 
and the absence of any considerable body of water, give healthfulness, 
comparative freedom from a humid atmosphere, and render it one of 
the healthiest sections anywhere to be found. A study of vital sta- 
tistics has shown a much smaller mortality among children than obtains 
elsewhere, and indicates a greater average longevity. 

Elevation. There are many hills 1000 feet above tide-water, some 
1100, 1200 and 1300 feet, and one elevation east of Little Rest 1344 
feet high. 

Industby. The industry of the town is almost entirely agricultural, 
and many of the farms within a few miles of the railroads have daries, 
carrying their milk daily to the condensing factories or shipping it to 
the city. 

Land. Some of the land is rough, with the underlying slate very 
near the surface and cropping out in barren ridges, yet many are the 
broad valleys and rich plateaus where the soil is equal to any in the 
county. In the western half of the town the Dutchess slate loam pre- 
vails, while in the eastern half the Dutchess silt loam is more abundant. 



478 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

At Little Rest and again east of Lithgow there are many acres of 
Merrimac gravelly or sandy loam, and the same conditions occur both 
north and south of Washington Hollow. While in the valley of Wash- 
ington Hollow and extending in a narrow strip so as to include much 
of the land of John Ham, is the Huntington silt loam. This is almost 
the only land of this character in the whole town. There is one other 
patch (say 150 acres) in the extreme northeast of the town, and it 
occurs along the banks of some streams in narrow strips. 

Roads. Washington has 121 miles of public roads which have a 
good reputation among those who visit the town, and have for a long 
time been the just pride of its citizens. 

The old Dutchess Turnpike, which was chartered in 1805, crosses 
the town from Washington Hollow to the east, dividing near Wash- 
ington HoUow into its north and' south branches, the former leading 
to Amenia and Sharon, and the latter through Little Rest, Dover 
Plains and on to Kent, Conn. 

In 1888, soon after the great blizzard of March 12, the corporation 
surrendered its charter, gave to the town a deed of its property within 
the town limits, and its sixteen miles became part of the public sys- 
tem. The town is also crossed from north to south by the Newburgh, 
Dutchess and Connecticut Railroad, which was built and equipped in 
1869 by the enterprise of George Hunter Brown, whose coming 
brought so many other things for the development and enlightenment 
of this and surroimding towns. 

Streams — ^Wateb. Powee. A small but noteworthy stream crosses 
the town, rising in the hills near Little Rest, where it has an elevation 
of nearly 800 feet and where there is a gristmill on the farm of Stephen 
Deuel. (There were formerly two mills in Little Rest.) This ndll is 
one of the oldest buildings in the county, having stood for about two 
hundred years, and its giant oak posts and floor timbers of the same 
size, more than a foot thick and wider still, may stand for two hundred 
years more, so solid is the entire structure. 

The stream flows northeasterly toward MabbetsviUe, crossing the 
Sharon turnpike, where for years was the Warner miU, thence to Mill- 
brook, where are five dams within a distance of a mile, one to form a 
lake on the estate of Mr. Charles F. Deitrich, another just below it 
but«not now in use as a water power, a third at the fine modem mill 
built by Mr. Deitrich, a fourth at the milk condenser, and a fifth at 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 479 

/ 
the mill of the late R. S. Haight. From here the direction is westerly 
until it leaves the town near the old Bloomvale cotton mills (now in 
ruins) at an elevation of only 275 feet. This stream, with its 500 
feet of fall, once attracted greater enterprises than at present, and 
now that water power can be transferred,, it awaits the genius and 
enterprise of someone who will use it to furnish electric power to pro- 
pel electric cars through our town, should we feel the need of such a 
convenience to connect us with our neighboring State, and with our 
county seat. 

In 1813 there was a fulling mill at Hartsville, built by Philip Hart, 
who owned 1000 acres and gave existence and his name to the village. 
Near the same point in 1820 came a plant for cutting dyewoods, owned 
and managed by the firm of Gifford, Sherman &^Innis. About 1837 
the firm of Merrit & Haviland bought the water power at Hartsville 
and built three large cotton mills. Later a silk mill flourished here 
also, and a spoke factory. 

Another manufactory of the town was established in 184!5 by Beriah 
Swift, just south of the Millbrook Inn, for manufacturing coffee mills. 
This plant afterward came into the possession of John and Wilham 
Lane, who did a large business, shipping these mills to all parts of the 
world. They added to the output of their factory, wheel rakes, door 
rollers, wagon jacks, plow shares and other small castings, and were 
doing a large business when they moved their plant to Poughkeepsie 
and soon after sold the house and farm connected with it to the Mill- 
brook Inn Co. In 1890 this company soon reconstructed the old 
house, and with the large additions, transformed it into one of the 
finest inns to be found anywhere in the country. 

Town Recokss. It is not to the praise of those who had the man- 
agement of public affairs that no records have been kept, back of 1866. 
There is not a road survey, nor even a list of the town officers, nor any 
statement of the part which the town took in County, State or National 
affairs. Any facts of early town history depend upon tradition or 
must be verified by records of the County, or public documents of the 
State or Nation. 

In 1778 an army of British soldiers, more than 5000 in number, 
marched across our town as prisoners of war. They were the troops 
of General Burgoyne, who surrendered to General Gates at the battle 
of Saratoga in October, 1777. - The terms of surrender were that 



y 



480 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

these troops were to embark from Boston to England, under a prom- 
ise not to serve the King "against the United States during this war." 

Greneral Gates sent his report to Congress, instead of to Washing- 
ton, and Congress did not ratify the terms made by Gates. After a 
while, therefore, the prisoners were marched from Boston to Charlott- 
ville, Va:;, where the most of them were held as prisoners until the 
close of the war. It was necessary in sending such a number of men 
across the country to keep them within the lines of the American 
army, and to do this they must be taken across the Hudson River 
above the Highlands. 

General Washington had distributed his army after the battle of 
Monmouth along the south side of the Highlands from the Hudson 
to Daiibury, Conn., and at a corresponding latitude on the west 
side of the river and the prisoners were conducted across Dutchess 
County, through Amenia, MabbettsviUe, Little Rest, Verbank, Ar- 
thursburgh, Hopewell Junction, and crossed the Hudson River at 
Fishkill Landing to Newburgh. 

Stephen Deuell remembers hearing his grandmother say that she 
saw them pass through Little Rest, and that they were Hessians. 
Probably some of them were, as General Burgoyne was assisted by 
Baron Riedesel and General Specht, who commanded the German 
troops. Madam Riedesel was among the prisoners, and her diary 
mentions the principal places through which the captives marched. 

In 1866 George Hunter Brown was elected Supervisor, and George 
Lawton, Town Clerk, and a sense of the value of records seems to 
have been born with their advent. 

Alms House. The town is also the seat of the County Alms 
House. When it was thought wise to separate the poor of Pough- 
keepsie from the paupers of the townships, David S. Tallman, 
John Ferris and Albert Emans were appointed by the State Legis- 
lature on April 7, 1863, to take the whole matter in hahd. They 
sold the old Alms House near Poughkeepsie, bought the present poor 
farm of Daniel H. Lyons and his wife Hannah, built and furnished an 
Alms House and transferred the towns' poor to it October 3, 1864. 
This was a frame structure and served well the purpose for forty 
years, when the present house was built of brick, with all the modern 
conveniences, at a cost of more than $60,000, in 1903. 

The first Superintendent of County Poor was Edgar M. Vande- 




JOHN M. HAM. 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 481 

burgh, who held the office for six years, his successors and their terms 
of office being as follows ; Walter Woddell, six years ; Charles LaDue, 
three years; D. S. Tallman, three years; James Russell, six years; 
Myron Smith, nine years; Isaac N. Carman, twelve years. 

Villages — Hartsville. The villages that are, and have been, are 
Hartsville, now a part of Millbrook, where is the greatest fall in the 
brook, before mentioned, and where the manufacturing interests of 
the town chiefly centered. There is a picturesque gorge here, not 
easily seen from the highway, which is well worth a visit both below 
and above the Daheim mills. 

Mabbettsville was at first called Filkintown, after one of the Nine 
Partners, because, it has been said by a former historian, he presented 
the inhabitants with a barrel of rum. Its present name was from 
one of the most prominent families of early times. If history's trage- 
dies could teach temperance, MabbettsviUe would have a history worth 
preserving. The late John Comstock, when an old man, once told the 
writer that he had recalled the young men, whose lives had been 
blighted and destroyed by strong drink in connection with the Mab- 
bettsville tavern and the cider press which long thrived there, and 
said, "I can count more than three hundred young men whose lives 
have come to a sad end before they had lived out half their days." 
Truly "Wine is a mocker and strong drink is raging and whoso is 
deceived thereby is not wise." No wonder John Comstock was a 
strong advocate and liberal supporter of the temperance cause. 

But Mabbettsville has had better things. Here a union Sabbath 
School was formed in 1867, which prospered to such an extent that 
through the liberal gifts of the inhabitants and the large benevolence 
of George Hunter Brown, a beautiful chapel was built at a cost of 
more than $11,000. It was a branch work of the Millbrook Re- 
formed Church, and continued for years to be an uplifting influence 
to all that region until the rise of Millbrook so near to it, and the 
establishing of several churches there, when it seemed unnecessary to 
continue the services longer, and the chapel was removed, with the 
intention of having it do duty to a better advantage elsewhere. 

Little Rest probably owes its name to the fact that in the days 
which antedated railroads, when there was a very large passenger and 
produce traffic by wagon between the Hudson River and Connecticut, 
the wagons and stages which had no accommodations at this point for 



482 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

spending the night, were accustomed to stop here briefly to water and 
rest the horses and oxen. 

LiTHGOw probably owes its name to some Scotchman, whose memo- 
ries took him back to his ancestral heath. It is a small hamlet near 
the eastern line of the town, and contains a Methodist Church, and a 
Protestant Episcopal Church which is one of the oldest churches of 
that denomination in the State. It antedates the organization of the 
diocese of New York and existed under royal charter, and its first 
services were held in private houses. 

One of the Nine Partners gave the land upon which the first 
church building was erected, in 1834, which was burned on March 
22, 1880. A new building was consecrated August 4, 1881. A rec- 
tory stands by the church, in which the clergyman lived, who also had 
charge of the work in MiUbrook, until Grace Church in that village 
became the far more important part of his parochial duties. 

A short distance east of Lithgow is the home of Isaac Smith Whea- 
ton, which is interesting because of its age, its construction and some 
items in its history. It was built about 1760 by David Johnston, a 
Scotchman, who had attained success in business and eminence in 
public affairs. The ceilings of the lower story of the house are twelve 
feet high and quite in contrast with all American houses of that period. 
Johnston was a slave holder, and there is tradition that he owned 
thirty slaves. 

Isaac Smith bought the property in 1813. He was also a slave 
holder, at least his father's will, dated Jime 26, 1794, contains the 
following: "I do give to my sons, Piatt Smith and Isaac Smith, to 
be divided equally between them, all my real estate * * * also 
all my negroes." In 1821 Homer Wheaton, just graduated from 
Hamilton College, came to Lithgow as tutor to the children of Isaac 
Smith, and afterward married his daughter Louisa in 1830. They 
were the parents of the late Judge Charles Wheaton, who was the 
father of the present owner of the place. Homer Wheaton became a 
priest of the Episcopal Church. He was rector of St. Peter's, also of 
Christ Church, Poughkeepsie ; later he became a member of the Roman 
Catholic Communion. 

Washington Hollow (in earliest times known as Pittsburg), is on 
the. line dividing Washington from Pleasant Valley and will more 
properly be spoken of in the history of that town, though it has 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 483 

been associated in thought with Washington, whose citizens have had 
a large part in all that pertained to the business and the public func- 
tions of that hamlet. 

The Dutchess County Agricultural Society was founded at Emigh's 
Hotel — ^the building is now used as a residence by George Badgely — 
in 1841, where a meeting was called by the County Clerk and the 
first officers were elected. President, Henry Staats, of Red Hook; 
Vice-presidents, John Wilkinson, Union Vale; Thomas Swift, Amenia; 
Stephen Thorn, Fishkill; Treasurer, George Wilkinson; Secretaries, 
Obediah Titus, Washington, and Edgar Sleight, Fishkill. In 1852 
the Society permanently located its grounds in Washington Hollow, 
and spent $2,000 in buildings and other improvements. 

Very near to Washington Hollow is the spacious residence of John 
Ham, at the present writing Clerk of Dutchess County, who, with his 
cousin, Eugene Ham, is a descendant of Conrad Ham, one of the 
earliest settlers in this town. The old house, built by his great- 
great-grandfather, still stands on a lot adjoining the present home of 
the family. 

South MiiiiiBROOK was formerly known as "The Four Comers," 
and "Washington Four Corners" was one of the earliest hamlets of 
the town. It became Washington, N. Y., in 1869, when the United 
States postoffice was moved to that point from Mechanic, which lies 
about half a mile east of it on the turnpike. 

This name wrought great confusion in the minds of many postal 
clerks apparently. The writer has seen in the postoffice here, letters 
addressed to President Cleveland, in the days of his administration, 
and to his sister. Rose Cleveland, because some careless clerk had read 
"D. C." as Dutchess County instead of District of Columbia in the 
address. Mail for many another "Washington" often came to this 
office. When, therefore, some of the patrons of the office, in or about 
1892, petitioned the Postoffice Department to change the name to 
South Millbrook there was a ready compliance. 

Here the MiUbrook Reformed Church had its beginnings in a Sun- 
day School, sta;rted by George Hunter Brown, in October, 1864. The 
Sunday School was first held in the district school house; then in the 
house of Samuel Briggs, the village blacksmith. 

A public circulating library was soon established which numbered, 
with additions, about five hundred volumes. 



484 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Early in January, 1865, a meeting was called to consdder the sug- 
gestion of Mr. Brown that a church be erected. Plans of a building 
were presented at an adjourned meeting, which were afterwards 
adopted. Frankhn Sutton, present at the meeting, gave an acre of 
land, and on April 1, 1865, ground was broken and the work of build- 
ing begun under the superintendence of Samuel Thorne. The corner 
stone was laid in early June. 

In October, 1865, an evening school was organized which was well 
attended and gave opportunities to some who had passed the school 
age, to further train their minds. 

A lecture course was also estabhshed and some of the first lecturers 
of the times came to speak, among them Bayard Taylor. Rev. J. L. 
Zabriskie, who came on invitation at the beginning of the work, and 
who laid the corner stone, resigned in November, 1865, and Rev. H. 
N. Cobb followed as stated supply until October, 1866, when he was 
installed pastor of the church. 

The church was dedicated June 20, 1866. July 84, those who had 
thus far been a part of this religious enterprise were organized into a 
church by the Classis of Poughkeepsie, and became a part of the Re- 
formed Church in America with fourteen charter members. 

For a long time this church furnished, in its basement, the only 
pubhc hall in the vicinity, and was the center of every active effort 
for reUgious, educational and moral betterment. 

Dr. Henry Cobb remained pastor until May, 1881, when ill health 
caused him to resign. Rev. J. E. Lyall accepted a call and was in- 
stalled pastor November 11 of the same year and has continued until 
the present writing. 

The charter members of this church were George Hunter Brown 
and Rachel his wife, John Swezy and Sally Ann his wife, John S. Gil- 
bert and Maria Louise Stockholm his wife, Matilda E. Van Zandt, 
wife of Rev. H. N. Cobb, Andrew J. Ketcham and Sarah his wife, 
David Dickson and Agnes his wife, Elizabeth Germond, Anna Maria 
Wright, Jane T. Haviland. 

This church carried on active and efficient work at Mabbettsville 
as above stated, and at Bloomvale, where a beautiful chapel was built, 
to care for the employees of the Bloomvale cotton factory. Captain 
B. F. Pond, who was an elder in the church, began with a Sunday 
School, which grew to such an extent that a chapel was necessary. 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 485 

Then George H. Brown came to the front and with characteristic 
generosity gave more than $10,000 to build and furnish a house of 
worship. The land was donated by Mr. Pond, who was superinten- 
dent of the school. The corner stone was laid in October, 1868, and 
it was dedicated June 24, 1869. The first communion service was 
held on Sunday afternoon, July 4, 1869, when eleven persons were 
received as members of the Millbrook church. At this time the work 
was so enlarged as to require an assistant for the pastor, and an invita- 
tion was extended to Rev. A. P. Stockwell to take up the work. Again 
Mr. Brown came forward and generously met aU the extra expense 
for salary and for a residence for the assistant pastor. Mr. Stock- 
well remained until 1872, and was succeeded by Rev. J. Hill, who 
remained until 1876. , 

Another branch of the South Millbrook church was started at Lit- 
tle Rest. This was a union effort, but whatever has been done has 
been chiefly by the pastors of the Reformed Church. 

Early in 1893 Halcyon Hall was built as a summer hotel by H. J. 
Davison, Jr., and his wife Marie Weed Alden, a granddaughter of 
Thurlow Weed. This beautiful building, complete in all its appoint- 
ments, was used as a summer hotel for eight years, but not succeeding 
as a financial proposition, it stood vacant until 1907, when the prop- 
erty was purchased by Miss May F. Bennett, who has remodeled its 
interior and moved into it her school for girls. This school was 
founded at Irvington, N. Y., in 1890, and has been a gradual develop- 
ment. Last year its pupils were one hundred and eighteen in number 
and represented nearly every State in the Union. 

The school has an executive staff of sixteen and the faculty num- 
bers twenty-one. It offers thorough physical as weU as mental training 
carefully adapted to the individual, and seeks to inculcate high ethical 
ideals, a sense of personal responsibility and love of truth. 

The course of study covers a period of six years, the first four cor- 
responding to the ordinary high school course, no student being ad- 
mitted to the two higher classes who is not a graduate from a good 
preparatory school. One-third of those who enter the school are in 
this course, which offers unusually fine opportunities for the study of 
music, art, literature, history, economics, ethics, domestic arts and 
sciences. This fine school adds much to the life and pleasure of the 
community in many ways and promises to become more and more a 
real, a vital part of our historic development. 



486 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Mechanic, which is now no more than a name, was for a long time 
the busiest place in the town and a mart for a much larger territory. 
Now most of the houses have been torn down. No store has been 
there for more than forty years. When it received the name of 
Mechanic is not certain, and the reason for it is only surmised by those 
who say it was because of the blacksmith, wagon maker and carpenter 
shops there situated and the number of skilled workmen who lived 
there. Be that as it may there is much more to remember about 
Mechanic. This was one of the earliest settlements in this part of the 
county. Between 1724 and 1750 this was the center of a settlement 
of "Friends." Hither came the Thornes and the Tituses from Long 
Island; from Nantucket came those bearing the names CofBn, Mitchell 
and Pinkham; from Westchester County, Rhode Island and other 
parts came the Comstocksj Aliens, Rogers, Hulls, Colemans, Willetts, 
Congdons, Haights, Havilands and Talcotts. Most of these names 
are yet here, many of them having numerous representatives. 

Until 1774 the Dutchess County Friends belonged to the Purchase 
monthly meeting, in Westchester County. Then the Oblong monthly 
meeting was established and meetings were held alternately at Ob- 
long and Nine Partners. In 1769 Nine Partners was set oflF as a 
separate monthly meeting, which has continued for one hundred and 
forty years. 

The Friends in this settlement had their own local meeting at a 
much earlier date, and erected a log meeting house upon the spot 
where the present building stands. This first building was destroyed 
by fire December 27, 1778. A committee was appointed on April 16, 
of the following year, to prepare plans for a less perishable building 
40 by 50 feet at an estimated cost of £600. The result was that 
in 1780 a large brick meeting house was built and stands today a 
monument to the thoroughness and skill of those who did the work. 
The brick were made a short distance directly south of the building 
on the farm now known as Altamont Stock Farm, which is the prop- 
erty of G. Howard Davison. The bricks are said to be very hard, 
and the mortar in which they are laid is harder still. 

Li this building for more than a century and a quarter the Friends 
have met on the first and fifth day of each week to commune with 
God* and help one another in the struggle against evil. Throngs once 
gathered there and filled the entire space of floor and gallery, but at 
the present time only one side of the lower floor is used. 




o 
o 

« 



S d 



t3 

o 

o 
g 



Q 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 487 

At Mechanic for a long time was the only postoffice in the town 
and it was called "Washington." About 1760, Samuel Mabbett, a 
Friend, came to Mechanic, opened a small store and an inn to accom- 
modate the many passing travelers who went to and fro between New 
Fngland and the Hudson River. In 1762 he bought ten acres of 
land of Isaac Thome, built a large house 4sO by 60 feet, two stories 
high, formed a stock company of which he was manager and prin- 
cipal owner. The building served as store, inn and dwelling and was 
called the finest building in this part of the State. He did a large 
business. While the postoffice here was Washington, and the village 
at that time may have been called Mechanic, and the Friends' Society 
was known as Nine Partners, the store was known as "Mabbett's," and 
was so prominent a part of the life of the settlement as to threaten 
supplanting the other names, and this has led some to confuse it with 
Mabbettsville, which probably received its name later. 

Mr. Mabbett was a Tory and belonged to the band who had for 
their motto "Loyal and Determined." He was not always as safe from 
violence as one might suppose he would have been in a Friends' settle- 
ment. However, many travelers were passing through and it is said 
he had reasons to hide himself at times in an excavation made for the 
purpose which was entered by a trap door. At the close of the Revo- 
lution, Samuel Mabbett moved to Lansingburgh, N. Y., and his son, 
Joseph, took the property and continued the business until 1795. 

William Thorne, great-great-grandfather of the present owner of 
Thorndale, was one of the first settlers at Nine Partners and was a 
merchant and large landholder. He became successor to the business 
of Mabbett though his store was on the south side of the turnpike, and 
he and his brother Isaac were probably competitors with Mabbett be- 
fore 1795. From that date this store became a noted depot of 
supplies for all the country round about. 

Mr. Thome is said to have been very thrifty, with good business 
judgment, of sterling integrity and having a keen sense of humor. 

Beginning of the Famous Nine Partneks Boakding Schoox. 
Joseph Mabbett sold his store and two acres of land to a committee 
appointed by the Friends' Yearly Meeting. This committee consisted 
of Isaac Thome, Tripp Mosher and Joseph Talcott, and the purpose 
was to establish a boarding school. The building was altered and 
enlarged to ninety-nine feet in length and a school was opened in the 



488 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

autumn of 1796, with Tripp Mosher as superintendent, and Jonathan 
Talcott as principal/ The school gave a thorough academic course 
and usually had about one hundred pupils. Land was added from 
time to time; a $10,000 endowment fund was secured, and the school 
greatly prospered until 1828, when the unfortunate separation took 
place on account of differing religious opinion in the Friends' Society. 
One of its first pupils was Jacob Willetts, who became principal at 
the age of nineteen, and made it famous by reason of his teaching 
abilities, and by the text books of which he was the unproud but famous 
author. Willetts' arithmetic passed through many editions and was 
widely used in the schools of the country. Older men and women in 
all walks of life wiU remember some of its quaintly expressed prob- 
lems. One is selected from a httle leaflet recently issued by Joel Ben- 
ton: 

No. 16. When first the marriage knot was tjr'd 
Between my wife and me 
My age was to that of my bride 
As three times three to three. 
But now, when ten and half ten years 

We man and wife have been. 
Her age to mine exactly bears 

As eight is to sixteen. 
Now tell, I pray, from what I've said, 
What were our ages when we wed? 

Ans. Thy age when married must have been 

Just forty-five— thy wife's fifteen. 

He also pubUshed a geography and atlas which is said to have 
been more accurate than any which preceded it. Joel Benton states 
that this geography passed through at least thirteen editions, which 
fact speaks of the favor in which his method of teaching geography 
was held, and of the length of time it held friendly place in the edu- 

1. The following extract will be of Interest and is taken from the journal of Martha 
Routh, a Quakeress minister from Manchester, Blng., formerly teacher of a girls' select 
school In Nottingham, Eng. : 

"15th of 6th mo., 1796. Attended the monthly meeting at Nine Partners. Next morn- 
ing we sat with a committee appointed to have care of a boarding school In that yearly 
meeting, for which purpose Friends have purchased a large houae. 

Feeling interested in the undertaking, I offered to return and render any assistance in 
my power, which seemed to be gladly accepted. 

18th of 6th mo. — On Seventh Day morning we returned to Nine Partners. Spent about 
four Hburs with Friends, in reviewing the house before mentioned, and making such re- 
marks as occurred, which were taken down for further consideration. We left them in 
the evening with unfeigned desires for the prosperity of the school." 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 489 

cational world. Chronological cards for teaching facts of history and 
the times of their occurrence was another device of Jacob Willetts for 
attracting the attention of the pupil, and instructing him and amus- 
ing him at the same time. Mr. Willetts' wife was scarcely less famous 
than her husband. She was born in Marshfield, Mass., August 23, 
1788, and was a lineal descendant of John Rogers of early colonial 
fame. 

She came to the school at sixteen, and after two years' study was 
thought capable, and was made principal of the girls' department 
when only eighteen years old. She was a famous mathematician and 
once successfully calculated an eclipse. Jacob Willets married Debora 
Rogers in 1812. The winter after their marriage they taught a private 
school near Pine Plains and the next year assume4 their old positions 
as principals in the Mechanic boarding school. They were inducedj 
says Mr. Benton, by an attractive offer to go to Nantucket for three 
years in 1819, but again came back to Nine Partners, where they re- 
mained until the separation, when he built a school of his own near 
Mechanic. 

At the separation in 1828 he and his wife were sympathizers with 
what was called the "Hicksite" branch. It so happened that the 
school board belonged to the Orthodox, while the principal leaders in 
the meeting house were Hicksites. In the separation, therefore, it was 
quietly permitted that the "Orthodox" take the school and some of 
the land, and they afterward built a meeting house for themselves, 
while the "Hicksites" continued in the brick meeting house and took 
a portion of the land, including the cemetery .'^ The orthodox school, 

1. This meeting house Is without adornments within and without. No paint was ever 
put on the Inside and the columns which support the galleries show the marks of the 
axes by which they scored and hewed the logs. The wooden benches, with straight hacks, 
show plainly by the many initials and names cut on them that boys in early days knew 
how to amuse themselves with a Jackknlfe when not Interested in the speaker or his mes- 
sage. The same box stoves with wrought iron legs, which were put up in 1780, seem to 
be doing good duty yet and stand on brick foundations in the middle of the room. There 
were until a few years ago many foot stoves, which were filled with live coals from the 
stoves and then placed under the feet, for the sake of warmth and support. The build- 
ing and land, including the cemetery, were transferred by deed on December 29, 1897, to 
the Nine Partners Burial Ground Association for the purpose of improving, extending and 
preserving this property so closely connected with the history of the town. It was a 
law of the Friends Society that no monument nor headstone over twelve inches high 
should be placed at the graves, and many bodies which have slept long are without any 
mark as to their resting place. The Burial Association has an endowment which pro- 
vides an Income for the care of the grounds. The president, Mr. C. V. Wlntringham, 
and other officers have been efficient in bringing the fund to respectable proportions and 
the whole property into a fine state of order. 



490 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

however, did not prosper as it had done and requested Jacob Willetts 
and his wife to assume control again. He accepted the invitation 
for two years and then went back to his own school, where he con- 
tinued until 1856, when he gave up teaching and resigned to take the 
rest earned by an active and pre-eminently useful life. 

Mr. Willetts' house was for a time a station of the "Underground 
Railway," which furnished transportation for slaves who had escaped 
from bondage in the Southland. His daughter, Mrs. F. T. Carpen- 
ter, told the writer recently that she remembered that a slave was kept 
over night in her father's house and was carried next day to the home 
of David Irish on Quaker Hill. 

Stephen Haight was a more active helper of fugitive slaves. His 
daughter, now Mrs. Susan Merritt, states that slaves frequently were 
brought to her father's house (sometimes one, and oftentimes two or 
three at once) where they were sure to find safe hiding, food to eat and 
money to assist them. They were sometimes hidden through a day 
in a barn. When the darkness of night fell, they were taken to Val-' 
entine Hallock's home, on the Hudson River, south of Poughkeepsie. 
This good "Friend" kept them through another day, rowed them 
across the river next night and forwarded them to the next station 
en route for Canada via Buffalo. These fugitives carried written 
directions of friends, somewhere in their clothing, which gave warning 
also of suspected danger. 

The "Orthodox" school went on with varying success until 1850. 
The yearly meeting then made the mistake of voting to "exclude non- 
members." From this date its usefulness was greatly impaired until 
it finally closed in 1863, and two years later the property was sold 
to John D. Wing. The endowment fund was transferred to the Union 
Springs Academy, which had been established in 1857, and this school 
now known as Oakwood Seminary, is the successor of Nine Partners 
school. 

Among the pupils of this once so famous school were Lucretia Mott, 
whose maiden name was Coffin, and Gould Brown, the grammarian. 
Others who gained their education at this school, who are still with 
us, are F. C. Tompkins and his daughter, Mrs. Clark Haight, Wil- 
liam Henry Tompkins, George Titus, Mrs. Joseph Sisson, John H. 
Clement, David Stringham, Cromline Dean, and many others whose 
names have not come to the writer's ears. A catalogue of 1853 states 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 491 

that the cost of attending the school was $2.00 per week, which in- 
cluded tuition, board, lodging and laundry work, and provision was 
made for free education of those unable to pay for themselves. When 
Mr. Wing (who had been a pupil in the school) bought the property 
he modeled it into a country residence. 

He afterwards moved this house to a hilltop overlooking the village 
of MiUbrook, and a wide expanse of hills, vales and mountains, and 
with additions on every side and many touches of architectural beauty 
it is expanded into a mansion which, with 'its acres of gardens, lawns 
and farmland, has the appropriate name Sandanona, which is the 
Indian for sunshine. 

Millbrook is the youngest village in the town, but is already larger 
and busier than all the others combined. It owes it* birth to the build- 
ing of the railroad in 1869 and the placing of the station. Its name 
was taken from the name given to the station, which the railroad 
ofScials chose as a compliment to Mr. Brown, whose energy brought 
the road to completion and who had named his estate Millbrook Farms. 

Millbrook became an incorporated village December 31, 1895. It 
has about 1,100 inhabitants, four churches — ^Roman Catholic, Friends, 
Methodist and Protestant Episcopal. 

It has two school buildings, a bank, a public library housed in a 
beautiful building, forty business places, including grocers, plumbers, 
barbers, butchers, hardware, jewelers, druggists dry goods, etc., etc. 
It has a Masonic and Knights of Pythias lodge. Knights of Columbus 
and Millbrook Club, Junior Order American Mechanics, a Women's 
Christian Temperance Union and a weekly newspaper. 

Geace Episcopai, Chukch, now under the guidance of Rev. Charles 
K. Gilbert, was a mission of St. Peter's Church, Lithgow, from 1863, 
when Rev. E. C. Pattison, its rector, began regular service on Sunday 
afternoon, September 6, 1863. He organized a parish September 13, 
1866. The corner stone was laid and in 1867 the building was con- 
secrated. This building, which was burned September 28, 1870, was 
situated in or near HartsviUe. A new lot was secured in Millbrook, 
a new building erected at a cost of $6,000, which was consecrated by 
the Right Rev. Horatio Potter November 3, 1871. Li 1901 this 
property was sold and a new site having been given by John D. Wing, 
a new church was built, the corner stone of which was laid September 



492 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS, 

16, 1901, and the completed building was consecrated October 15, 
1902. Soon after a rectory was built adjoining the church; both are 
beautifully situated at the head of the main street of the village. 

The rectors have presided in the following order: Revs. E. C. 
Pattison, B. F. MiUer, J. C. S. Weills, J. H. Nimo, J. C. WeiUs, 
Charles Pickells, John Tunis, C. H. Duncan, J. C. Rodgers, Charles K. 
Gilbert. 

Methodist. The Methodist Church was a gradual growth, origi- 
nating in the heart of some consecrated Christians, growing into 
meetings held in private houses, consisting of class meetings under 
some fervent leaders, and prayer meetings, held by good "Mothers 
in Israel," until the pastors from Lithgow and Verbank were appointed 
by the conference to do such work as might be possible. Public meet- 
ings were first held in a wagonmaker's shop in Hartsville. A village 
hall was built in Hart's Village in 1843, where meetings were held 
occasionally. The first mention of MiUbrook in the minutes of confer- 
ence is in 1872 when Rev. Robert Kay was in charge of Lithgow and 
Verbank. In 1877 Rev. J. W. Felous secured and partly paid for a 
lot. Other ministers, Revs. W. Sweetman and George B. Mead, con- 
tinued the spirit and work in connection with their conference appoint- 
ments. In 1886 Rev. Percy I. Fenn was appointed, and he succeeded 
in building a church, by persistent canvassing with his subscription 
book. 

Rev. H. L. Heroy followed Mr. Fenn, and after him Rev. S. P. 
Cadman, who has since given himself world-wide fame. He was fol- 
lowed by Revs. W. R. Evans, L. D. Robbins, C. H. Grubb, C. C. H. 
Adams, W. T. Otterson, W. W. Wilcox, U. G. Warren and the present 
pastor, Rev. William L. Cadman. Under Mr. Warren's regime an 
addition was made to the church for a Sunday School room and a 
pastor's study. A parsonage was built under the pastorate of Rev. 
S. P. Cadman. 

Fbiends. The Friends Society, which is known as the "Orthodox" 
branch, dates back to 1828. At least that was the date when at one 
of the quarterly meetings in the brick meeting house, after an un- 
usually earnest discussion a large number rose in a body and left 
the meeting. These "Friends" soon built a frame structure on a lot 
adjoining the brick meeting house, where all who beheved themselves 
more true to the teachings of George Fox and of the New Testament, 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 493 

might gather for worship. Very many on both sides deeply felt the 
misfortune of the separation, but each went on, conscientiously believ- 
ing that truth was best conserved by parting. The orthodox Friends 
maintained their meetings in Mechanic until 1882. They then 
moved their building to Millbrook, using much of the old frame, but 
in reaHty making a new structure. The first service in this location 
was held Sunday, December 3, 1882. They have a flourishing Sunday 
School, a vigorous Christian Endeavor Society, and are doing aggres- 
sive Christian work. 

School. The Millbrook public school is a union of the school dis- 
tricts which formerly had buildings, one at South Millbrook and the 
other at Hartsville. It now has two large buildings in the village 
and has been for twelve years under the able management of Prin- 
cipal William Roe Anderson, who has eleven other teachers to assist 
in the instruction of the pupils. This school is a worthy successor of 
Nine Partners' School in its palmiest days. It gives preparation for 
college and for practical life, and its pupils have gone to Cornell, 
Brown, Princeton, Amherst, Rutgers, University of Illinois, Troy 
Polytechnic, West Point Military Academy, and Vassar, and have 
taken good positions in these colleges. 

For the high school building the village is indebted to the generous 
spirit, the careful planning, and the wise supervision of Mr. Samuel 
Thorne, who associated with himself his brothers and sister and built 
it and equipped it as a memorial to his father and mother, Jonathan 
and Lydia A. Thorne, in 1894. The building is of white brick with 
marble trimmings, and is situated at the head of the main street on a 
commanding site. The northerly end of the building is a beautiful 
auditorium for lectures, concerts and other public entertainments. 
The school has an ample endowment, which by deed of gift, may not 
be used for teachers' salaries but for the care of the building and 
grounds, for free lectures and concerts, and for providing such special 
courses as in the estimation of the donors will best equip for prac- 
tical life, and a portion is used for prizes. This fine building, with 
its land, large horse sheds, furniture and endowment, was deeded to 
the village trustees at a meeting held September 18, 1896, at 4 :30 p. m. 

The part of the building designed for the school has three recita- 
tion rooms on the first floor and three recitation rooms and a large 
assembly room on the second floor. In the basement are two play- 



494 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

rooms for boys and girls. On the third floor are living rooms for the 
janitor. The heating is eflFected by hot air furnaces and the ventila- 
tion is after the most approved modern method. 

The primary school is a two-story brick building with two recita- 
tion rooms on each floor. This was built by taxation, and is modem 
in all its appointments. 

LiBEAUY. One of the latest additions to the village is a beautiful 
public library building, the gift of Mrs. R. S. Hayes, a memorial to 
her husband, the late Captain Richard Sommer Hayes. This timely 
and generous gift is centrally located and admirably adapted to the 
needs of a growing village. Previously to the occupancy of this 
building our library was housed in a room in Thome Memorial School, 
but the room was inadequate for the enlarging library, and was needed 
for the growing school. In this dilemma Mrs. Hayes came to the 
rescue with her most generous proposal and the transfer of the books 
was made to the completed building in December, 1908. 

The Bank. The Bank of Millbrook, which was organized May 18, 
1891, bought the brick building used formerly as an office of the N. D. 
& C. R. R. It has a capital of $50,000. The first president, John J. 
Donaldson, an old New York banker, who made his home in the village, 
inaugurated the bank and brought it to success. His successors have 
been Richard J. Scoles, and the present official, James Reardon. 

The Club. The MiUbrook Club was incorporated in 1902. Its 
first officers were: President, Oakleigh Thome; vice-president, F. W. 
Hallock; secretary, R. T. Monfort; treasurer, Henry Shaw; steward, 
Myron Smith. This club built its present house. The incorporators 
other than the officers above named were Dr. J. O. Pingry, W. E. 
Smith, S. H. Cutler, E. S. Hallock, Dr. S. I. Jacobs, Dr. S. Henry, 
Smith L. De Garmo, J. J. Donaldson, H. S. Van Derburgh, Thomas 
Smith and J. Haight. 

Golf. The Golf Club was established in 1900, when it bought land 
and built the club house on a sightly hiU, and laid out links and con- 
structed tennis courts. Its first officers were: President and treas- 
urer, H. R. McLane; vice-president, John Morgan Wing; secretary, 
G. Howard Davison. 

Business. The pioneer business house in Millbrook was Tompkins 
& "Smith, who opened a general store in 1870. They continued until 
1884, when George P. Tompkins, the senior member, died. From this 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 495 

date W. E. Smith took entire charge and became so much a favorite 
and so large a part of the Kfe of the place that he has been called 
the "father" of the village. 

In everything for the good of the village he was interested and 
became a liberal supporter, and was called to fill many a place of im- 
portance. He was wise in his advice, faithful in every position he was 
called upon to fill, the confidant of many who were in trouble or in 
need, "the trusted man" of the community, and his death in January, 
1909, was regretted deeply by all. 

PosTOFriCE. The Millbrook Postoffice began with the life of the 
village and has been a third-class office for about seventeen years. 
The present postmaster, F. W. Hallock, was appointed by President 
McKinley in 1896, and by Theodore Roosevelt in 4902, and again in 
1906. 

Jail, With the growth of the village came, as is always the case, 
some "undesirable citizens," and because of such, police became need- 
ful and a jail, which was built in the autumn of 1902. 

Gas. Millbrook also has the benefit of an acetylene gas plant, 
which was incorporated in 1898 and built and equipped for service in 
1899. The chief man in this enterprise is Mr. Charles F. Deitrich, 
who has been the father of the acetylene gas business in the United 
States. This plant furnishes gas for our streets, churches, public 
halls, business places and many of the homes in the village, and to 
the outlying residences of most of the New York gentlemen who have 
made homes here. 

W. C. T. U. The Woman's Christian Temperance Union was or- 
ganized in 1878. Its first president, Mrs. Rhoda Swift, held that 
office for twenty years, when «he asked to be released, and Mrs. Gurdon 
Swift was elected to succeed her and has held the position for eleven 
years. 

Their hall was built in 1882, and entirely remodeled in 1887. It 
furnished rooms for the society and a public hall for concerts, lec- 
tures, etc., until Memorial Hall was available in 1894. This Union 
of Christian ladies has done more for the village than is now usually 
credited to them. They have consistently advocated and ably abetted 
the cause of temperance. They furnished, year after year, a course 
of lectures for the uplift of the community. They established and 
cared for a circulating library, which has now grown to our present 



496 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

library association, with its beautiful building, and its doors open 
six days in the week. They have constantly done what they could 
to influence the town in favor of the no-license policy, and on every 
election day they have furnished lunch and hot tea and coffee for all 
who wished for this refreshment. They maintain a weekly prayer 
meeting on Thursday afternoons. 

Millbrook also has a fire company, which with a large chemical 
engine and an organized bucket brigade, has done good work already 
and is hoping shortly to have a building in which to properly care 
for such apparatus as they have or may obtain. 

The MiLLBaooK Round Table was founded by W. L. Swift, and 
its first number was issued August 20, 1892. For seventeen years it 
has made its weekly appearance. When W. L. Swift, through ill 
health, was constrained to lay down the responsibility of publication, 
the Round Table was managed by H. W. Higgins, who a few years 
ago sold the plant to William Tyldsley, who is now editor and pro- 
prietor. 

The town of Washington is fortunate in the men who have come 
to make homes within its hmits in recent years. 

Samuel Thome, who has returned where his ancestors have been for 
generations connected with all that is best in the history of the past, 
perpetuates their Christian character and broad minded philanthropy. 

Oakleigh Thorne, who occupies "Thorndale," the old homestead 
made famous by the horses bred by his father, Edwin Thorne, and 
more so by the herd of short-horn cattle, bred by his uncle, Samuel, 
which were widely known on both sides of the Atlantic, has given his 
name prominence by the large and successful financial institutions 
which he has inaugurated and conducted. 

John D. Wing has also returned to the scenes of his boyhood days, 
after having attained great success in other parts of the world. 

Charles F. Dietrich, whose estate is the most extensive and with its 
many beautiful features is worth a long journey to see; the late 
H. J. Davison, who built Altamont; and the late and much lamented 
Col. Daniel S. Lamont, so widely known in pubhc affairs, both in this 
State and in the Nation; Roswell P. Miller, of the Chicago^ Mil- 
waukee & St. Paul railroad, who has built a fine "Colonial" mansion; 
if. R. McLane, a Brooklyn gentleman of Uterary and artistic taste; 
Harry Harkness Flagler, whose interest and co-operation in local 



TOWN OF WASHINGTON. 



497 



affairs has been constant, and who is a member of the Board of 
Education, an active trustee of the Library Association, president 
and chief promoter of the Millbrook Choral Society, and a supporter 
of everything that pertains to the general good of the community ; the 
late Captain R. S. Hayes, in whose memory the library was erected; 
Miss Mary Lenox Kennedy, whose mother was a member of that fine 
old family so identified with the rehgious, literary, educational, philan- 
thropic and civic Ufe of New York City; Charles Chnton Marshall, 
whose ancestors have been in Dutchess County since Revolutionary 
days; G. Howard Davison, whose stock farm is famous for its horses, 
cattle and sheep ; — these are some of the "Millbrook Colony" to whom 
the town has proved attractive on account of its healthy climate and 
scenic beauty. 

The following is the succession of Supervisors from 1866: 



1866 




Greorge H. Brown 


1883 


John Tompkins 


1867- 


-'69 


George Titus 


1884— '86 


Andrew B. Hammond 


1870 




Walter Woodin 


1887— '88 


Stephen H. Cutler 


1971 




John P. Anderson 


1889— '91 


Lewis D. Giermond 


1873 




James B. Sisson 


1892 


Oakleigh Thome 


1873 




John P. Anderson 


1893— '95 


John M. Ham 


1974 




Timothy W. Preston 


1896— '01 


Stephen Robinson 


1875 




James Deming 


1902— '07 


Stephen H. Cutler 


1876- 


-'78 


George P. Tompkins 


1908— '09 


Minot D. Andrews 


1879- 


-'82 


Lewis D. Germond 







498 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

THE BENCH AND BAR OF DUTCHESS COUNTY. 

By Frank B. Lown. 

IN the accompanying series of sketches nothing more is intended 
than to briefly set down the names of lawyers, dead and living, 
who have at one time or another practiced in the courts of 
Dutchess County, and have filled judicial or other offices necessarily 
filled by lawyers.^ Time marches rapidly, and the lawyers of one gen- 
eration, except they be of remarkable ability and achievement, are for- 
gotten by the next. The distinguished and great need no historians. 
Their lives and deeds pass from father to son, their names and reputa- 
tions never sufi'ering in the telling. It is hoped by the following 
lists and sketches to perpetuate and keep in mind not only the dis- 
tinguished lawyers who have adorned, and now adorn the county bar, 
but the much greater class who have filled, and are filling worthily 
and well, the ranks of the' legal profession, each doing his quota of 
good in the enforcement of the legal rights and remedies, which are 
our common heritage. 

QUE COUNTY COUKT. 

In 1691 a general assembly of freeholders of the then Province of 
New York was held, which assembly abolished all courts then existing, 
and took measures for the judicial reorganization of the Province. It 
created a county court, among others giving it a jurisdiction described 
in the quaint language of those days as follows: 

"County Court. The County Court for Common Pleas hath cognizance of Civil 
Accons to any value, excepting what concerns the title to land, and noe Accon can 
be removed from this Court, if the damage be under twenty pounds." 

This court was re-established in 1777, and was again continued by 
the constitution of 1821. Down to the time of the enactment of the 



1. The names of the County Judges, Surrogates and District Attorneys, with their yeara 
of service, will be found on page 77. 





■S" yl <^/'jiiJ .:' su... I^LLh U^hci: 



BENCH AND BAR. 499 

constitution of 1846, the presiding official was styled "Judge of the 
County Court," and was appointed by the governor. He seems in 
many instances to have been a layman, and not a lawyer, it being 
deemed sufficient to have a man of practical sagacity and sense in the 
ordinary pursuits of life. The disputes which arose and which were 
triable in the county courts of that day, or which came before them 
for review on appeals from the judgments of Justices of the Peace 
were petty in character, involving but small amounts, and were such 
as arose between members of an agricultural community; and hence 
the anomaly of a layman acting as judge in a court of law. 

THE EAULIEU LAWYERS. 

Among the earlier lawyers residing and practicing in our county, 
who, if not known to men yet living are yet fresh in their memories, 
James Kent, the great Chancellor, of course stands preeminent. He 
was admitted to the bar in 1785, and shortly afterwards commenced 
the practice of law in a hainlet in Dutchess County. Tradition has 
it that so little was he and other lawyers valued at the time that a 
committee of citizens one day made him a visit, informed him that the 
people regarded lawyers as destructive of the peace and good order 
of the town, and requested him to leave. Whether on account of this 
interview or not, he soon came to Poughkeepsie and entered into part- 
nership with General Livingston, then Surrogate. The same year, he 
then being twenty-one years of age, married Elizabeth Bailey, aged 
sixteen. The chancellor speaking of his life immediately after mar- 
riage, in his memoirs, says: 

"I owned one acre of ground, and fitted up in neat style for that day, a isnug 
and endearing little cottage, and I cultivated an excellent little garden; and my 
income by practice did not exceed $500 per year. I studied in my little cottage 
mornings, and devoted one hour to Greek and another to Latin. I soon increased 
it to two for each tongue in the twenty-four hours." 

The cottage and garden referred to were at or near where the Mor- 
gan House now stands, on the north side of Main street, then called 
the Filkintown road, and the cottage was firmly anchored to the soil 
by a mortgage for $335.00, which is recorded in the Clerk's office. 
"Great oaks from little acorns grow." 

Judge Beekman, Col. Henry Beekman, Gouvernor TlUottson, Ed- 
ward Livingston, Charles Ten Broeck, Francis A. Livingston and 



500 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Henry B. Livingston were all practitioners in our courts in the early 
days, but we know little of them save that they were men of reputa- 
tion and standing, and well skilled in their profession. Undoubtedly 
they loomed large in their day, and one of them, Francis A. Livings- 
ton, was District Attorney of the county from 1821 to 1829. He 
was located at Rhinebeck, and it was in his office that John Thomp- 
son and other later and distinguished lawers studied. 

A little later Augustus Schell, afterwards prominent in railroad 
enterprises, and Walter W. Schell practiced in the upper part of our 
county. 

One of the most useful lawyers that our county has produced was 
James Hooker, who was born in 1792, and died in 1858. He was 
elected Surrogate in 1824, and retained the office until 1840. He 
lived in, the old building on the west side of Market street, recently 
torn down to give place to the new building of the Young Men's 
Christian Association. He was very fond of flowers and sylvan sur- 
roundings, and in the rear of his residence was a large garden, with 
shady walks and beautiful shrubs, and trees of every nature, which was 
kept up until a comparatively recent date. One of his daughters mar- 
ried a John W. Hammersley, who was also a lawyer, and his grandson, 
J. Hooker Hammersley, now deceased (also a lawyer), is well remem- 
bered by many of the present generation. Mr. Hooker was a great 
believer in real estate and its value as an investment, and considerable 
tracts of land in this city are still held and owned by his descendants. 

Mr. Hooker had among his co-temporaries many men of training 
and ability as lawyers. Among them were John Cleveland, John 
Brush, Ulysses Cole, Philo Ruggles, Samuel B. Ruggles, Charles H. 
Ruggles, David V. N. Radcliffe, William Radcliffe and Jacob Rad- 
cliffe, and many other men who might be named all "good men and 
true." 

In passing upon the merits of this earlier group of men the reader 
should bear in mind the difficulties under which they labored. Law 
reporting had not become the fine art it now is. Blackstone's and 
Kent's Commentaries, Chitty's Pleadings, a dozen or fifteen text-books, 
Caine's Cases and a shelf or two more of similar books constituted 
the working library of the average lawyer. 

The lawyer of to-day only has to find the law. It is already made 



Bench and bar. 501 

and established, and it is but a matter of industry and research and 
comprehension of legal principles for him to ascertain what has 
already been laid down as the law on almost every subject. The 
ancient lawyer — and by ancient is meant the lawyer who practiced 
only a generation or two ago — ^had few of these aids which are avail- 
able to the lawyer of to-day. He could but determine the legal prin- 
ciple involved, and then reason out in his own mind what ought to be 
the law of his particular case. 

This naturally involved an independence of thought, and a couraige 
in advancing new and undetermined propositions not called in play 
by the practice of this day; and the mental eifort involved had the 
effect of strengthening and broadening the mind, so that our prede- 
cessors were in fact better and more forceful rdtisoners than we of 
the later generation. 

So, too, with the adjuncts of the best regulated office. Even a steel 
pen was unknown, much less the ever present typewriter. A stenog- 
rapher, even to report cases upon trial, had not yet been dreamed of. 
Pitman had not yet invented his marvellous art. The Judge, with his 
quill pen, scratched down brief minutes of the proceedings before him.. 
Every one of the interminable pleadings and proceedings required by 
the practice of that day had to be written out by hand by the prac- 
titioner, and then laboriously duplicated by him or his clerks. 

The writer well remembers, even as late as 1870, when there was no 
method of duplicating law papers except by hand copying. Finally 
some daring innovator introduced press copies on necessarily very 
thin paper. The courts naturally and properly objected, and would 
have none of them. Then that genius, Edison, invented what was 
called an electric pen, which was nothing more or less than a miniature 
electric engine, run from a battery, and which held in the hand and 
guided on the paper, produced a stencil which, rubbed over with an 
inked roller duplicated the writing on the sheet beneath. Cumbrous 
and awkward as the machine was, it was the first step toward escaping 
the thraldom which bound the average lawyer in preparing his plead- 
ings and papers. 

And then along came the typewriter, the greatest of all boons to 
the lawyer, with its accompanying typist. Last of all the combined 
stenographer and typist, who has lifted the burden of drudgery from 
the shoulders of the profession. For long, long after the writer com- 



502 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

menced his studies (1870) not an office in the city had a stenographer, 
and now an office without one could hardly be conceived or found. 

These innovations and improved adjuncts which we now enjoy, as 
has been said before, were unknown to the older lawyer, and their lack 
emphasizes the difficulties under which they labored, and aid us in 
forming an estimate as to their powers and abilities. 

Another contemporary of Mr. Hooker was Nathaniel P. Tallmadge, 
one of the most brilliant and versatile of men. Besides occupying a 
prominent position at the bar he was largely interested in business 
pursuits, being one of the chief organizers in what in the early thirties 
was known as the "Improvement party," and which was engaged in 
various enterprises, such as the sending out of whaling vessels from 
what is still known as the "whale dock," and the rearing and propa- 
gation of silk worms, under the name of the Poughkeepsie Silk Com- 
pany. Both of said enterprises came to grief, the world's production 
of silk and oil not being greatly augmented by either. 

In the boom days of the Silk Company, Delafield street was laid out 
as the "Court" street of the town, and Mr. Tallmadge built the resi- 
dence stiU standing on the west side of the street, and for very many 
years owned and occupied by the Elting family. 

Mr. Tallmadge was elected United States Senator, and subsequently 
resigned and became the Territorial Governor of Wisconsin. He at 
one time was a partner of Mr. Hooker, and during his life was very 
prominent in all matters. 

James Emott, whose life was closely entwined with the County of 
Dutchess, and particularly with the city of Poughkeepsie, was bom 
in the year 1823, his father being James Emott, a resident of the city, 
and for many years a Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Judge Emott the younger was born in the building known as No. 
46 Market street, and early won distinction at the bar. He was mar- 
ried to Mary Crooke, daughter of Charles Crooke, whom old inhabi- 
tants win remember as being engaged in business as a freighter at the 
Lower Landing. He was the first Mayor of the city of Poughkeepsie, 
and during his whole life took the warmest interest in its affairs. He 
was elected a Justice of the Supreme Court in 1856, and served as 
sucK until 1864. During the later years of his term he sat in the 
Court of Appeals. After he left the bench he formed a copartnership 



BENCH AND BAR. 503 

with Henry M. Taylor, which copartnership continued until he was 
attracted to the city of New York. There he continued to practice 
until his death in 1884!. 

One of the strongest personalities and most acute lawyers of his 
time was Henry Swift, universally known as "Harry" Swift. He 
was bom in 1784, studied law in Poughkeepsie with Van Ness and 
Livingston, and was admitted to practice in 1807. 

In 1816 he commenced the practice of law in Poughkeepsie, and 
continued in the most active practice until his death in 1866. His 
office and residence were in the three-story brick building, still stand- 
ing on the west side of Market street, opposite the Farmers' and 
Manufacturers' Bank. Mr. Swift's ability was great, and his industry 
and energy enormous. Measured by volume of business and by his 
success, he was perhaps the foremost lawyer in the county. For 
many years before his death he lived in the house on the south side of 
Cannon street, of late years occupied by Rev. A. P. Van Gieson. He 
had two sons, Charles Wells Swift, who was for many years engaged 
in business with his father in Poughkeepsie, and who died in 1877, and 
George H. Swift, who removed to and practiced law in Amenia in 
this county, until his death, which occurred in 1908. 

Both Charles W. and George H. Swift, and their uncle, Eleazor 
Morton Swift, brother of their father, were lawyers of recognized 
standing and ability. They did not have, or did not exercise the gift 
of eloquence so generously bestowed upon Harry Swift, and did not 
have the combative nature of the latter; but each was the trusted 
adviser and counsel of a large circle of clients. 

Seward Barculo, born September 22, 1808, was the son of Rev. 
George Barculo, who was a clergyman at New Hackensack. He 
studied law with Stephen Cleveland at Poughkeepsie, and was admitted 
to the bar in 1834, at once forming a copartnership with Mr. Cleve- 
land. 

In 1845 he was appointed Judge of the County Court by the Gov- 
ernor, and the next year was appointed Circuit Judge. In 1847 he 
was elected Justice of the Supreme Court, and served over six years. 
He was an extensive reader, possessed of fine literary taste, and was 
an ardent horticulturist. In June, 1854, being upon his return from 
Europe, he died in New York City. He was an able lawyer and in- 
corruptible jurist. 



504 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

One of his daughters, Caroline T., married Charles Wheaton, who 
afterwards became County Judge. Mrs, Wheaton died in 1908, leav- 
ing a son, Isaac S. Wheaton, also an attorney. 

Henry Angevine will long be remembered by the older of the pres- 
ent generation of lawyers. He was a precise, quaint old man, and 
during the latter years of his life occupied an oflSce with Judge 
Wheaton on Market street. He was notable for always exacting the 
proper and legal fee for performing the act of a Notary Public, whereas 
among lawyers generally the office is taken and held mainly as a matter 
of convenience and accommodation, and without any thought of real 
remuneration. But with Mr. Angevine the person who subscribed an 
affidavit, or acknowledged the execution of an instrument was ex- 
pected to pay on the nail the ten or twenty-five cents the notary's due. 

But if there was any dissatisfaction at his course of doing business, 
it ceased when upon a trial of an important cause where the fact of 
the due execution of an important paper and the attendant circum- 
stances connected therewith became of vital importance, it was made 
known by the evidence of Mr. Angevine that in each case of taking 
an affidavit or acknowledgment he entered upon his books a careful 
record of the event and its date, so that in case of necessity the trans- 
action did not depend upon uncertain memory. Mr. Angevine died 
in 1881. 

Gilbert Dean was bom in Pleasant Valley, Dutchess County, on 
August 14, 1819, and died in the city of Poughkeepsie on the 12th 
day of October, 1870. He practiced for a number of years in Pough- 
keepsie and was a member of Congress in 1851-1853. He was ap- 
pointed a Justice of the Supreme Court and for a part of his term 
acted as Judge of the Court of Appeals. 

He owned a beautiful place on South avenue, immediately south of 
Eastman Terrace, where he resided. He was a brilliant young lawyer, 
and after he left Poughkeepsie practiced in the city of New York 
until his death. 

He was counsel for Miss Cunningham in the Burdell murder trial, 
and won great fame and credit by his successful defense of her. 

John Thompson was bom in the town of Rhinebeck in 1809, and 
studied law in the office of Francis A. Livingston, then District At- 
torney of the county. Upon being licensed to practice he entered 




JOSEPH MORSCHAUSER. 



BENCH AND BAR. 505 

the office of Hooker and Tallmadge at Poughkeepsie, and later went 
into partnership with Mr. Hooker. Subsequently he entered in co- 
partnership with James H. Weeks, which partnership continued until 
1878, when the writer of this article entered the firm, which continued 
under the name of Thompson, Weeks & Lown until 1887, when Mr. 
Weeks died, Mr. Thompson following in 1890. 

Mr. Thompson was a brilliant advocate, and a man of much learn- 
ing in his profession. He dearly loved the turmoil of a lawsuit, and 
it is not too much to say that he was in practically every important 
trial from 1845 until his retirement. Mr. Weeks, his partner, was his 
opposite in this respect. Like Mr. Thompson, he was a great reader 
and possessed fine scholarly tastes, having at his death probably the 
best chosen and most complete private hbrary in the city. But Mr. 
Weeks disliked the combative air of the court room, and rarely could 
be induced to take an active part in trials. He was perhaps the best 
and safest office lawyer and general adviser at the bar, and with his 
partner to supply the eloquence and pyrotechnics, the firm of Thomp- 
son & Weeks was deservedly pre-eminent in the legal history of 
Dutchess County. 

One of Mr. Thompson's daughters married Allard Anthony, Dis- 
trict Attorney, and afterwards County Judge, and, with another 
daughter and his widow, is still living. Mr. Weeks had no sons, but 
left a widow, now dead, and two daughters, both of whom reside out- 
side of Dutchess County,, 

The writer in closing this brief sketch of his two dead partners 
regrets that the space at his disposal and the purpose of this publi- 
cation prevent placing on record some of the affectionate memories 
of these two just and good men, thronging to his mind. 

William Wilkinson was an attorney in active practice, and was the 
son of Robert Wilkinson, also a lawyer. He studied law with his 
father, and after admission associated himself with William I. Street, 
under the firm name of Street & Wilkinson. He married Mary E. 
Trowbridge, daughter of Stephen B. Trowbridge, an old resident of 
the city, and died in 1864. He left five children, one of whom was 
Robert E. Wilkinson, one of the most brilliant and versatile of men, 
and a most excellent lawyer. Mr. Wilkinson participated in the War 
of the Rebellion and was in some of the most hotly contested engage- 
ments. He was very badly wounded at the battle of Cedar Creek in 



506 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1864, but after recovery he reentered the army and remained until 
mustered out with the rank of colonel. 

Colonel Wilkinson was admitted to the bar in 1866, and at once 
assumed a high rank in his profession. He was Recorder of the city 
of Poughkeepsie for four years, and held other offices of honor or 
trust. He was a man of great information and of the highest culture. 
He died in the year 1908, leaving among other children, two sons, 
Gifford Wilkinson and Robert Wilkinson, both of whom are practic- 
ing attorneys. 

John P. H. TaUman died so recently that he is remembered by most 
of the members of the present bar. He was born in Dutchess County 
in 1820, and commenced the study of law first in the office of James 
Hooker, and afterwards that of Virgil D. Bonesteel, a lawyer of 
repute. He was admitted to practice in 1840, and in 1847 was elected 
Surrogate, defeating John Thompson, who was his opponent. 

Upon retiring from the office he formed a partnership first with 
Gilbert Dean, and afterwards with Charles Powers, George W. Payne 
and George W. Lord. Subsequently he entered into partnership with 
Walter Farrington, who is still engaged in practice. Mr. Tallman 
died in 1895, leaving four children, of whom one, John Francis TaU- 
man, was educated as a lawyer and admitted to practice, but at pres- 
ent fills a responsible position in insurance circles in the city of New 
York. 

A mention of the lawyers of these days would be incomplete without 
the names of Le Grand Dodge, Henry D. Varick, Joseph H. Jackson, 
Edgar Thorn and Egbert Q. Eldridge. 

Mr. Dodge was never a trial lawer, but was a safe, wise counsellor 
and a most estimable man. He died in 1892. 

Mr. Varick and Mr. Eldridge were copartners in business for many 
years, and down to the death of the former, which occurred in the 
year 1877. During their long association they were the attorneys 
for the Poughkeepsie Savings Bank, and had their offices in the Bank 
building. 

Mr. Varick was born in 1811, and held no public office that the 
writ^ recalls. Upon his death he left several children, one of whom, 
DeWitt, was a lawyer. He has since deceased. 

Mr. Eldridge (born in 1815) besides being a good lawyer was a 



BENCH AND BAR. 507 

genial, companionable man. He was elected County Judge in 1852, 
and was long a member of the Board of Education, having always 
entertained a great interest in educational matters. He died in 1899. 

Joseph H. Jackson always appeared to the writer like a character 
who had stepped out of one of Dickens' novels. He was a lawyer and 
gentleman of the old school, and down to the time of his retirement 
wore the claw hammer coat of the preceding generation. He was 
formal and precise in his manner and habits, but withal a sound, care- 
ful lawyer. He died about the year 1880, leaving a son, Joseph I. 
Jackson, also a lawyer practicing here, who has since deceased. 

Edgar Thorn (born in 1805) was elected Surrogate in 1856, and 
after the expiration of his term practiced law in» Poughkeepsie until 
his death, which occurred in 1890. 

The group of lawyers next mentioned undoubtedly embraces the 
most brilliant and powerful advocates that have ever adorned the 
Dutchess County bar. The Barnard Brothers (Joseph F., George 
G., Frederick and Robert), Homer A. Nelson, Charles Wheaton, 
Allard Anthony and William I. Thorn. Their names are all fresh in 
the memories of the present generation, and mouldy tradition does 
not have to be resorted to to pass judgment upon their abilities and 
achievements. The present bar hears with interest the many stories 
of their doings and proceedings in their early days, when business 
was duU and clients were scarce, but the legal battles fought between 
these trained legal gladiators in later years are recalled with interest 
and excitement by many of the present bar who remember well the 
many magnificent contests of which they were spectators. It is hard 
to tell where the palm of supremacy should go. Each excelled the 
other in some quality, but each was a forceful, resourceful and elo- 
quent trial lawyer. 

Joseph F. Barnard, the oldest of the Barnard brothers, was born 
at Poughkeepsie. He studied law with Stephen Cleveland, and was 
admitted to practice in 1845. He was elected a Justice of the Supreme 
Court in 1863, and remained on the bench — an ornament to it — ^until 
retired by the age limit in 1893. Subsequently he was designated by 
the Governor of the State, and continued to exercise and perform cer- 
tain powers and functions of a Supreme Court Justice until the ex- 



508 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

piration of his elective term, when he finally retired from the bench. 
He died in 1904, leaving a son, Frederic, who is now engaged in active 
practice in Poughkeepsie. 

Judge Barnard was incomparably the greatest legal character that 
Dutchess County has ever produced. A fine scholar, a trained lawyer, 
an incorruptible and fearless man, he had all the tools necessary and 
proper for use in his life work, and he used them, if not to perfection, 
at least so as to earn and receive the respect and reverence not only 
of the bar, but of the people of the entire judicial district. Austere 
in his appearance, quick and impetuous in his language, he had under 
his brusque demeanor the heart of a child. Impatient of the fetters 
of legal procedure, caring little or nothing for precedent, his whole 
aim was to do justice in each particular case. He was particularly 
helpful to young and inexperienced practitioners, and particularly 
to the young men whom he saw studying in the surrounding offices ; 
and it was a chilly day for the veteran when one of these verdant 
practictioners appeared in Judge Barnard's court against him. 

The writer well remembers when late one very hot afternoon he was 
directed by his legal preceptor to go down to the Judge's house and 
secure his signature to some papers. During his few weeks in a law 
office he had seen the Judge only upon the bench engaged in his judicial 
duties, stern and preoccupied, and apparently as far removed from a 
green law student as the planet Mars. Neither was he in any way 
made to feel comfortable when he was told not to mind it if the Judge 
showed any irritation upon being disturbed at his home. 

Upon reaching the Judge's house the writer was shown in the 
library, the servant stating that she would call the Judge, who was 
somewhere around the grounds. Looking from the library window 
the servant could be seen walking down the steep hill to the end of the 
lot, almost to Market street, and giving the message to the Judge, who 
commenced to climb the hiU in the heat and glare of a July sun. If 
ever the writer thought he was going to catch it, it was when the 
Judge, hot and breathless, stalked into the room with an impatient 
"What do you want.'" "I have some papers which Mr. Baker wants 
signed," was the stammering answer. "Give them to me;" and with 
two steps he was at the table, and the wonderful hieroglyphics which 
to the initiated meant "J. F. Barnard" were attached and the papers 
handed back. The writer realizing that as yet no casualty had 



BENCH AND BAR. 509 

occurred thought it proper and wise to endeavor to palliate his act, 
and commenced hesitatingly to apologize for the trouble he had in- 
flicted, but the Judge would have none of it. "It is my business to 
sign orders at any time of the night or day, and you don't want to be 
afraid to come at any hour, late or early," and with a pleasant and 
reassuring word or two he dismissed him. 

The story is but a trivial one, but the same spirit which led him to 
reassure and set at ease scared students, led him to care for those 
same students in other ways, when timid and inexperienced, they com- 
menced to assume and perform the duties of their profession. 

George G. Barnard became Recorder of the City of New York, and 
then Judge of the Supreme Court. Frederic and Robert Barnard 
removed to California, and there engaged in the pi'actice of their pro- 
fession. 

Charles Wheaton was born at Lithgow, in Dutchess County, in 
1834. He studied law in the office of Thompson & Weeks, and upon 
his admission to the bar, he became assistant to Silas Wodell, then Dis- 
trict Attorney. In 1863 he was elected County Judge, and after the 
expiration of his term he commenced the practice of law, and con- 
tinued until his death, which occurred in 1886. He left him surviving 
one son, Isaac S. Wheaton, who was educated as a lawyer, and now 
lives on the old homestead at Lithgow. 

Judge Wheaton was of an entirely different type from Judge Bar- 
nard, although during their lives they were the closest friends. He 
was quiet and amiable in his manners, and possessed, or at all events 
showed, none of the impetuosity and brusquerie shown by his friend. 
His sense of humor was singularly keen, and whether in the court room, 
or in his own, or a fellow lawyer's office, it constantly cropped out in 
epigram «Cnd anecdote. He was an extremely good, sound lawyer, and 
one of the most ingenious and plausible advocates that ever practiced 
at our bar. 

Homer A. Nelson was born in 1829, and at his death, which occurred 
in 1891, was fitly characterized by one of the Poughkeepsie journals 
as "the first citizen of the city and county." He was admitted to 
practice at the age of twenty-one, and in 1855, when but twenty-six 
years of age, was elected County Judge, being the youngest man ever 



510 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

elected to that ofBce. He was re-elected in 1861 and served two years 
of his term, resigning in 1863. In 1867 he was elected Secretary of 
State, to which office he was re-elected two years later. 

During his business career he was at different times associated as 
partner with Henry F. Pultz, who died in 1883; with Gilbert Dean, 
with William I. Thorn, and with Orlando D. M. Baker. 

After his retirement from the office of Secretary of State in 1871, 
he removed his law office to the City of New York, retaining his resi- 
dence, however, in the city of Poughkeepsie. In 1881 he was elected 
State Senator and served his term as chairman of the Senate Judici- 
ary Committee. 

After his death a friend, in writing a short biographical sketch, 
said: 

"With the young men of his time, and especially with the then struggling law 
student or newly fledged attorney. Judge Nelson's memory wUl be ever held in 
kindly reverence. To these he was always considerate and helpful, encouraging 
and affable, and none ever came to him for advice and counsel that was not cheer- 
fully given. He was possessed of an extremely generous heart, was charitable to 
all deserving causes, and the poor at all times had his counsel without money and 
without price. Physically he was a man of fine presence handsome, standing six 
feet in height, and well built in proportion. He was fond of sport, ever boyish 
in his tastes and enjoyments, and delighted to join with children in their games 
and sports." 

He left him surviving a widow, still living, and two brothers, one 
of whom, John, was a practicing lawyer here, now deceased. 

Judge Nelson was, all in all, the most formidable jury lawyer of the 
group in question. He lacked some qualities which shone pre-eminent 
in Barnard, Wheaton, Anthony and Thorn, but he possessed the price- 
less gift of common "horse" sense, and his speeches to the jury always 
went to them and never over their heads. In terse, powerful state- 
ment he was not the equal of Barnard. In polished Ciceronian elo- 
quence he was excelled by Wheaton and Anthony. In some respects 
Thorn was his equal, if not his superior, but in getting a verdict, 
which is the supreme test, he beat them all. His love for his home 
and his friends was the mainspring and the joy of his Ufe, and as he 
often said when in the tide of success in the great metropolis, he 
waited impatiently for Friday night to come that he might get back 
to •them. Alas! within a few weeks after he had removed from the 
turmoil of that great city and had come back to his home and friends. 




SAMUEL K. PHILLIPS. 



BENCH AND BAR. 611 

expecting to pass the evening of his days in comfort and happiness, 
he was stricken with a mortal ailment, and died almost without warn- 
ing. 

Allard Anthony, another of this coterie of brilliant men, was born 
in the year 1838, was elected District Attorney in 1861, and served 
as such for six years. He was then elected County Judge, and at the 
expiration of his term went back to private practice. Speaking from 
the standpoint of well chosen diction and pure eloquence, his eiforts 
have never been equalled by any practitioner at the local bar within 
the memory of the present generation of lawyers. Of slight form, 
and yet commanding presence, with deep set eyes, and a brow like 
Webster's, it was a treat to listen to him in his forensic combats with 
the legal giants who surrounded him. * 

He married a daughter of John Thompson, and died in 1877 at the 
early age of thirty-nine, leaving her surviving him. Had he lived, 
his fame would have been not local, but national. 

And William I. Thorn, known to his friends and the community as 
"Billy I.," what affectionate memories come back to all at the men- 
tion of his familiar name! Bulky in body, with the smooth, round 
face of a baby, what treasures of humor, wit and eloquence lay be- 
hind that rosy, smiling countenance! 
Alas! poor Yorick! 
A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy." 

He was bom in the year 1837, and died at Poughkeepsie in 1890. 
May the earth rest lightly over one who was not only valuable to the 
community as a lawyer, but whose cheerful countenance, and whole- 
some, merry conversation added brightness to the lives of his asso- 
ciates. 

Many stories might be told of the sayings and doings of these 
men, some of which would look well in cold print, and some would not. 
They were intense, virile persons, living in a generation more primitive 
and less artificial than the present one. Their jokes and escapades 
were but the natural expression of the youth and energy flowing in 
their veins. Some of them might in this day seem of questionable 
taste and propriety, but they undoubtedly added much to the savour 
of life forty or fifty years ago. They were pitiless in the practical 
jokes they played upon one another. 



612 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

All lawyers in those days, even the busiest and most eminent, were 
frequently called upon to go out in the country towns and try causes 
before Justices of the Peace. Judge Barnard, then but a struggling 
lawyer, was one day out upon such a mission, and upon his return 
found a new tenant in possession of his office. Taking advantage of 
his absence, and of a wandering and homeless mule, a band of con- 
spirators had driven the beast in the back room and tied him to the 
leg of the circular table which constituted the sole desk of the office. 
The appearance of the office the next morning can be imagined if not 
described. 

A short time afterwards Judge Wheaton was called out of town on 
some errand. Omitting to lock his office, or probably unable to do 
so — for half of the law offices were always open and unlocked night 
and day — an opportunity was offered to sufferers at his hands to get 
even. He was then in the old building where the postoffice now stands, 
the sidewalk in front being of unusual width. All of his furniture, 
desks, bookcases, books and all the paraphernalia of a law office were 
carefully removed to the sidewalk and covered with a red flag bearing 
the legend "Auction Sale." 

On rainy days, when clients were scanty and business "nil," they 
would gather in their back rooms and play profane games with cards 
— ^not bridge, and not pinochle. In one of the games, the name of 
which does not occur to the writer, an article or emblem known as a 
"Buck," and having a certain agreed monetary value, was put in 
circulation by one of the party who was a prominent jeweler on Main 
street. It turned out to be a watch, left for repair by Bishop Hed- 
ding of the M. E. Church, one of the godliest and most saintly of 
men. Needing an extra "buck," the movement was slipped from its 
case, and the two objects, sanctified by their association, were circu- 
lated by those graceless reprobates during the vicissitudes of a long, 
rainy afternoon. In after years, when the ranks had been thinned by 
death, the writer has often heard the "Bishop's Buck" referred to by 
the distinguished survivors. 

In those days the "growler" was unknown as such, but men's tastes 
and men's thirsts were the same as now. When the machinery needed 
lubricating, one of their number would be sent out for a pail full of 
thfe necessary lubricant, which was then the renowned Vassar ale. 

The emissary, on one particular occasion, was one who subse- 



BENCH AND BAR. 513 

quently became an ornament to the bar and to the city, one of the 
most lovable of men. Unsuspicious of evil, he accepted a counterfeit 
dollar which was given him to make the purchase, and his mortifica- 
tion and rage at the incidents which closed the transaction were de- 
picted with great glee by his associates for years afterwards. 

In the upper part of the old building where the postoffice now 
stands, and which was on the ground floor entirely occupied by law 
offices, was a huge, open garret. This was occupied by Barnard, 
Wheaton, Nelson and their contemporaries as a lodge room for a 
wonderful and mysterious organization known as the Knights of Malta. 
Each of the persons named was high in the councils of the order, the 
apparent purpose of which was to cast ridicule upon the Masonic or- 
ganization, against which at that time a populai^ clamor was being 
' made, and incidentally by bombastic rituals, and by indescribable uni- 
forms, regalia and accessories to shock and terrify unlucky novices 
who sought to penetrate this inner arcanum. 

The regalias and accessories, ragged and moth eaten, were in trunks 
in this old garret as late as the early seventies, and a description of 
them would be interesting to the reader if added hereto. And so, 
hard working lawyers, profound students, and distinguished jurists, as 
they were known to the outside world, it is interesting to know that 
these men possessed the same instincts and foibles, and were actuated 
by the same wishes and desires common to aU healthy minded beings. 

Jacob W. Elseffer, for over half a century a prominent lawyer of 
Dutchess County, was born at Red Hook, N. Y., September 6, 1822, 
and died November 16, 1907 He was a son of former Assemblyman 
John ElseflFer. His mother's maiden name was Katharine Whiteman. 
His ancestors were among the early settlers in this county, and for a 
hundred and fifty years prominent in local history. 

Mr. Elseffer took up the study of law in the office of Judge Row- 
ley at Upper Red Hook. He was admitted to the bar in 1845, and 
the fact that his earliest clients, as well as their descendants, adhered 
to him throughout his long and successful career is proof sufficient of 
his ability and integrity. He was largely instrumental in the organ- 
ization of the First National Bank of Red Hook, in 1865, and was 
elected its first president. He continued as a director and attorney 
for this institution for many years, and much credit was awarded to 
him for the favorable condition of its affairs. 



514 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Mr. Elseffer was united in marriage October 17, 1847, with Miss 
Delia Eliza Bonesteel of Clermont, N. Y., by whom survive their son, 
John H. Elseffer, of San Diego, Cal., and a daughter, Katharine, 
wife of William P. Adams, of Cohoes, N. Y., and two granddaughters, 
Elizabeth Piatt Adams and Katharine Elseffer Adams. 

Mr. Elseffer was a man of intellectual power, brilliant in conversa- 
tion, courteous in manner, and one who made friends and kept them. 

Ambrose Wager, a prominent member of the local bar, was born in 
1816, and died in 1883. He resided and maintained an office at 
Rhinebeck, and left him surviving a son, A. Lee Wager, at present 
practicing in the same place. 

Jacob B. Jewett, bom in 1826, was a lawyer in active practice, and 
resided on Mansion Square, at the comer of Mansion street. His 
practice was largely in the care and management of estates, and he 
was a man of probity and strong character. He died in 1876. 

Cyrus Swan was one of the most picturesque lawyers of the city 
in the early days of the war and afterwards. With his flowing white 
beard, and his blue cloak, he was noticeable wherever seen. Impetuous 
and irascible, he was a man of extremely broad culture, and one of 
the most genial and charming of companions. 

He was an ardent politician, and in 1872, at the request of the Hon. 
John O. Whitehouse, then candidate for Congress, he temporarily for- 
sook the law, and for a number of years edited with great ability the 
local organ of the Democratic party. He was bom in 1820, and died 
at Poughkeepsie in the year 1900. , 

Henry M. Taylor was born in 1828, and in his earlier years prac- 
ticed his profession, first in Hudson, and afterwards in Rhinebeck. 
He finally came to Poughkeepsie and associated himself with Hon. 
James Emott, under the firm name of Emott & Taylor, which partner- 
ship continued until Judge Emott removed his office to New York 
City. Mr. Taylor was elected County Judge in 1872, serving six 
years. He was a man of extensive reading, and of no mean literary 
attainments, as well as a safe, prudent counsellor and able trial law- 
yer. Reserved and quiet outside of his own circle, within it he was 
one of the most genial and lovable of men. He died in 1908 re- 
gretted and mourned by all. 



BENCH AND BAR. 516 

Another Poughkeepsie lawyer who is held in affectionate remem- 
brance by most of the lawyers of to-day was Robert E. Taylor, who 
was born in 18SS, and died suddenly in this city in 1896. He was a 
contemporary and companion of Judge Barnard, Nelson and Whea- 
ton during his whole career at the bar, and was a valued member of the 
inner circle before referred to. He was Recorder of the city for 
many years, the attorney for the Poughkeepsie Savings Bank, and was 
justly esteemed and admired, both as a lawyer and as a man. 

This sketch would also be incomplete without mention of William 
Stewart Eno, who for many years was an attorney in active practice 
at Pine Plains in this county, and who was the son of William Eno, 
also located at the same place, and who was among the very ablest of 
the older lawyers. Mr. Eno, the younger, was jjom in 1827, and 
died in 1902. 

Gerome WiUiams was born in 1823, and was in practice from about 
1850 to the time of his death in 1894. He had in his prime perhaps 
as large a volume of litigated business as any companion at the bar. 
He was a natural trial lawyer, and although without the advantage of 
a liberal education, and without any bent for the higher branches of 
legal lorCj was yet one of the most formidable of opponents before a 
jury in a cause dependant upon issues of fact. 

He was able to gauge the mind of the average juryman to a 
nicety, had great powers of sarcasm and invective, and with a never 
faiUng fund of common sense and experience to draw from was always 
able to hold his own with whomever might oppose him. 

He left surviving a son, George H. Williams, a lawyer now in active 
practice here, and was pre-deceased by another son, Eugene Williams, 
also a lawyer. 

J. Spencer Van Cleef was born in 1831, and all his life resided and 
practiced law in the city of Poughkeepsie. His specialty was office 
practice, and he worthily filled a useful place in the profession. He 
was greatly interested in educational matters, and for many years was 
a member of the Board of Education in Poughkeepsie. He died in 
1901, leaving him surviving a widow and children, of whom one, Harry 
H. Van Cleef, is a practicing lawyer, 

Daniel W. Guernsey was bom in 1834, admitted to the bar in 1856, 
and commenced the practice of law in Leavenworth, Kansas. He en- 



616 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

listed as a private in the War of the Rebellion, was present in many 
engagements, and was mustered out a captain. He was elected County 
Judge in 1884, and served two terms until 1896. He died in 1902, 
leaving a widow and children. 

Alfred B. Smith and Leonard B. Sackett were in business as part- 
ners from the close of the war until the firm was dissolved by death. 
Mr. Smith was born in 18.25, studied law with Judge Emott, was ad- 
mitted in 1855, and formed a copartnership with the Hon. Matthew 
Hale, afterwards a very distinguished lawyer at Albany. 

At the outbreak of the Civil War Mr. Smith went to the front as 
major of the 150th Regiment of New York State Volunteers, and 
served gallantly until the segiment was mustered out in 1865, he then 
having received the rank of brevet brigadier general. He was an 
ardent Republican, and held many offices of pubHc trust and con- 
fidence. He died in 1896, leaving one child, a son. 

Leonard B. Sackett was born in 1822, and died in 1906, leaving two 
daughters surviving. He was a ripe lawyer, and one of the most 
kindly of men ; and the firm of which he was a member was prominent 
in legal circles during its continuance. 

Silas Wodell was of Rhode Island ancestry. His grandfather, 
Silas Wodell, was bom in Rhode Island in 1760, and married there 
Ruth Borden, the daughter of John Borden. They came to Dutchess 
County soon after the War of the Revolution, and settled not far 
from Lithgow, this county, where their son, Joseph Wodell, was bom 
January 2, 1788. 

In 1797, Silas Wodell purchased from Philip Hart the farm which 
became the homestead place, which is located not far from Mabbetts- 
ville, on the south side of the road, and which still remains in the 
family. Here Silas Wodell erected a handsome residence and hved 
until he died, in January, 1849. He led a useful and honorable career, 
serving as Justice of the Peace for many successive terms. He un- 
doubtedly was possessed of considerable means when he came to 
Dutchess County, and later on acquired the land on the north side of 
the road, leaving to his son, Joseph, at the time of his death, some- 
where about six hundred acres of land. 

His son, Joseph, lived in the old homestead until that and almost 
all of the old buildings were destroyed by fire in the early fall of 




JOHN HACKETT. 



BENCH AND BAR. 517 

1876, when Joseph Wodell was in his eighty-ninth year. He died in 
Millbrook in 1878. 

Silas Wodell, the subject of this sketch, was born in the homestead 
near Mabbettsville, on January 2, 1826. He first attended Little 
Nine Partners' School, near Mechanics, then under the charge of 
Jacob Willetts. From there he went to the Amenia Seminary, where 
he was prepared for Yale College, and entered, in September, 184)5, 
the class of 1849. After his graduation he came to Poughkeepsie to 
study law, and was admitted to the Dutchess County Bar July 8, 
1861. He settled as a lawyer in Poughkeepsie in partnership with 
James Emott, Jr., Esq., in 1855, when Mr. Emott was elected to the 
Supreme Court bench and Mr. Wodell was elected District Attorney 
of Dutchess County. 

He married, June 1, 1853, Anna Hall, the daughter of Dr. Asahel 
Hall and Catherine Rutzen VanderBurgh. He died at the early age 
of thirty-five, on February 18, 1861, leaving him surviving his widow 
and four children. Miss Katharine Hall Wodell, who lives in Pough- 
keepsie, and occupies the old homestead at the corner of Noxon and 
Academy streets; Joseph Wodell, the eldest son, married Alice F. 
Clark, of Boston, and he died February 12, 1903. His widow sur- 
vives him. Henrietta Wodell married Lewis Hotchkiss English, and 
resides in New Haven, Connecticut, and has two daughters. Silas 
Wodell, a member of the Dutchess County Bar, the youngest of the 
four children, married Marion Ruthven Adriance, the daughter of 
John P. Adriance and Mary J. R. Piatt. They occupy the Adriance 
homestead on the corner of Academy and Livingston streets, Pough- 
keepsie, with their two children, one daughter, Katharine Wodell, and 
son, Ruthven Adriance Wodell, now a member of the Junior Academic 
Class of 1910, Yale University. 

Peter Dorland, one of the most useful and efficient of surrogates in 
our county, was born in 1815, and in 1860 was elected a surrogate. 
He was re-elected, and thus served a continuous term of eight years. 
In 1872 he was again elected, and served six years more. He was 
a man of experience, possessing a fund of common sense, and his ad- 
ministration of the office was satisfactory both to the lawyers and 
the people. 

He died in 1890, and left him surviving two sons, Cyrenue P. and 



618 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

John M., both of whom are attorneys, having offices in the city of 
Poughkeepsie. 

Horace D. Hufcut was also a useful and efficient surrogate. He 
was the son of George Hufcut, who for many years practiced law at, 
or near Dover, and who was a man of substance and reputation, and 
a great favorite with the lawyers of his day. He died in 1881, aged 
76 years. Horace D. entered into partnership with his father until 
1884, when he was elected surrogate. 

In 1891 he was elected District Attorney and served a term of 
three years. He was deservedly liked by the profession, and dis- 
charged his official duties to the satisfaction of all. He died in 1905, 
leaving a widow and two children. 

Edward Crummey, bom in 1827, was in his day a well-known attor- 
ney. He was of pronounced temperance proclivities, and much of his 
time and efforts were expended in advocating total abstinence. He 
died in 1894, at the age of about 67, leaving a widow and two sons, 
one of whom is a practicing lawyer in New York. 

John Z. Storrs was a contemporary of Mr. Crummey, and a co- 
worker with him. He was born in 1828, and died in 1887. 

One of the most serious losses sustained by the bar was the death, 
in 1896, of Charles B. Herrick. He was only fifty years of age, and 
had a career of much promise apparently before him. He studied 
law in the office of Thompson & Weeks, and in 1876 formed a partner- 
ship with Col. Henry E. Losey, which continued until his death. He 
was a lawyer of much ability and integrity, and had achieved an hon- 
orable standing in his profession. 

Henry H. Hustis, Edmund S. Phillips and J. Hervey Cook, all prac- 
titioners residing at Matteawan or Fishkill Landing, were active in 
professional circles. Mr. Hustis was an exceedingly accurate lawyer, 
and was engaged in many prominent causes. He was bom in 1829, 
and died in 1896, leaving a wife and children. 

Edmund S. Phillips, bom in 1836, was the first lawyer to locate at 
Matteawan, and continued to practice there until his death, which 
occurred in 1898. He left two sons, Samuel K. Phillips, afterward 
County Judge of Dutchess County, and Sherwood Phillips, also an 
attorney. Both the sons are still engaged in practice at Matteawan. 



BENCH AND BAR. 519 

J. Hervey Cook, the third of the three named, was a quaint and 
thoroughly likeable character. He possessed great literary tastes, 
iand was a well read lawyer and a charming companion. He was born 
in 1837 and died in 1905. 

The writer entertains very pleasant and affectionate memories of 
Orlando D. M. Baker, at one time a member of the firm of Nelson & 
Baker, and a lawyer of very large practice and in whose ofBce the 
writer entered as a student in 1870. Mr. Baker was born in 1842 
and died, a young man, in 1890, leaving a widow and two daughters. 

In all matters concerning practice, concerning the machinery of 
the law, Mr. Baker was far and away the ablest man at the bar. Not 
that he was not a good, sound, all around lawyer, but in all matters 
of legal procedure, in knowing just how to enforce legal rights, he 
knew more than all the rest of the bar put together. He was a man 
of the most prodigious industry and capacity for work, and was an 
invaluable aid to Judge Nelson during their copartnership. Re- 
served, and, in fact, unsocial outside of his own particular circle, he 
possessed the kindest of hearts, and was a model husband, father and 
citizen. 

Collins Sheldon will be well remembered by those doing business in 
the surrogate's court from '78 to '84. He was born in 1839, and was 
elected surrogate in 1877. He practiced law in MiUerton, where he 
died a few years ago. 

Peter Edgar Ackert was the attorney for the city of Poughkeepsie 
in 1895-'96, and died in 1902. 

William R. Woodin has been dead so few years that he will be well 
remembered by everyone. He was a gallant soldier during the war, 
and upon his return commenced practice in the city of Poughkeepsie, 
where he continued until his death. 

He was elected District Attorney in 1877, and served his term, 
giving satisfaction to aU. He was possessed of infinite wit and power 
of repartee, and was one of the readiest of speakers on all social or 
other occasions. He died in 1903, and left a widow and two daughters. 

The two Bakers, Ransom and Lewis, were notable characters in 
their day. 



520 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Ransom Baker, or Squire Baker as he was more generally known, 
was a Justice of the Peace in this city for many years. He was bom 
in 1822, and was a man of many virtues and great force of character. 
He died in 1894, leaving a son, Seward, who is now a distinguished 
member of the bar, practicing in the Borough of the Bronx. 

Lewis Baker, in no way akin to Ransom, studied law in the office of 
Gerome Williams, and was admitted to practice in the year 1871, after 
which time he followed his profession in the city of Poughkeepsie until 
his death, which occurred in 1896. He was a genial, kindly person, 
and was highly esteemed for his engaging personal quaUties by all his 
brethren at the bar. 

He presented himself for admission to the bar at Brooklyn in 1871 
with the writer of this article, then and always his intimate friend. 
The examinations were at that time entirely oral, and largely pre- 
functory. So modest was he, and so distrustful of his own powers 
and abilities, that it was difficult for him to summon up the requisite 
courage to present himself before the Board of Examiners. Finally 
he started with the writer, taking an immense old-fashioned carpet 
bag, which seemed to contain nothing but a well-thumbed copy of the 
then Civil Code. On the steam road to New York, on the horse cars 
to the hotel, and late that night our friend pored over that fateful 
book, as if all the legal lore extant was embraced within its green 
covers. 

The next morning Baker, the writer, the carpet bag, and the Code, 
started for Brooklyn where the examination was to be held. On the 
way to the court house his courage again oozed out, and it was only 
by the arrangement of an elaborate code of signals through which the 
writer was to help him in answering knotty questions, that he con- 
sented to go in the class room. All of the expected aid on the part of 
the writer could of course be exercised only by sitting next to the per- 
son undergoing examination. But, alas ! when the examiners were 
ready the chief one arose, and stated that for the purpose of con- 
venience the candidates would be arranged in alphabetical order. 
"Baker," and the first name shot out Uke a stone from a catapult. 
"Lew" gave one despairing glance at his companion, one at the door 
by which he had entered, one at the head of the room, and for an 
instant it was doubtful which route he would pursue. Finally, with 
an air of desperation, he grabbed his carpet bag, and with his ever 



BENCH AND BAR. 521 

ready code in his hand, started for the front seat. The class was a 
large one of over fifty, and, of course, the writer was three or four 
rows in the rear, unable in any way, to aid his comrade in. distress. 

When the entire class was arranged and settled, the examiner called 
out, "Mr. Baker, what are the Courts of this State?" Now in this 
self-same Code the very first section enumerated aU of these courts, 
commencing with "Courts for the trial of Impeachments" and ending 
with "PoHce Courts." No Hving man could have been expected to 
name them in full, much less in order, but this was our friend's, oppor- 
tunity. Like a horse galloping down a rocky road, he commenced 
with the head and went clickety-clack down to the end, not missing a 
one, and putting each in its regular order as it appeared in the sec- 
tion. So unusual, so apparently impossible was ''the answer, so glib 
and ready it was, that upon its completion the Board of Examiners, 
and the whole room of students, broke into a roar of laughter and 
applause, and the apphcant won his spurs and received his coveted 
diploma on this one question and answer. 

Perhaps no member of the bar was better known or more highly 
esteemed than James L. Williams, who died only last year. He was 
born in 1846, and was a nephew of Judge Dean, in this sketch before 
mentioned. He entered into partnership with Peter Dorland, and in 
1873 was elected District Attorney. In 1884 he entered into partner- 
ship with John Hackett, which association continued down to the 
time of his death. He was an excellent lawyer, and possessed of the 
most charming social qualities. 

John W. Bartram, Webster Haight, Henry H. Bowne, William 
Brewer, Caspar L. Odell and Robert N. Palmer wiU each be remem- 
bered by the present generation of lawyers. Mr. Bartram lived and 
practiced at Wappinger Falls, Webster Haight at Verbank, and Rob- 
ert N. Palmer at the city of Poughkeepsie. Each died a few years 
ago, the dates of death and birth not being accessible to the writer. 

Mr. Odell was elected a Recorder of the city of Poughkeepsie in 
1889. 

Mr. Bowne studied law in the office of Thompson & Weeks and sub- 
sequently removed to Jacksonville, Florida, where he practiced until 
he died. 



622 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS, 

Albert M. Card and John H. Millard are also fresh in the memories 
of the present bar. 

Mr. Card was born in 184!3, and died in 1905, most of the time main- 
taining an office and practicing in the city of New York, though fre- 
quently engaged in the trial of cases at the Dutchess terms. 

Mr. Millard was bom in 1851, studied law in the office of Thompson 
& Weeks, and died unmarried in 1904. 

Peter Hulme and NicoU Floyd Elmendorf, two young men of ex- 
ceptionable ability, died the first in 1901, and the other a few years 
earlier. 

Robert Sanford was born in 1831, and lived the greater part of his 
life in Poughkeepsie. He was never engaged in active practice here, 
but lived in dignified retirement. He was a genial, warm-hearted 
man, and particularly fond 'jof children. For many years he was 
actively interested in the public schools of this city. He died in 1908, 
leaving him surviving several children, of whom one, Henry G. San- 
ford, is a practicing lawyer in New York. 

James C. McCarty, one of the oldest and most respected of the 
country practitioners, and for many years a member of the firm of 
Esselstyn & McCarty, at Rhinebeck, went over to the majority during 
the last year. He had attained the ripe age of eighty-four. 

The last death to be recorded by your chronicler is that of Kieran 
J. Lawler, an amiable member of the bar, at one time City Chamber- 
lain, who died at Poughkeepsie during the present year. 

These sketches would be incomplete, however, without some refer- 
ence to the most unique and interesting character that ever trod the 
halls of Justice in our county, often and familiarly known as the 
Irish barrister — John Moore. 

No one ever knew the date of his birth, but no one after seeing and 
hearing him ever doubted his birthplace. Short and spare of frame, 
with a keen, intellectual face, and an inimitable brogue, he was a 
picturesque character of the bar during the writer's early life. Origi- 
nally he was a gardener in the employ of John Thompson, in this 
article often mentioned. In some way he got admitted to the bar» 




ALLISON BUTTS. 



BENCH AND BAR. 523 

though apparently without any steady course of study or attendance 
in a law office. At all events, in 1870, he was quite a practitioner, 
and had numerous clients who availed themselves of his peculiar talents. 
In later years he became very poor, cUents dropped away from him, 
and the world went wrong with the aged lawyer, but at long inter- 
vals he would reappear and exhibit flashes of his former wit and elo- 
quence. These appearances became more and more rare, and finally 
after a few years he was run over at a railroad crossing, and the poor, 
battered, unsuccessful huUt drifted into port. 

It was a treat to hear the barrister in his palmy days try a cause. 
With a hazy idea of the more intricate paths of law, he had naturally 
a keen intellect, and this coupled with native Irish wit, made him an 
effective trial lawyer where the issues were of fact only. The writer 
does not remember ever seeing or hearing him laugh, and his rare 
smiles were always wintry. He would utter the most witty sayings, 
and forge an epigram which was humor boiled down, with a face as 
impassive as a sphinx. 

The writer weU remembers a time in the early seventies when light- 
ning rods were greatly in vogue, and the country was infested with 
lightning rod agents, who thrust their wares upon the farmers almost 
against their will and knowledge. Moore was defending a case of 
this kind where the victim refused to pay, and in his summing up, 
wishing to crush the poor agent so faj- as words could do it, character- 
ized him as an "I-tin-e-rant bu-r-rd of prey." This characterization, 
flung at the plaintiff in Moore's high falsetto voice, was irresistibly 
ludicrous, and a verdict for the defendant followed. 

On another occasion when he was defending some one, on the last 
day of the term before the late Justice Gilbert, who resided in Brook- 
lyn, not having much of a defense upon the merits, he made a motion 
for a non-suit at the completion of the plaintiff's case, which happened 
to be about three o'clock in the afternoon. The Judge hesitated, 
and was dehberating on the motion, when Moore in his coaxing, 
wheedling manner said: "Your honor's train wiU be going at three 
thirty, and you will have just time to catch it." 

In his later years, when poverty was oppressing him, he was argu- 
ing a cause before Justice Barnard one warm spring day, wearing 
an overcoat buttoned up to his chin. The room was hot, and the 
counsellor was earnest, and the perspiration began to flow down his 



524 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

face. The court said, "Mr. Moore, take it easy. Why don't you 
remove your coat?" "I have raysons," said the advocate, shirtless, 
no doubt, and continued his efforts. 

Another memorable occasion was when he had been sued by a liquor 
dealer for luireturned collections, and had interposed a counter claim 
for services rendered to an amount considerably greater than the col- 
lections. The cause came on trial, the attorney for the plaintiff 
being the late Joseph H. Jackson, one of the most formal and precise 
lawyers of the old school. Opposed to him the Irish barrister, de- 
fendant and defendant's attorney in person. 

When it came to the defence Moore took the stand and gravely 
commenced to question himself. He had an old, greasy, battered stiff 
hat which was the repository of all the law papers and exhibits con- 
nected with the case. This hat with its precious contents he care- 
fully deposited on the end of the judicial bench, almost under the nose 
of the Justice presiding. 

He insisted on reading all the correspondence between him and the 
plaintiff, with a view, of course, to show the number and variety of 
the delinquents he was pursuing, and the extent of his labors, and 
the measure of proper remuneration. As each paper was needed he 
would solemnly rise on the witness stand and fish in the hat for it. 
Then he would read it, and comment upon its contents. In fifteen 
minutes he had the court, the jury, and the entire court room con- 
vulsed with laughter. Jackson was powerless to restrain him, the 
court seemed unwiUing to, and the poor plaintiff was laughed out of 
court with a verdict against him. 

At Mr. Moore's death the bar erected a neat tablet and placed it 
over his remains. It bears the inscription: 

JOHN MOORE. 

Counsellor at Law. 

Died Oct. 30, 1903, 

Age 70 years. 

Erected by his friends. 

Since this book commenced to go to press, the members of the local 
Bar have learned with regret of the decease of Mr. William R. Lee, 
which occurred at his home in Pawling on the 6th day of June, 1909. 

Mr*. Lee was a careful and efficient lawyer and was elected District 
Attorney, serving the term immediately preceding the term of the 



BENCH AND BAR. 525 

present incumbent. He was a man of the strictest personal and pro- 
fessional integrity, and endeared himself to all who came in contact 
with him. 

At a session of the Supreme Court held a few days after his death 
in the City of Poughkeepsie the proceedings were suspended and Mr. 
Lee's professional friends all joined in feeling and touching tributes, 
expressing their appreciation of him as a man and as a brother lawyer. 
Judge Tompkins, presiding, joined in these expressions of regret and 
respect, and ordered the entire proceeding to be spread in full upon 
the minutes of the court. 

In writing the foregoing sketches the writer feels that he has said 
little where much might be said. An experience of over thirty years 
at the local bar has brought him into personal Contact and associa- 
tion with most of the men named. He feels that he has done but scant 
justice to the professional ability and private qualifications of his 
dead associates, but he feels that they will long be remembered by what 
they were, and what they did, and not by any brief record that can at 
this time be made. 

He has prepared a list of other deceased lawyers who at one time 
or another have practiced at the local bar, and who havt not been 
specially mentioned in the foregoing part of this article. 

While such hst extends beyond the personal recollection of the older 
members of the bar now living, it is necessarily imperfect and incom- 
plete, embracing but comparatively few of the earlier practitioners. 

No attempt has been made to arrange the names chronologically, 
but only to the extent that the later generation of lawyers appear at 
the end of each grouping. Possibly some of these last may still be 
living in some place outside of this county or State. 

Ashurst, John Golden, Cadwallader De Lacy, William L. 

Armstrong John, Jr. Cowles, Edward E. 

Akerley, Frank T. Crooke, Philip S. Ellison, 

Ackert, Alfred T. Conger, Moses Emigh, Ward 

Cole, Andrew 

Bonney, B. W. Forbus, Alexander 

Buttolph, Edward A. Davis, Richard, II. 

Bonesteel, Virgil D. Duer, William A. Greenthal, Robert 

Brundage, Chester B. Davies, John W. Gray, Frank H. 

Baum, Peter M. Doty, John V. W. Gillender, Augustus T. 

Beard, Oliver L. Dearin, Samuel L. Guernsey, Joseph R. 



526 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Hayes, Peter P. 
Hoffmann, Murray 
Hoffman, Fr. R. 
Hammond, Burton 
Hitchcock, Cyrus 
Haviland, Hiram S. 
Hughes, J. Wade 
Hoff, Charles L. 
Haight, Silas E. 
Heermance, De Witt 
Hill Gideon 
HuU, Walter C. 

Ingraham, George 

Johnston, Charles 

Kipp, William Bergh 

Lyle, John V. A. 
Lewis, Morgan 
Liston, John K. 
Lord, Greorge W. 
Lawton, Isaac 

Maison, Leonard 



Morse, John 
McCarty, Andrew Z. 
McWilliam, John S. 
Martin, Joseph 
Mitchell, J. Grant 
MoneU, John J. 

Nelson, William B. 

Oppe, James H. 
Oakley, Thomas J. 

Piatt, Jonas 
Piatt, John H. 
Paine, George W. 
Peck, Richard 
Post, J. Edward 

Rusk, John 
Rusk, Elisha 
Rose, Homer A. 
Reed, Thomas, Jr. 

Smith, Melancthon 
Shufeldt, George A. 



Smith, James 
Stoutenburgh, John A. 
Schouten, William K. 
Schryver, Matthew V. B. 
Simmons, E. A. 
Smalley Charles M. 

Thayer, 



Townsend, Robert 
Thompson, Smith 
Tucker, Gideon J. 
Tallmadge, James, Jr. 
Thorn, Samuel 
Thompson, Walter L. 
Townsend, John M. 

Van Ness, Jacob 

Van Benthuysen, Jacob 

Van Keuren, Frank T. 

Woodworth, W. W. 
Williams, Charles 
Weeks, Z. 

Wilkinson, Arthur L. 
Wolcott, Henry G. 



Except as may be found in the biographical sketches contained in 
Part H of this History, the records of living and practicing lawyers 
are not given. 

It seems well, however, as a matter of convenience to future his- 
torians that there should be appended to this article a list of the 
names and the present residences of all the members of the Dutchess 
County Bar now living. 

The list as printed in the Calendar for June, 1909, Trial Term of 
the Supreme Court, follows: 

DUTCHESS COUNTY BAB. 



Ackerman, Fred E., Poughkeepsie 
Albro, William C, Poughkeepsie 
Arnold, C. W. H., Poughkeepsie 
Arnold, Harry, Poughkeepsie 
Atwater, Edward S., Poughkeepsie 
Ball, aJohn B., Poughkeepsie 
Barker, Harry C, Poughkeepsie 
Barnard, Frederick, Poughkeepsie 



Bingham, Isaac E., Poughkeepsie 
Bolin, Gains C, Poughkeepsie 
Brevoort, Benjamin H., Poughkeepsie 
Briggs, Homer E., Poughkeepsie 
Brown, Samuel H., Poughkeepsie 
Butts, Allison, Poughkeepsie 
Butts, Ralph P., Poughkeepsie 
Card, George, Poughkeepsie 



BENCH AND BAR. 



527 



Carroll, James E., Poughkeepsie 
Connolly, Frank J., Poughkeepsie 
Conklin, Fred L., Millerton 
Cossum, Charles F., Poughkeepsie 
Conger, Edward A., Poughkeepsie 
Daughton, Jos. A., Poughkeepsie 
Daley, Annie G. W., Poughkeepsie 
Donnelly, John J., Matteawan 
Dorland, Cyrenus P., Poughkeepsie 
Dorland, John M., Poughkeepsie 
Douw, Alexander, Poughkeepsie 
Doughty, Robert W., Fishkill Landing 
Downing, William, Pawling 
Drake, Clarence J., Pleasant Valley 
Dugan, Daniel A., Fishkill Landing 
Dwight, James S., Poughkeepsie 
Elting, Irving, Poughkeepsie 
Eno, Frank, Pine Plains 
Esselstyn, George, Rhinebeck 
Farrington, Walter, Poughkeepsie 
Fowler, Milton A., Poughkeepsie 
Fowler, Benjamin M., Poughkeepsie 
Gardinier, Samuel H., Poughkeepsie 
Gurney, Herbert R., Poughkeepsie 
Gleason, Daniel J., Millerton 
Guernsey, Stephen G., Poughkeepsie 
Grubb, John B., Poughkeepsie 
Hackett, John, Poughkeepsie 
Hackett, John M., Poughkeepsie 
Haight, Adelbert, Poughkeepsie 
Harris, Harry C, Poughkeepsie 
Hasbrouck, Frank, Poughkeepsie 
Hasbrouck, Webster D., Poughkeepsie 
Heermance, Martin, Poughkeepsie 
Hopkins, Charles A., Poughkeepsie 
Hoysradt, Willet E., Poughkeepsie 
Hunter, Robert H., Poughkeepsie 
Husted, Chester, Poughkeepsie 
Horan, Joseph, Poughkeepsie 
Ingal, J. Malcolm, Pouglikeepsie 
Keech, John R., Poughkeepsie 
Kelly, John A., Poughkeepsie 
Kent, William, FishkiU Landing 
KeUy, John T., Jr., Matteawan 



Kelly, Frank H., Poughkeepsie 
Lawson, Welcome H., Poughkeepsie 
Lee, W. Morgan, Poughkeepsie 
Loope, Warren L., Matteawan 
Losey, Henry E., Poughkeepsie 
Lown, Frank B., Pouglikeepsie 
Mayer, Edward D., Amenia 
Mattice, Leonard, Red Hook 
McCann, Charles L., Poughkeepsie 
McCarty, Charles E., Rhinebeck 
Meyer, James G., Matteawan 
Mack, John B., Poughkeepsie 
Morgan, Guy H., Pouglikeepsie 
Morschauser, Charles, Poughkeepsie 
Morschauser, Joseph, Poughkeepsie 
Mylod, John J., •Poughkeepsie 
Ormsbee, Frank S., Madalin 
Overocker, George, Poughkeepsie 
Perkins, Edward E., Poughkeepsie 
Pliillips, Samuel K., Matteawan 
Phillips, Sherwood, Matteawan 
Phillips, George W., Hughsonville 
Piatt, Isaac, Poughkeepsie 
Rikert, Frank G., Matteawan 
Ringwood, John F., Pouglikeepsie 
Rogers, Samuel B., FishkiU Landing 
Russell, Elijah T., Millbrook 
Reynolds, Allen S., Poughkeepsie 
Schlosser, John F., Fishkill Landing 
Sherrill, Wilfrid H., Poughkeepsie 
Sickley, John C, Poughkeepsie 
Slee, Samuel, Poughkeepsie 
Slee, R. Burton, Poughkeepsie 
Spratt, George V. L., Pouglikeepsie 
Tice, William G., Pawling 
Travis, Everett H., Pouglikeepsie 
Van Cleef, Henry H., Poughkeepsie 
Van Wyck, S. Miller, FishkiU Landing 
Wager, A. Lee, Rhinebeck 
Wilkinson, Robert, Poughkeepsie 
Williams, George H., Poughkeepsie 
Wood, George, Pouglikeepsie 
WorraU, George, Poughkeepsie 
Whittaker, Theodore, Poughkeepsie 



Note. — The writer desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to the editors of the 
History of Dutchess County, and of the History of the City of Poughkeepsie for 
much valuable data. 



528 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

THE MEDICAL PROFESSION. 

Bt Guy Caeleton Bayley. 

The Medical Society of Dutchess County. 

ON March 23rd, 1797, the Legislature passed a law to regu- 
late the practice of physic and surgery in this State, which 
in substance required that every person practicing medicine 
should file a copy of his diploma, or license to practice, with 
the Clerk of the County in which he lived. If he had no diploma 
he had to take a responsible person who knew him personally, 
before a Judge of a Court of Record to vouch for his re- 
spectability, and to the fact that he had practiced medicine in his 
present place of residence for at least two years previous. On his 
showing this, the judge gave him a license to practice. Two of these 
licenses which have historical interest, have been examined by the 
writer: One was issued to Cyrenus Crosby, of the Town of Amenia, 
by Gilbert Livingston, Master in Chancery, March 23rd, 1797. The 
second was issued to Isaac DeLavergne, of the Town of Washington, 
by Jacob C. Bloom, Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, December 
8th, 1797. If a man could do neither of these two things, he had to 
stop practicing, under certain penalties. This law was good, but 
whose duty was it to enforce it.'' And through what channel could 
it be done? It proved ineflFective, and the law passed April 4th, 1806, 
entitled "An Act to incorporate Medical Societies for the purpose of 
regulating the practice of Physic and Surgery in this State," was a 
natural result. This made the medical men of each county, in an asso- 
ciation legally constituted, the judges of the fitness of those desirous 
of engaging in practice, the censors of the morals and character of 
its own members, also enabling and constraining this body to 
enforce the laws of the State against illegal practitioners. It is in- 
teresting to note here that there had been voluntary associations and 




GUY CARLETON BAYLEY, M. D. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 529 

societies of doctors before this, not only in the large cities of New 
York, Philadelphia and Boston, but as seen by the following adver- 
tisement, the doctors in the country towns associated themselves to- 
gether in societies to discuss medical aiFairs. This notice is in the 
New York Packet and the American Advertiser, published at Fish- 
kill, and dated May 22nd, 1783 ; 

"This is to notify the members of the First Medical Society in the thirteen 
United States of America since their Independence. That a meeting will be holden 
at the house of Dr. Phineas Smith in Sharon on the second Tuesday of June next, 
at 10 o'clock A. M., certified per. Oliver Fuller, Clerk." 

This meeting was to be at Sharon, but the notice was given at Fish- 
kiU. The lines between New York and Connecticut were at that time 
very illy-defined, and Sharon may well have been «onsidered in New 
York State. In any event the doctors of Dutchess were expected to 
take notice and respond to the call. 

Up to the passage of the act of 1797 the practice of medicine had 
been in a chaotic state. Many of those calling themselves doctors had 
no qualifications whatever. The possession of some popular treatise on the 
treatment of simple ailments, a knowledge of the use of simples, often 
gained by intercourse with the Indians, were their only credentials. There 
were a few adventurous spirits from Europe, who had qualified them- 
selves for practice at one of the great schools ; a few Americans who 
went to the universities in the old countries and gained their diplomas; 
more who went to England, or Edinburgh, and took a single course 
of lectures ; but the great number, after serving an apprenticeship 
with a doctor, without further advantages, launched their craft, 
spread their sails to the breeze, fuU fledged doctors. As the country 
became more thickly populated, and as collections of cabins grew 
into towns and villages, this confusion and uncertainty as to a doc- 
tor's standing and quahfications became intolerable, till the people, led 
by the better educated of the doctors, demanded order and higher 
standards, and these laws resulted. 

In the Poughkeepsie Journal of August 12th, 1806, appeared the 
following notice: 

"The Physicians of Dutchess having omitted to organize themselves into a 
society according to an act passed at the last session of the Legislature, they are 
requested to meet at Cunningham's Hotel, Poughkeepsie, on Saturday, the 30th 
of September, at 3 o'clock p. m. It is necessary that as large a number convene 
as possible." 



530 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In the same paper on August 26th there appeared the following 
communication — (it is verbose, and the sentences are badly con- 
structed, but we get the writer's meaning) : 

"To the Physicians of Dutchess County: 

A distinguished writer has remarked 'That enjoying a state of health we want 
little else.' A position which every man's progress through life can iUnstrate very 
clearly. But we do not trust to an exception and a recovery from disease, only 
to a, strong and regular organization of our frame. Ill health wiU approach-^it 
may advance with an insidious step, or it may assail with violence: and having 
commenced its attack, more than common skill may be necessaiy to resist it. For 
this purpose, in nursery language, you must call in the physician. It is of conse- 
quence, then, that he with whom a sick person is to be intrusted should be fitted 
to answer the purpose for which he is sent, coming on an errand, too, on which 
perhaps, is suspended the happiness of a family and of a community: — ^What 
Horace, with exuberant praise, asserts of the muse, is emphatically appropriate to 
the well-educated and skillful physician. — Digmma Virmn Vetat Mori. 

There can be no question that the practice of medicine involves the best interests 
of society; nor, can any one deny that they are also shamefuDy neglected. To 
remedy this evil, in some measure, a law was passed at the last session of the 
legislature, authorizing the physicians of the several counties to imite into socie- 
ties, which should have the power of regulating a number of things appertaining 
to their profession. With a. spirit that reflects lustre on the medical character 
societies of this kind have been formed in most of the coimties of the State. In 
Dutchess, from apathy, indolence, or ignorance that a new law relating to the 
practice of physic and surgery was in existence, no society has been formed. Still 
it is not too late to fulfill the intention of the act, a provision having been made 
for those counties which should omit to avail themselves of its privileges. In 
reference to this provision is the notice to physicians in last week's paper. It 
may be observed that this notice ought to be attended to — ^because the law, — ^which 
regulates the practice of physic and surgery at present, will expire on the first of 
next month, after which time imtil the forming of a society according to the late 
law the practice wiU be absolutely at loose ends, or at no ends at all, unless the 
rotten limbs of the profession — the fag ends of it — ^may be called one of the ends 
of our science. To be serious, after the first of September, until the evil here 
spoken of be guarded against, any man may exalt himself in our county into a 
guardian of health, without examination or license. It is within the writer's knowl- 
edge, that three persons have appeared with the intention of settling down as 
doctors, on the strength of a belief that the present law was abrogated. It follows 
from these observations, that not only a sense of duty which actuates physicians, 
considered as members of the community, but that of interest should induce those 
of our county of Dutchess to form a corporate and medical association which may 
embrace their district. And the motive of interest is strengthened by another 
consideration. The wording of the provision in the law regulating the practice of 
physic which I have mentioned makes it necessary to convene a majority of the 
physicians of the country to institute a society where they have omitted to meet 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 531 

on the first Tuesday of July. It runs thus: 'And be it further enacted, that if 
the physicians and surgeons of any county or counties of this State shall not meet 
and organize themselves at such times and places as is required by this act, it 
shall be lawful for them to meet at such other time as a majority of them shall 
think proper, and their proceedings shall be as valid as if their meeting had been 
at the time provided for in this act.' Here it is plain that a majority of the 
physicians of the county is necessary now even in the initiatory steps to organize 
themselves into a society. Nor is the case without difficulty. In the first place it 
cannot be ascertained at once what number of physicians constitutes a majority: 
and in the next it seems quite improbable that a majority will assemble at the 
time appointed, or at any other time. A sufficient number of physicians can con- 
vene, however, if they please. Let me ask them, then, with the utmost earnestness 
by all means to endeavor to come to town on the 30th of September, so as to have as 
many collected as possible. The solicitude which marks this request is not magni- 
fying the trifles in matters of moment; for I am pleading at^the bar of the faculty 
to effect what I deem a most important end. I have in view the happiness of 
mankind, and the satisfaction and comfort of my fellow practitioners in the dis- 
charge of the duties of their profession. 

A Physiciait. 

N. B. — ^Measures are taking to obtain a list of all the practitioners of medicine 
in the county. If it be procured, comparing it with the number of physicians who 
may meet on the 20th of next month, it can be ascertainedi'T^ther there be a 
majority as pointed out in the law. 

Poughkeepsie, August 3Sth, 1806." 

Agreeable to public notice a meeting of the Physicians of Dutchess 
County was held at Cunningham's Hotel, September 20th, 1806, viz. : 

Doctors Benjamin DeLavergne and William Lathrop of Washing- 
ton; Ezekiel H. Gurnsey, Amasa Buckman and Richard Bartlett of 
Stanford ; James Thome, John Pinckney, Abraham Halsey and Bartow 
White of FishkiU; David Delavan and James Scovel of Pawling; John 
Chamberlain, Charles Waldo, Baltus Livingston Va'n Kleeck, Caled 
Child, John Thomas and James Livingston Van Kleeck of Pough- 
keepsie; Thomas Quinlan, James Downs, George W. Cook, Cyrus 
Berry and William Ely of Clinton ; John M. Smith of Amenia ; Joseph 
Rogers of Fishkill (Wappingers) ; David Tomlinson and William 
Wheeler of Rhinebeck; Uri Judd of Northeast; Ebenezer Cary and 
Thomas Saffen of Beekman. 

Resolved, That these present do form themselves into a society pur- 
suant "to an act to incorporate medical societies for the purpose of 
regulating the practice of physic and surgery in this State, passed 
the 4.th of April, 1806." 

Whereupon the following were chosen officers of the society: Presi- 



532 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

dent, Samuel Bard, M. D. ; Vice-president, Benjamin DeLavergne; 
Treasurer, Robert Noxon; Secretary, James L. Van Kleeck, M. D. 

Benjamin DeLaveegne, Chairman. 
Abuaham Halsey, Secretary. 

The society being organized, Dr. DeLavergne in the chair, the fol- 
lowing were elected censors: Ebenezer Cary of Beekman, John 
Thomas of Poughkeepsie, William Lathrop, M. D., of Washington, 
Daniel Tomlinson of Rhinebeck, Abraham Halsey of FishkiU. Dr. 
WiUiam Wheeler was appointed delegate to the State Society. Drs. 
Thomas, White, Saffen, Ely and J. L. Van Kleeck were appointed a 
committee to draft a code of by-laws. When we consider that the 
state of the roads was such that travehng was largely done on horse- 
back, the distance traveled, and the time taken, this was a goodly 
meeting of representative men, well conducted, of admirable results. 
We may note four things. Dr. Samuel Bard of Hyde Park, the Presi- 
dent elect, was not present; Dr. Cyrus Berry, though present and 
taking part in this and other meetings up to May 11th, 1807, without 
objection, on that date applied for admission and was rejected, no 
reason being given; also that there were but three of the ten officers 
elected who had the degree of doctor of medicine, and that must have 
been a large proportion for any meeting of medical men in those days- 
And again that Dr. WTieeler, the delegate to the State Society, was 
at the organization of that body, in 1807, appointed a censor, an 
honor for old Dutchess. 

I have been so very fortunate as to find Dr. Bard's inaugural ad- 
dress. As it is not printed among any collections of his writings, 
and gives a very good idea of his style in writing, and of the great 
interest he had in medical education, it has a special interest for us 
to-day. 

Address — ^Delivered before the Medicai, Society op Dutchess 
County at their Anniversary Meeting on the 2nd Tuesday 

OF THE PRESENT MONTH (NOVEMBER, 1806), BY DoCTOR SaMUEL 

Bard, President of the Society. 

Gentlemen: 

At all times and in all countries, the healing art has been considered of the first 
iid|)ortance to the happiness of mankind; and accordingly, the means of instruc- 
tion in it, and the regulation of its practice, have ever been thought objects worthy 



MEDICAI. PROFESSION. 533 

the attention of most civilized nations and of the wisest governments. In the 
first, great progress has been made, and the theory and practice of medicine, upon 
the most solid principles, and the most extensive and philosophic plan, are in the 
present day not only taught in all the learned nations of Europe, but in this 
comparatively new country learned institutions for teaching all the various 
branches of science, which are connected with, and necessary to the most thorough 
knowledge of our profession have been founded, and brought to a degree of per- 
fection which already vies with the most ancient. But to regulate the practice 
of medicine so as to avoid the fatal blunders of ignorance, and to prevent the 
frauds of deception, has been found a more difBcult task; and notwithstanding the 
extensive powers which have been conferred on colleges and other medical institu- 
tions; and the penalties with which ignorance and quackery have been threatened, 
we daily see every city and almost every village in almost all countries, deluged 
with advertisements and nostroms, and the money, the health, and the lives of the 
people sacrificed to the most open and bare-faced imposture. In the institution 
imder which we now meet, the Legislature of this State ha# made a new attempt, 
and upon a plan, which I believe, more extensive than has hitherto been thought 
of in any country; she has committed the care of guarding the honor of the heal- 
ing art, of promoting its real usefulness, and of protecting our fellow citizens from 
the dangers of ignorance and of imposture, to the profession at large. Where 
confidence is reposed fidelity is a debt; and I sincerely hope that in the zeal and 
disinterestedness of the practitioners of medicine throughout the State, the Legis- 
lature may find reason to applaud the wisdom of her design. All human institu- 
tions are defective, and time and experience are necessary to bring them to any 
tolerable degree of perfection, from this conviction, the Medical Society of the 
State, which is formed of delegates from that of every county, and which meets 
at the seat of government, has been instituted, that the Legislature may, from time 
to time, receive the necessary information for correcting and perfecting its plan. 
From this, therefore, we are ultimately to receive many of the laws and regulations 
by which we are to be governed, and for this reason the fewer laws and regulations 
which are entered into by the county societies the better, especially in the be- 
ginning, that we may not contravene each other and that uniformity of conduct 
may be preserved, which is essential to success in any extensive design; for it 
is very plain to see, that if in this institution the physicians and surgeons throughout 
the State, are not actuated by one uniform, liberal and disinterested spirit, but 
oppose one another with jealous and contradictory designs, the whole will soon 
crumble into nothing. To incorporate the professors of an art so extensively 
diffused as that of medicine, so as to give imiformity to their plans and operations, 
is a delicate trust, and we must not expect but what the Legislature will contem- 
plate our conduct with some degree of diffidence. If, therefore, we find her listen- 
ing to our proposals with caution, and slowly granting the privileges we may think 
necessary to the completion of her own design, we must be prepared to wait with 
patience, until we can convince her of the liberality, utility, and disinterestedness 
of our intentions. It is evident from the use to which the Legislature has appro- 
priated the annual contributions of the county societies, that she has had in view 
not only to legislate for the practice, but to promote the knowledge of medicine; 



634 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the necessily and usefulness of this part of the plan Is apparent, and the sooner we 
make a heginning the better, but although I heartily subscribe to the collection of 
books, I think that the more they are read, the more general will be the conviction, 
that a good medical education although it may be commenced, can never be prop- 
erly finished in the country, where opportunities for the study of many of the most 
useful branches of our profession are not to be obtained, where many rare and 
important diseases seldom occur, where few young men can see a capital operation 
in surgery, and where none can attend the dissection of a whole body. One great 
advantage therefor which I hope to see flow from this institution is the encourage- 
ment of our public medical schools by a practice which has not hitherto prevailed 
so generally as from its usefulness and great importance it unquestionably ought; 
1 mean that of sending young men at least to finish their medical education at 
New York, where a botanic garden, a chemical laboratory, an anatomatical theatre, 
a well regulated hospital, and learned professors, offer them every means of im- 
provement; and will do more in one season to promote their knowledge 
and to give them just, liberal and extensive use of their profession than many 
years spent in the coimtry. I am confident that in this decided preference which 
I have given to the opportunities afforded by a medical education at a well regu- 
lated and amply furnished school which we possess in New York, I meet the 
hearty concurrence of every medical man of liberal mind in this or any other 
county of the State. They too well know the diflSculties they have to contend with 
in instructing their pupUs, too justly appreciate the excellent opportunities of our 
public seminary and too conscientiously feel their duty, to hesitate in a matter so 
apparent and so important. I know too the difficulties and obstacles which 
obstruct their wishes, the reluctance, and in too many instances the impossibilities 
of parents supplying the necessary expenses, and too frequently the impatience and 
confidence of young men. But would it not be a less evil, that those who either 
will not or cannot afford the necessary expenses of time and money to obtain a, 
good medical education, should turn their thoughts to some other profession, than 
that the health and lives of our fellow citizens should be committed to the care 
of such as are confessedly unqualified for so delicate and important a task. I 
have nothing further, gentlemen, to add at present, but to thank you for the honor 
you have done me in appointing me your president to recommend ' to you a 
unanimity, zeal, and public spirit in the conduct of this institution, and to promise 
you my hearty concurrence and faithful exertions in carrying into effect such 
useful regulations as you may think proper to adopt. 

Samuel Baud. 
November 11th, 1806. 

At the meeting in which Dr. Berry was refused fellowship, the law 
against illegal practitioners was first put in motion, information 
being laid against a ^James Cavel for illegal practice. In this, the 
first, as well as in all future cases of proposed discipline and enforce- 
ment of the rules, we find that there are members doubting the power 

1. James Cavel was admitted to membership in 1819. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 536 

of the society to do anything in the way of discipline. This question 
of power is never raised outside, or by the defendant, but always by a 
member, and in most instances it has been overruled. It is a curious 
manifestation of the desire to be in the opposition which crops up so 
continually among men in all conditions in life. On January 22nd, 
1808, a seal and a form for a diploma were adopted. It is very much 
to be regretted that all traces of this seal have been lost. In 1873, 
when I was secretary, I instituted a search among the famihes of for- 
mer secretaries, but could find no trace of it. The society then 
authorized the secretary to procure a new seal, and one was obtained 
of an uninteresting, conventional design, which had no special signifi- 
cance. In the centennial year of the society I found several impres- 
sions of the old seal, which is most characteristic and original, and at 
the anniversary meeting of the society I recommended that the old 
seal reproduced from the impressions there shown, be the official seal 
of the society for the future. 

The seal as shown has a profile of Dr. John Bard, the father of our 
first president, who lived both in New York and Dutchess Counties; 
the inscription "Couny N York. John Bard M. D. Med^ S^ Dut^«'" 
and the billet of wood ( I tried hard to make it out, the staff dt 
Aesculapius), with a serpent rising up, is all very good. An inaccu^ 
racy (it was a common fault in those times) is shown in placing M. D. 
after John Bard's name. He had no degree; his prehminary and 
professional education were both very scant, though he made the most 
of his opportunities, and by his perseverance and natural abih'ty rose 
superior to the difficulties that prevented his obtaining a college edu- 
cation. Let us by aU means have the old seal as it was. 

The first evidence of real public spirit was shown by the society in 
1812, when a committee of three was appointed to publish such infor- 
mation as it may be able to obtain in regard to the nature and, method 
of treatment of the prevailing epidemic. This is very laudable, but 
if they had only gratified the curiosity of future generations by tell- 
ing what the epidemic was it would have been more satisfactory.^ 



1. This epidemic was one of Cerebo-spinal Meningitis, or Spotted Fever. In a letter 
written by Captain Fonda, the grandfather of the present cashier of the Merchants' 
Bank, to Dr. William Thomas, then in the army and stationed at Baton Kouge, he de- 
scribes the scourge, and says that there had been forty deaths already from it in the 
town. Foughkeepsle at that time bad less than three thousand Inhabitants, and forty 
deaths was a high percentage of mortality. 



536 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

It was at this meeting the deaths of Drs. William Lathrop and 
George W. Cook were announced, and it was resolved to wear crape 
on the left arm for twenty days in testimony of their regard for their 
deceased brethren, the first of the members to pass on. This custom 
was kept up, sometimes wearing the crape on the right arm, until 
1836, when Dr. David Hosack, an honorary member, was the last so 
honored. On November 10th, 1831, Dr. Bard resigned the presi- 
dency of the society, which he had held since its organization, and the 
thanks of the society were voted him for his services as president. 
His resignation was occasioned by his appointment to the presidency 
of the College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York City. He 
was then in his 71st year. He seems to have been a father to, as well 
as president of, the society. The most distinguished medical man of 
his time in this country, the society was most fortunate in having such 
a one to lead in its councils at its birth. He was an eloquent speaker, 
an interesting, instructive writer, loved and respected by his associ- 
ates, giving freely of his time and of his talents to the society, it is 
no wonder that it prospered under his leadership. 

In the third generation there was another president with many of 
Dr. Bard's qualifications, whose service was longer, and whose reign, 
for he was a sovereign in the best sense while he served — was more 
beneficent than that of the first. I speak of Dr. Lewis H. White, 
whose memory we all revere, and of whom I shall say more later. 

From May 19th, 1815, up to the present time the society has suf- 
fered from a chronic trouble for which no treatment that has been 
proposed has proved even palliative; it seems to have reached its 
climacteric in 1841, when a lawyer was employed to consult with the 
doctors and to direct the treatment, even to the extent of prosecuting 
delinquents, though the treatment never was carried so far. The 
collection of dues has caused endless trouble, and this was largely 
occasioned by the law which then compelled each physician practicing 
in the county to pay the society one dollar each year, whether he 
was a member or not. This law could never be enforced and was re- 
pealed. 

From 1808 to 1816 the society was given the privilege of nominat- 
ing a student of medicine each year to attend one course of lectures 
free at both the medical colleges in New York City. Seven young 
men were given and availed themselves of this opportunity. On 




ALFRED HASBROUCK, M. D. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 537 

November 12th, 1816, the society made a new departure, and ordered 
that one hundred dollars be spent for instruments for the use of 
members of the society. 

In 1817 two sets of amputating, and two sets of trephining instru- 
ments having been bought, it was ordered that one of each should be 
kept by the treasurer at Poughkeepsie, and one of each by Dr. Ricket- 
son at Beekman, for the use of the members. Afterwards a set of 
obstetrical instruments was bought, and the nucleus of a library 
formed, but for reasons not stated this venture proved a failure, and 
the instruments and books were sold to individual members in 1826. 
In 1817 the first standard of prices for ordinary practice was adopted 
in great detail, even giving the price of medicines by the dose or 
larger quantity. The charges vary but little ftrom the fees of the 
present time. 

From 1836 to 1838 the society was greatly exercised by the ques- 
tion of granting a diploma to a Joel Devine. Feeling ran high; with 
the slight knowledge we have it is impossible to judge of the merits 
of the case. The court intervened, a mandamus was issued requiring 
the society to show cause why a diploma should not be given. It was 
decided at last, at a meeting slimly attended, to grant the diploma.^ 

The late Dr. Pine in an historical sketch read before the society in 
1875, gives this unfortunate episode as the cause of the gradual loss 
of interest shown by the members from about this time, which culmi- 
nated in 1845. Then after a meeting, where officers were elected, and 
new members admitted, and for no apparent reason, there was no fur- 
ther meeting till 1854. The society was passing through parlous 
times, and its life was only saved by an accident. At a meeting of 
the physicians of Dutchess County, held at Washington Hollow, Oc- 
tober, 1854, there were present Drs. Hillis, Hughson, Thorn, Dodge, 
Hasbrouck, Losee, Pine, Harvey, Bell, Campbell, and Bockee. A 



1. The young man applied for examination by tlie society for a iicense to practice. 
The examination was held and he was given a certiflcate which had to be signed by the 
President. This, Dr. John Cooper, the President, refused to do, on account of the moral 
character of the applicant. The case was taken to the court, a mandamus to show 
cause was issued, the parties to appear at Utlca. Lawyers were retained, and expense 
incurred. Dr. Varick was elected President and signed the certiflcate, and that part of the 
trouble was settled, but the Mils were still to be paid, and it was^ this financial end of 
the affair which so nearly disrupted the society. Smith, in his History of Dutchess 
County, says that "The future course of the young man more than justified Dr. Cooper's 
action." 



538 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

motion was made to organize a new society, not connected with the 
Dutchess County Medical Society. Motion lost. Just think of it! 
If that motion had prevailed we should not be here to-day, there would 
have been no centennial, and this honorable, useful organization would 
have passed into innocuous desuetude. 

On motion it was resolved to reorganize the Dutchess County Medi- 
cal Society, and Drs. Hughson, Pine and Bockee were appointed to 
revise the by-laws. On November 4th, 1854, a meeting of the society 
was held at Dr. Pine's office, in MiU street, the president elected in 
1845, Dr. Calvert Canfield, in the chair. New members were elected, 
the by-laws revised, and the name of the society changed, and called 
"The Medical Society of Dutchess County." On August 9th, 1859, 
the next meeting was held, no reason being given for the long interval. 
The only business of importance was the reception of Dr. Edward H. 
Parker as a member. There was a meeting in 1861, and then another 
break till 1866. In 1867 Dr. Lewis H. White was elected president 
of the society, and a new era of enlarged usefulness and increasing 
prosperity opened out for it. The meetings were regularly held, the 
annual in Poughkeepsie, the semi-annual in one of the country vil- 
lages. The numbers in attendance increased. The papers read were 
carefully prepared and full of interest. The discussions were intelli- 
gent and instructive. This change was due to the earnest efforts 
of one man, whose sincerity of manner, whose fatherly interest in the 
welfare and care of the individual interests of each member, caused 
him to be loved and universally respected. There were fourteen mem- 
bers present at the meeting when he was elected president, there were 
thirty-two present at the meeting in 1877 when he refused a renomina- 
tion, which he thought was for the best interest of the society. At 
one semi-annual meeting in Fishkill there were forty-four members 
present, the largest number noted. It is truly said that blessed is 
the country that has no liistory, for history is largely the record of 
war and discord. And so with our society. From 1867 to 1877 the 
record is one of peace and prosperity. Important action was taken 
in 1879 which had far-reaching results on the rank of the medical 
staff in the navy. The army medical staff had already received 
justice at the hands of the government, though it was only about 
181© that a medical man had any rank, and when rank was conferred 
Dr. WilUam Thomas, of our society, who was then in the service, being 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 539 

given the rank of colonel, he received letters sent him in derision by 
the officers addressed to Colonel Thomas. The navy and army staffs 
had never been equalized, the navy remaining at a standstill. A 
grave injustice done an assistant surgeon, Dr. Charles L. Green, 
brought matters to a head. He was court martialed, and found guilty 
of treating with contempt his superior officer, in that he refused to 
report for duty a seaman who was on the sick list, and who in Dr. 
Green's opinion was unfit for duty. He was discharged from the 
navy. The society resolved that this was degrading to the profession, 
and that the attention of our Congressman, Ketcham, be called to 
the matter, and that he be urged to influence legislation on the sub- 
ject. Dr. De Witt Webb took the matter in charge for the society, 
and Mr. John O. Whitehouse having succeeded Mr. Ketcham in Con- 
gress, Dr. Webb urged the matter on his attention until in 1875, 
through Mr. Whitehouse's efforts a law was passed removing the dis- 
abilities of the surgeons in the navy, and giving them commensurate 
rank with those in the army. The thanks of the society were voted 
to Mr. Whitehouse for his successful efforts for the cause of equality 
and justice. The subject of medical education was also considered, 
and the efforts of the American Medical Association to raise the 
standards and make them uniform was urged upon the Legislature. 
On November 12th, 1872, the meeting was not held for a very unique 
reason. There was a distemper prevailing among the horses through- 
out the country which threw them all out of commission; the older 
members can well remember the inconvenience and confusion that re- 
sulted from business having to be attended to on foot. The State 
Society at its meeting in 1882 repealed the code of ethics of the Ameri- 
can Medical Association. The delegates present were Drs. Tuthill 
and Barnes. They were seated side by side when the vote was taken, 
the former voting aye, the latter no. In 1883 the question of rescind- 
ing this action was to come up at the meeting of the State Society, 
and the delegates, Drs. Barnes and Hasbrouck (the latter protest- 
ing), were instructed to vote for the restoration of the old code by a 
vote of 18 to 9. At the annual meeting in 1884 the code question was 
the prominent issue, and the society was greatly agitated. Dr. Has- 
brouck had served one year as president; by courtesy he should have 
been elected again. Every member of the society would gladly have 
voted for him, but the code question overshadowed all other considera- 



540 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

tions. Dr. Barnes was elected president, and Drs, Slack and Bayley 
delegates to the State Society, all being favorable to the restoration 
of the old code. From this time on the story of the society's life is 
too recent to be treated as history. The membership has increased 
largely and includes several practitioners of homeopathy. 

The work of the society is only the collective results of the labors of 
its members. Where the activities of such an association has made a 
record of its work valuable, a knowledge of the lives and personal 
attributes of its members will always add to the interest and help to 
an understanding of its history. To-day we cannot even mention the 
names of all of the 885 men and women who at some time during the 
last century have been members, but in this, as in every institution, there 
are some men, hke the mountain peaks in a diversified landscape, whose 
lives stand out so prominently before us, have been so rounded out by 
activities, and high achievement, that we are forced to give them the 
praise and recognition which their good works merit. Of this class 
our first president is easily at the head. 

Samuel Baud, M.D., LL.D. By far the most illustrious member 
of our society and its first president, was of French descent. He was 
bom in Philadelphia, April 1st, 1742, and came with his father to 
New York in 1746. He attended an excellent preparatory school, 
and entering King's (now Columbia) College, he graduated when 19 
years of age. In the same year he sailed for England, but the vessel 
was taken by the French, and he spent five months in France, a pris- 
oner on parole. On reaching London he entered Dr. Russell's office 
and pursued the study of medicine. In 1762 he went to Edinburgh; 
here he received a medal in botany, and took his degree in 1765. In 
1770 he returned to New York and engaged in general practice and 
lecturing on medicine, and in efforts to buUd a hospital. In 1791 
this latter work was accomplished, and Dr. Bard was the first physi- 
cian appointed to the New York Hospital. During the war he lived 
with his father at the latter's residence at Hyde Park. Afterwards, 
when President Washington was living in New York, Dr. Bard was his 
family physician. Dr. Bard did not have the surgical temperament; 
after his first surgical operation he fainted away, and his second and 
last was only accomplished after a sleepless night. In 1805 he took 
Dr.'Hossick into partnership, and in the same year retired to his 
country place at Hyde Park. In 1813 he was elected President of the 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 541 

College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York. The degree of 
LL.D. was conferred soon after by Princeton. He died at Hyde Park, 
May 8,4ith, 1821, surviving his wife less than twenty-four hours. 
They were buried in a common grave in the family yard.^ It is told 
of Dr. Bard that he regarded his talents and education as a sacred 
trust, held for the use of those who asked for their aid, and that after 
his retirement to the country he never refused the call of any one who 
sought his advice. A man of great talent, disciplined by education 
and experience, he was an ornament to our profession. 

De. John Thomas, one of the founders of our society, and second 
only in prominence to the president, was born at Plymouth, Mass., 
April 1st, 1758. His father, Dr. William Thomas, was the surgeon 
of the troops which went from Plymouth in the French and Indian 
war, in the expedition against Louisburgh. He took a very zealous 
part in the disputes with the Mother country that resulted finally in 
the independence of her colonies. After the first blow was struck at 
the battle of Lexington, 1776, he immediately joined himself and his 
four sons, viz. : Joshua, Joseph, John and Nathaniel, to the first 
formed revolutionary corps. Joseph and John continued in the ser- 
vice throughout the war, Joseph as Captain of Artillery, and John on 
the Medical Staff. Dr. Wilham Thomas, on joining the army, was 
appointed Regimental Surgeon, and ;his son John, then seventeen 
years of age, accompanied his father, as surgeon's mate. They joined 
the army at Cambridge in the spring of 1775. Dr. John Thomas, on 
the resignation of his father in 1776, on account of ill health, was 
promoted to the rank of Regimental Surgeon. He was commissioned 
Surgeon of "Wesson's" 9th Mass. Regiment, January 1st, 1777, 
and was transferred to the 8th Mass. in 1783. He served on General 
Washington's staff, was often a guest at his table, and was with him 
all through the winter at Valley Forge. Soon after the conclusion 
of peace. Dr. Thomas settled in the town of Poughkeepsie, where he 
remained in the reputable and successful practice of his profession 
until his death in 1819. He is buried in the cemetery at Pough- 
keepsie. He was one of the original members of the society of the 
Cincinnati. Endowed with considerable powers of mind and devoting 



1. The bodies of Dr. Bard and his wife were moved to St. James churchyard, Hyde 
Park. 



542 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

himself to his official duties, Dr. Thomas overcame the difficulties and 
inexperience of his youth, and maintained a high professional respecta- 
bility. La all his conduct he was honorable, just and benevolent; 
for wit and humor he was unrivaled. Such was the fecundity and dis- 
position of his mind, that on all occasions he was furnished with an 
inexhaustible fund of anecdote and song, which made him a welcome 
guest in every place. There was considerable originality in the dis- 
play of his talents, which with the courteousness of his manner, won 
the esteem of gentlemen of the highest rank ; and on one occasion at 
the table of Washington, he excited an unusual degree of merriment 
and pleasantry. He is said to have made General Washington laugh 
the only time he was seen to do so at Valley Forge. There is an 
invitation to Dr. Thomas to dine with General Washington hanging 
framed on the wall of Washington's Headquarters at Newburgh. 

Db. John Baknes was bom on the Barnes farm, northeast of the 
present city limits, December 11th, 1790. He was a man of feeble 
constitution, but he accomplished a prodigious amount of work. He 
accompanied the troops from this section to Long Island in the war 
of 1812. He was easily the leading surgeon of his time for this and 
surrounding counties. This position attracted to him many students 
of medicine, and some of the leading physicians of the next genera- 
tion laid the foundations of their success under his wise supervision. 
It is to be regretted that the facts necessary for a more extended 
notice are not available. He died at his home. No. 45 Market 
street, August 29th, 1850, of dysentery. After his death his family 
were in straitened circumstances; bills were found on his books 
amounting to $30,000 which were uncoUectable. He is buried in the 
cemetery on the post road, just north of the city. 

De. Richaed a. Vaeick was born in New York City, April 24th, 
1806. His preliminary education was liberal and thorough; he grad- 
uated at the Rutgers Medical College in New York City in 1827. The 
practice of his profession was begun with Dr. John Barnes, and at 
the latter's death Dr. Varick succeeded to the business. His taste 
led him to the practice of medicine rather than to surgery, and his 
skiU and kindly manner led to his being largely sought in obstetric 
worj^. He was one of the last of the old time doctors to ride in a 
chaise. He was a member of the Society of the Cincinnati. Dr. 
Varick died August 10th, 1871. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 543 

Dr. Walter Hughson. While Dr. Barnes' sun was setting, a new 
planet was pushing above the horizon. Dr. Hughson joined this 
society in 1837. He was well educated, active, nervous, ambitious, 
wrapped up in his profession, devoted to his work. Born at Hughson- 
ville, October 31st, 1816, he married a daughter of Dr. Cooper, and 
this, of course, brought him in close connection with the Coopers, 
father and son. There was a strong rivalry between Drs. Barnes and 
Cooper, and the families in which they practiced were zealous friends 
of their respective doctors. Dr. Hughson was a surgeon naturally, 
by education and from choice, and his success was far beyond that of 
any of his predecessors. North, south, east and west he went, far 
beyond the county lines, in consultation and for operations. His 
death from consumption, on December 9th, 1857^ was all too early, 
and left a great gap in the profession here. 

Dr. Lewis H. White was bom at Somers, Westchester County, 
March 17th, 1807. His grandfather, father and himself had each 
two brothers besides themselves who were physicians. The doctor at- 
tended lectures at the New Haven Medical College, and afterwards 
received an honorary degree from the Medical University of New 
York. For several years he practiced at Johnsville, removing to 
Fishkill, succeeding his uncle. Dr. Bartow White. He practiced 
medicine actively for fifty-eight years, dying September 24th, 1886- 
During the latter years of his life his time was taken up largely with 
consultations with his brother doctors, his opinion being sought and 
valued most highly. He was for eleven years president of this society, 
and what he did for its welfare and success is a matter of record, for 
which we feel deep gratitude and give all praise. In all Dr. White's 
long and more than usually useful life he gave no offence, made no 
enemies. Every man who knew him was his friend, and was the better 
for his friendship. 

Dr. Alfred Hasbrouck was born in Ulster County, N. Y., July 
17, 1820. His father was a great grandson of Abram Hasbrouck, 
and his mother was the great-great granddaughter of Jean Hasbrouck, 
two brothers who came to America before the close of the 17th cen- 
tury, and were two of the twelve patentees and original settlers of 
New Paltz. 

Dr. Hasbrouck received his preliminary education at Kingston 



544 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Academy, and was graduated from Yale with the degree of A. B. in 
1844. He then came to Poughkeepsie to study medicine with Dr. 
John Barnes, and graduated from the College of Physicians and Sur- 
geons of New York, in 1848. He actively pursued the practice of his 
profession in Poughkeepsie for over fifty years with skiU and fidehty. 

He had an exalted idea of the honor and dignity, as well as the 
duties and obligations of the medical profession, and while he sacredly 
observed these obligations on his part, he exactingly required the re- 
spect due the noble art of healing on the part of others — as well 
fellow physicians as patients. He was quiet and unassuming in his 
ways, and possessed a generous nature, which was ever open to the 
appeals of the needy and distressed. 

For many years in his younger days he was Alms House physician. 
He was Health Officer of the city for some time, and for a long time 
after the Civil War he was Medical Examiner for this district under 
the United States Pension Bureau. 

During the whole of his useful career he was one of the medical 
staff of St. Barnabas Hospital, and for a number of years he was vice- 
president of the medical corps of Vassar Hospital. In 1883-'84 he 
was president of the Dutchess County Medical Society. 

Dr. Hasbrouck died May 9, 190S, aged 83 years. 

Dk. Edwaed Hazen Parkek, son of Hon. Isaac and Sarah (Ains- 
worth) Parker, was bom in the city of Boston, Mass., in 1823. Dr. 
Parker graduated from Dartmouth CoUege in 1846, and received his 
medical degree from Jefferson Medical College in 1848. In the same 
year he was appointed lecturer on anatomy and physiology at Bow- 
doin Medical CoUege, and for the following nine years was editor of 
the New Hampshire Medical Jourrud. In 1853 Dr. Parker was called 
to the chair of Physiology and Pathology in the New York Medical 
College, and associated himself in practice with Dr. Fordyce Barker 
in New York City. He at this time established the New York Medical 
Monthly, which he continued to edit personally for many years with 
great abiUty and success. In 1854 he received the degree of A.M. 
from Trinity CoUege. In 1858, as the result of overwork. Dr. Par- 
ker had serious trouble with his eyes, necessitating his removal from 
the city, and in the outdoor Ufe of a country practice to seek the 
recovery of his health. He came to Poughkeepsie, where, as a general 
practitioner and consultant, he practiced his profession for nearly 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 545 

forty years. He was elected president of the New York State Medi- 
cal Society in 1862, and in the same year, and in the succeeding one, 
went to the front as a volunteer surgeon in the service of New York 
State. The doctor was one of the trustees of, and visiting surgeons 
to St. Barnabas Hospital from its opening until it was closed in 1877. 
In 1877 he was appointed visiting surgeon to Vassar Brothers' Hos- 
pital, and elected president of the medical board. Dr. Parker died 
November 10th, 1896. He was twice married, his first wife, Sarah 
(Heyderk), died in 1880, leaving three daughters and one son, Dr. 
Harry Parker, all of whom are living. In 1883 he married Jennie C. 
Wright, who, with one son, survives her husband. Dr. Parker was a 
physician of signal competency and skill, and as a surgeon he had few 
superiors. He was a man of very fine fibre, of unusual cultivation, 
and of high scholarly attainments. 

Db. Joseph Manning Cleaveland was born in Newbury, Mass., 
in July, 1824. He came from a family which had many members of 
the medical profession, his grandfathers on both sides being doctors. 

He graduated from Princeton University at an early age, and then 
began the study of medicine in the New York Medical School under 
Drs. Gordon Buck and Joseph M. Smith, who at that time were at 
the head of the profession. He was then appointed to the New York 
Hospital, on Broadway, where he spent three years as resident phy- 
sician. After leaving this institution he joined his friend. Dr. Cor- 
nelius P. Agnew in the medical care of over twelve hundred miners, 
at the Great Cliff Mine on Lake Superior. Later he went to Utica 
as first assistant to Dr. Gray, the superintendent of that Asylum, 
where he remained for several years. While there he acted as editor 
of the American Journal of Insanity. 

At this period of his career the needs of the eastern part of the 
State of New York for greater provision for the insane impressed 
themselves so strongly on his mind that he prepared the biU for the 
Hudson River State Hospital for the Insane, and carried it through 
the Legislature. This was the first time the term "hospital" was 
used in this connection as opposed to the old term "asylum." 

A committee was appointed to secure a site for the building. The 
business of selecting and deciding upon the same was practically left 
to him, and after a thorough investigation of them all, he fixed upon 
Poughkeepsie. His choice was ratified by the committee. His labors 



546 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

for many years in arranging the multifarious details of the buildings, 
laying out the roads, water works, sewers, the planting of trees, etc., 
speak for themselves. 

Dr. Cleaveland remained at the head of this institution for over a 
quarter of a century, and in 1893 retired from the service of the State, 
which he had served so faithfully and well, a martyr to political inter- 
ference. 

At a meeting of the Dutchess County Medical Club held in Pough- 
keepsie February 25, 1907, Dr. James E. Sadlier paid a deserved 
tribute to the memory of Dr. Cleaveland. In closing his remarks he 
said: "Dr. Cleaveland died January 21, 1907, aged 83 years. He 
is dead, but he has left us a heritage of greater value than gold or 
precious stones, — ^the example of a noble life well spent." 

Db. Edwin Baenes was bom in Troy, July 28th, 1844, though his 
family had lived in this county for generations. Before completing 
his course at the Albany Medical College, he in 1864 entered the army 
as a medical cadet, and his degree was given him while in the service. 
In 1866 he began practice in Pleasant Plains, where he continued 
until his death, January 22nd, 1904. He had been active in the coun- 
cils of this society, and was on the consulting staff of Vassar Broth- 
ers' Hospital. 

Robert K. Tuthill, who at the time of his death, June 9, 1909, 
was the oldest practicing physician in Poughkeepsie, was born in New- 
burgh January 18, 1835, a son of Dr. Samuel TuthiU. Dr. Tuthill 
came to Poughkeepsie with his father in 1848. He studied medicine 
in the New York Medical College, from which he graduated in 1859, 
and began the practice of his profession in Poughkeepsie. 

In 1861 he volunteered as a surgeon in the Union army, and served 
his country with distinction through the Civil War. He had charge 
of the hospital at Fredericksburg in 1862. 

Dr. Tuthill was made a member of the medical staff of St. Barnabas 
Hospital at the opening of that institution, continuing in that capacity 
until the hospital closed in 1884. He was selected as one of the sur- 
geons of Vassar Brothers' Hospital by the founders of that institution. 

Dr. TuthiU was blessed with a sense of humor, and his innate wit 
played with scintillating effect through all his work. To have known 
him as a family physician is to have felt the influence of good cheer 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 547 

and constant hope in the sick-room. His presence brought confi- 
dence and relief like a benediction to the sufferer. He was for almost 
a generation among the busiest of men to be found in the community. 
He numbered his patients among the rich and the poor, and he gave, 
in fullest measure, all his splendid gifts to every case with which he 
had anything to do. His skill was acknowledged wherever he was 
known, and his kindly expressions endeared him to his patients and 
their friends. 

HisTOEicAL Sketch, 1740-1908. 

The first evidence of a doctor practicing in Dutchess County is 
found in the Assessor's book for 1740, in the County Clerk's office: 
It reads, "The doctor of Rhinebeck" (giving the amount assessed). 
These Assessors did not keep their books with a view to enlightening 
future searchers of the past, but only to designate a certain individual 
for the purpose of assessment, and this designation of "the doctor" 
would be sufiicient if there was but one doctor, as there was here. 
Then, as the affair develops, the doctor had a hard name to spell; 
they make four efforts to accomplish this, and we can only judge by 
the evidence which of the spellings is correct. In 1748 the assessment 
is made against "Doctor Guselbruht" for five pounds one shilling. 
In 1750 it is "Doctor Guselbright." In 1754 it is "Doctor Kesel- 
brught." In 1755 it is "Doctor Kisolbright." As during the years 
1740 to 1755 there is no other doctor mentioned in Rhinebeck Pre- 
cinct, and but one other (Dr. Nicholas De LaVergne) in the whole 
county, we may well beheve that "the doctor of Rhinebeck" and "Doc- 
tor Kesolbright" are the same. The two letters given below bear 
directly on this subject, and also tend to show that there was a doctor 
at Rhinebeck before there was one at Kingston, which proves the 
opposite of the theory which has • so often been advanced that there 
were doctors in Ulster County long before there were any in Dutchess 
County, because Ulster had the larger population at that time. 

Kingston ye Sth march, 1741/3 
Loving Son 

I wrote to you before that your Sister Hannah was the Same day you went, 
taken with Spitting of blood, and black StufF like Corroded blood and fevourish, 
and is so weeke with it that wee have two Girles Every night to sit up, by her. 
She Spitts no more blood but is very week your mother is better but sill vertf 
week has no Stomach to her victuals. If Philip more has Recorded a deed which 



548 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

he had of Capt. Barent van Benthuysen Send or bring me a Copy of it. the River 
wiU be passable here soon with a Cannoe Yesterday the Rondout Creek was open 
from the Dock to the middle of the Rivr, alida went home last Wednesday. 
Remain with our Love yr affet father 

Gil: Livurogioir 
To Henry Livingston Bsqr Clarke of the peace of Dutchess County at Mr Yel- 
vertons. 

Kingston ye 7th march 1741/3 
Loving Son 

I wrote you that yr Sister Hannah was taken ill the same day you left this 
place and She groes dayly weaker and Cant hold it Long unles it please God to 
give a Change William Cool Came over Just by Lowrence hendrick this morning 
who is to Returne with the doctor to morrow morning, and I believe that one Can 
goe over at van wagenen with a cannoe. I want a Copy of a deed from Barent 
Benthuysen to plulip more if it is Recorded. I Remain yor Loving father 

Gn.: LiviNGSTOir 
P. S. Your mother is still very week. 
To Henry Livingston Esqr at Poghkeepsinck. 

Here it is shown, that waiting for the ice to go out of the river, 
these letters were sent over the river in a canoe by a messenger to 
Rhinebeck who would bring the doctor back with him to see the sick 
girl. In the records of the Reformed Church of Kingston, there is a 
baptism of a child of Godfried Geisselbracht and wife, February 7th, 

1742, and in the record of the Reformed Church of Rhinebeck there 
is the record of the baptism of a child of the same parents, Sept. 11th, 

1743. The last mention that we can find of this doctor in Rhine- 
beck is in 1755, and about 1760 we find there was "A German, G. 
Gyselbricht, Surgeon and Practitioner in Physic," in New York City. 
It would seem reasonable to suppose that he left Rhinebeck for New 
York between those dates. 

Du. CoBNEMus OsBOBNE, of Poughkeepsie, is the second physician 
whom we find to have been practicing in the county, and fortunately 
we can give of him quite a full and accurate account. There was a 
Francis Filkins living in Poughkeepsie in those days, and he is known 
and made celebrated by an account book which he kept, and which has 
been preserved for our enlightenment. In this book is found the 
following memorandum: "1745, September 1st. Dr. Cornelius Ras- 
bun agreed with me for twenty shillings per year to doctor my family. 
He has due one pound." In the Assessor's book for 1757 we find Dr. 
Cornelius Osborne assessed for one pound one shilline at Pouehkeeosie. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 549 

Now we know that this Dr. Osborne was born in England, July 13th, 
1723, that he practiced at Poughkeepsie up to the Revolutionary 
War, that he joined the American Army as a surgeon, and served in 
the war, and died about one-half mile above Fishkill, at Osborne Hill, 
on August 23rd, 1782. He left three sons, all doctors, and all dying 
bachelors at the homestead. They were James, born August 13th, 
1748; Peter, born March 4th, 1769; Thomas, born July 27th, 1764. 
There was a daughter who had a son. Dr. Cornelius Remson. He was 
born at Newton, L. I., February 14th, 1789. He came to Fishkill, 
September 7th, 1804, studied medicine with his uncles, and with Dr. 
Bartow White, he was licensed to practice by the society in 1810, and 
served as a surgeon in the army during the war of 1812. Dr. Rem- 
sen practiced medicine at Wappingers Falls and liispd there until his 
death, December 4th, 1883. 

Dr. William Mooee. We are fortunate in having quite a detailed 
account of Dr. Moore, who was assessed for land in the Middle Pre- 
cinct, now the Town of Beekman, as early as 1735, although he was 
not a resident of the county at that time. Dr. Moore was born at 
Antrim, Ireland, February 12th, 1705, and received his medical edu- 
cation before emigrating. He married Mary Palmer, of Stonington, 
Conn., June 4th, 1729, and was in Union Vale in 1745, but had real 
estate in Westchester County, where he spent part of the time. He 
must have settled at his home in Union Vale about 1746. His wife 
joined the Society of Friends before coming to this county, and he 
became an active member also, and a noted preacher of the society. 
He tells us that while he was practicing his professions here (for he 
preached, practiced law and medicine), after 1745 the roads through 
Dutchess County were only trails through the woods, marked by blazed 
treesi impassible for wagons, all traveling being on horseback, with 
wolves and Indians constantly about. Dr. Moore was killed in the 
woods, his horse returning home without him while he was making a 
professional visit on November 25th, 1752. His son, Allan Moore, 
built the mill which has named the postoffice Moore's Mills. 

In 1741 there lived in the "Gore," a strip of land between the Great 
and Little Nine Partners, now called Shekomeko, a "Christian Henry 
Ranch," a Moravian missionary, teacher and physician. He did not 
call himself doctor, but he treated the sick for miles around acceptably. 



550 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Dk. Nicholas De La Vekgne was bom in France in 1703, and 
tradition says came to this country in 1720 on a French man-of-war, 
as a surgeon. He is first found in this county at the Oblong, where 
he owned a large tract of land. In 1747 he was on his farm, which 
now forms part of Mr. Oakleigh Thome's place, in the Town of 
Washington, and in the Supervisors' books for that year he is allowed 
one pound, one shilling for pasturing twelve horses and serving the 
Assessors. He was a man of affairs, a Justice of the Peace, and a 
Probate Judge. He speculated in land and practiced his profession 
and was a man of substance, being assessed in 1748 for thirteen pounds 
ten shillings, a large sum for those days. He was known through- 
out the county as the French doctor, and a dam which he built is 
known as the French doctor's dam to this day. He died in 1783. 
Dr. Benjamin De La Vergne was his son. 

Dtt. Theodorus Van Wyck was born at JohnsviUe (now Wicopee) 
in 1730. He may have commenced practice about 1762, certainly 
the earliest doctor in Fishkill. He was a delegate to the Second Pro- 
vincial Congress in 1775 from New York, where he had been com- 
pelled to move on account of his outspoken patriotism. He was 
elected to the Third Congress in 1776 from Fishkill, and was a mem- 
ber of the Committee of Safety during the Revolution. He served 
in the Second Dutchess Regiment, and afterwards in the Sixth. Dr. 
Van Wyck practiced medicine actively, and had a fine temper of his 
own. He died in 1797 and is buried in Rombout cemetery. 

These were the first physicians practicing in the county. The 
names of many who followed them are given alphabetically. They 
have been gathered from files of old newspapers, local histories and 
family records, by tramping through cemeteries, churchyards and 
family burying grounds. The data of several living members of the 
profession are absent because they did not answer letters of inquiry 
sent them. 

AcKEKT, William S. Born Rhinebeck, December 18th, 1865; 
graduated Albany, 1891; Rensselaer, 1892-1900; Poughkeepsie and 
Society, 1901. 

.Adams, Elijah. Bom February 15th, 1754 ; army surgeon during 
the Revolution; died Pine Plains, April 14th, 1837; buried Vedder 
Church, Gallatin. 




J. WILSON POUCHER, M.D, 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 551 

Allaboen, Ezka W. Born April 18th, 1820; died Upper Red 
Hook, December 11th, 1863. 

Allerton, Cornelius. Born Amenia, July 23rd, 1779. Son of 
Dr. Reuben Allerton. He studied medicine at New Haven, beginning 
practice at Amenia in 1803. He was a successful physician, and es- 
teemed by all for his charity and kindness of heart. He died at Pine 
Plains, April 26th, 1855. 

ALiiERTON, Cornelius. Born Pine Plains, May 19th, 1819. A 
son of Dr. Cornelius Allerton. He was a man of good natural abili- 
ties, but erratic and indolent. He died suddenly at Dover Plains, 
January 15th, 1867. 

Allerton, Reuben. Born Canterbury, Conn., December 25th, 
1763. He was unusually well educated for those times, and studied 
medicine with Dr. Fitch, of New Haven, and surgery with Dr. Spaul- 
ding, of Norwich. He moved to Amenia, and entering the army as a 
surgeon he was present at the battle of Saratoga and the surrender 
of Burgoyne. He was in Col. Hopkins' Regiment, 1777. Died 
Amenia, October 13th, 1808. 

Allison, Henry E. Born Concord, N. H., December 1st, 1851; 
graduated A. B. Dartmouth, 1875 ; M. D. Dartmouth, 1878 ; Super- 
intendent Asylum for Insane Criminals at Auburn, N. Y., July 1st, 
1889; Superintendent Matteawan State Hospital, 1882; Society 1893. 
A man whose honesty of purpose and force of character was so plainly 
marked in every line of his face as to give him great influence over 
the unfortunates committed to his care. Eminent in his specialty. 
Author of many monographs on insanity. Died November 12th, 1904. 

Andrews, Nelson. Bom about 1803; Hyde Park and Society, 
1835. A peculiar character, penurious, accumulating a large prop- 
erty. Never married. Died at Poughkeepsie, July 27th, 1873. 

Andrews, Robert Wesley. Bom Rochdale, N. Y., September 9th, 
1869; graduated Albany, 1898; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1898; 
active service as Assistant Surgeon U. S. A. in the Philippines, 1899- 
1902 ; Poughkeepsie, 1902. 

Andrus, CiiARLES Hawley. Born October 13th, 1823; graduated 



552 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

P. & S., 1845; perceptor, Dr. E. R. Grant; Poughkeepsie, 1845; So- 
ciety, 1854 ; Assistant Surgeon 128th N. Y. V. I., 1862 ; Medical In- 
spector, 1864 ; died Metuchen, N J., August 13th, 1905. 

Annan, Daniel D. Born Fishkill, June 11th, 1792; Surgeon in 
war of 1812 ; Society, 1821 ; died Matteawan, November 28d, 1834. 

Anthony, Theodoee V. W. Bom Fishkill, May 31st, 1801; So- 
ciety, 1825; member of State Legislature, 1834; died Glenham, April 
15th, 1868. 

Atwood, John W. Born Marion, N. Y., September 14th, 1862; 
graduated Jefferson, 1888; Marion, 1888-96; FishldU-on-Hudson and 
Society, 1905. 

Baker, Benjamin N. Bom Montgomery County, Pa., October 
2d, 1833; graduated Pennsylvania Medical College, 1857; Surgeon 
U. S. A., 1862-3; Rhinebeck, 1868; Society, 1878. 

Baldwin, Lesteb. Cass. Born Jewett, N. Y., December 14th, 1850 ; 
New York University, 1879 ; TivoH, 1879. 

Bami'obd, Thomas E. Born New York City, November 11th, 
1867; graduated N. Y. University, 1889; H. R. S. H., 1893-1904; 
Society, 1894. 

Baud, John. Bom Burhngton, N. J., February 20th, 1716; died 
Hyde Park, N. Y., April 1st, 1799 ; buried St. James' Churchyard. 

Baunes, John Henuy. Bom Poughkeepsie, March 22nd, 1818. 
Son of Dr. John Barnes. Office in Garden street, 1852. Died New 
York City, February 8th, 1880. 

Barnes, Peter. Born Poughkeepsie, October 8th, 1808. A half 
brother of Dr. John Barnes; graduated P. and S., 1835; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1835; died December 5th, 1870. 

Barnum, Henry Weston. Born Bridgeville, N. Y., January 19th, 
1859; Jefferson, 1890; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1890. 

Barton, Leonard. Bom Stanford, N. Y., 1769; Society, 1829; 
died, 1841. A man of more than usual intelligence. 

Barton, Lewis. Bom, 1724; practiced in the Town of Stanford, 
1770-1801 ; died, 1813. Father of Dr. Leonard Barton. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 553 

Baeton, Thomas Jefferson. Born Valatia, N. Y., 1830; gradu- 
ated Albany, 1855; Madalin, 1856; Society, 1878; died Tivoli, Sep- 
tember ISth, 1903. A well read man; a writer of verses; served in 
Civil War. 

Basch, Samuel H. Graduated Albany, 1903; Rhinebeck and So- 
ciety, 1904. 

Bates, John. Born November a6th, 1812 ; Lower Red Hook, suc- 
ceeding Dr. Benedict ; Society, 1841 ; died June 8th, 1877. 

Bates, Xyeis T. Born Lebanon Springs, August 11th, 1839; 
graduated A. B., Yale, 1862; M. D., Albany, 1867; Rotunda Hos- 
pital, Dublin, 1871; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1890; died Pough- 
keepsie, January 2nd, 1899. 

Bayley, Guy Caeleton. Bom Eden Hill, Poughkeepsie, October 
16th, 1850; grandson of Dr. Guy Carleton Bayley and great-grand- 
son of Dr. Richard Bayley, of New York City; student of Dr. H. B. 
Sands; graduate P. and S., 1872; Poughkeepsie, 1872; physician St. 
Barnabas Hospital and Orphan House; Assistant Surgeon Woman's 
Hospital, New York City; Surgeon-in-Chief Vassar Brothers' Hos- 
pital; Society, 1873. 

Baxtek, William. Born Delhi, N. Y., 1805; graduated A. B., 
Union College ; M. D., P. and S., 1831 ; practiced New York City and 
Wappingers Falls; died July 3d, 1875. 

Beadle, Edwaed L. Born Pleasant Valley, N. Y., July 12th, 
1807; graduated P. and S., 1829; Society, 1829; practiced Hyde 
Park, 1834, New York City, 1859 ; retired, his wife inheriting a large 
property; Poughkeepsie, 1862; died April 5th, 1882; Vice-president 
College P. and S. ; trustee of many public and charitable institutions ; 
also held many civil offices. A man of high character, very popular, 
and greatly respected. 

Beckwith, Geoege S. Born Litchfield, Conn., 1841; graduated 
Yale ; practiced at Ballston, N. Y., Pine Plains, 1868 ; died about 1890. 

Beees, Villeeoy. Born, 1789; Society, 1817; died Poughkeepsie, 
February 28th, 1846. 



554 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Belden, Samuel. Supposed to have settled at Pleasant Valley 
about 1770. Moved to New York City in 1815, where he died June 
4th, 1830, at an advanced age. 

Belding, Sii^s T. Born Town of Washington, January 6th, 1795. 
Practiced at Poughkeepsie and Dover, where he died, January 2nd, 
1859. 

Bell, William P. Born Gettysburg, Penn., February 25th, 1822 ; 
Fishkill Landing, 1850 ; Society, 1854 ; died December 4th, 1869. 

Benedict, Abijah G. Born Salem, N. Y., 1790; student of Dr. 
James Downs of Pleasant Valley; licensed by Dutchess County So- 
ciety, 1816 ; Society, 1816 ; member of the State Legislature, 1835-6 ; 
Lower Red Hook, 1816; died October 3rd, 1862. 

Benedict, Abijah G. Bom, 1833; P. and S., 1855; Assistant 
Surgeon 125th N. Y. V. I.; discharged November 18th, 1862; died 
Red Hook, April 15th, 1873. 

Beeky, Chaeles H. Born Mahopac, N. Y., 1842 ; graduated Uni- 
versity Michigan, 1868 ; Dover Plains, 1868 ; Society, 1869. 

Beeky, Cyeus. Society, 1806; Pleasant Valley after Dr. Ely. 

BiED, J. Steeling. Bom Winchester, Conn., August 29th, 1836; 
graduated P. and S., 1863; Hyde Park, 1865; Society, 1866; died 
April 3d, 1900. 

BiED, W. Langdon. Born Middletown, Conn., 1867; New York 
University, 1893; Matteawan S. H. ; Society, 1894. 

Bliss, Willl^m A. Born Nassau, May 5th, 1841 ; graduated Al- 
bany, 1866 ; practiced Brooklyn till 1892, when he retired and lived at 
Spy Hill, Matteawan. 

BocKEE, Jacob. Born Northeast, 1814; graduated Union M. A., 
1836; M. D., University Pennsylvania; Society, 1840; in the drug 
business in Poughkeepsie and Chicago; Brigade Surgeon of Volun- 
teers, 1862; in charge of the Marine Hospital, New Orleans, 1866; 
died November 26th, 1885. A scholarly man of retiring disposition. 

* Bolton, Edward Clay. Born April 25th, 1818; in the drug 
business in New Orleans and Poughkeepsie; Society, 1867; died Oc- 
tober 19th, 1892. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 555 

BoBBT, Nelson. Bom Cobleskill, N. Y., January 8th, 1867; grad- 
uated P. and S., 1889; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1890. 

BoTTsroBD, Chables. Bom Connecticut; Wappingers Falls, 1840- 
1861, about; Society, 1842; died in Connecticut of consumption. 

BoYCE, J. Newton. Born Pine Plains, August 11th, 1873 ; gradu- 
uated P. and S., 1895; Contract Surgeon U. S. A., 1900-02; Society, 
1898; Stanfordville, 1902. 

BaowN, Lewis Henby. Born Amrath, South Wales, September 
25th, 1860; Guy's Hospital, London, England, 1887; New York 
City, 1901 ; Pine Plains and Society, 1905. 

Beown, Samuel Hebman. Born New York*City, August 4th, 
1860 ; A. B. St. Stephens, 1881 ; M. D. Wurzburg, 1885 ; son of Dr. 
S. H. Brown; Madalin, 1885; Tivoli, 1899. 

Bbttsh, Nehemiah. Bom August 20th, 1787; died September Sd. 
1843; buried at New Hackensack. 

BiTCKNUM, Amasa. Born England, 1768; graduated Oxford Uni- 
versity; Society, 1806; Stanford; in 1854 he was attacked with gan- 
grene of the foot; he amputated the toes himself; died June 15th, 
1856, and is buried at the Bear Market. A man of unusual attain- 
ments, and of a cheerful disposition. 

Btjfpington, Chables E. Graduated Albany, 1874; Troy, 1892; 
Pawling and Society, 1894. 

Btjgbee, HeNby G. Graduated Columbia, 1903; Superintendent 
and Surgeon-in-Chief Vassar Brothers' Hospital, 1906; Society, 
1907. 

Bttbns, Edwabd M. Born Bulls Head, N. Y., May 19th, 1871; 
graduated Cornell, A. B. ; M. D., P. and S., 1894 ; Poughkeepsie and 
Society, 1895. 

Bush, William. Madalin. A surgeon in the army in 1863, where 
he lost his life. 

Cady. Rombout Patent, 1779. 

Calkins. At the Oblong before 1750. 



556 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Caed, John Ailing. Bom Poughkeepsie, May 20th, 1876 ; gradu- 
ated N. Y. University, 1898 ; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1898. 

Campbeli, Cornelius Naue. Born July 7th, 1825, at Amenia; 
student of Dr. Eastman of Dover Plains ; graduated N. Y. University, 
1849; Pawling, 1850; Society, 1854-; Stanford to 1862; Surgeon 
150th Regiment; Medical Inspector 20th Corps, 1865; Poughkeepsie, 
1865; died of pneumonia, December 21st, 1888. A happy, kind- 
hearted man, keeping no accounts, and never worrying over business 
troubles. 

Canfield, Calvert. Born 1793; Pleasant Valley and Society, 
1817; died August 11th, I860. 

Carroll, Robert J. Bom Ohio, 1843; graduated Jefferson, 1867; 
Red Hook, 1876; Society, 1878. 

Cary, Ebenezer. Bom at Providence, R. I., February 22d, 1745. 
He is said to have been educated at Brown University. He was a 
taxpayer in Beekman in 1767, and probably settled there about that 
time; his house, which he built is still standing at Gardner's HoUow. 
During the Revolutionary War he served as Adjutant of the Fifth 
Regiment, Dutchess County MiHtia, 1775-1779, the regiment gar-, 
risoning the forts in the Highland, and taking part in the battle of 
White Plains. He was a member of Beekman Precinct Committee, 
1776-78. In civil life he served as a member of the State Legislature 
at the fourth and eighth sessions, 1780-1 and 1784-5. He was prom- 
inent in his profession and active in the affairs of the community 
where he lived. He died at Beekman, May 10th, 1815. 

Gary, Eobert. Born Beekman, April 12th, 1789; a son of Dr. 
Ebenezer Cary. He studied medicine with his father and attended 
lectures at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and was licensed 
to practice by the Dutchess County Medical Society in 1810. In 
1812 he was commissioned Surgeon's Mate of the Fourth Regiment, 
New York State Cavalry, and in 1818 Surgeon of the same. He 
served in civil offices in his town, and in 1827 as a member of the State 
Legislature. Dr. Cary died May 1st, 1862, and is buried in the Rural 
Cemetery at Poughkeepsie. 

Case, Ephraim. Clinton Corners; died 1876. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 557 

Cavanaugh, William J. Born Bath, N. Y., June 4th, 1874; 
graduated Albany, 1899; H. R. S. H. and Society, 1902. 

Chabtee, Jeeome Stewaet. Born Amenia, N. Y. ; A. B., Yale; 
M. D., University Pennsylvania, 1897 ; U. S. A. Medical School, Wash- 
ington ; Amenia Union and Society, 1898 ; in active service in the U, S. 
Army and Navy; Sharon, Conn., 1903. 

Chambeelain, John. Poughkeepsie and Society, 1806; died Mil- 
lerton, 187S. 

Chambeelain, Willia.m Young. Boi-n 1815; Northeast, 1850; 
died August 26th, 1863. 

Chapman, Geoege B. Born Dover, May 20th, 1849; graduated 
Medical Department, Yale, 1875; Amenia Union and Society, 1876- 
88, when he retired on account of ill health. 

Chase, Benjamin. Amenia, 1765. 

Childs, Heney F. Born 1811 ; graduated Fairfield Medical Col- 
lege, 1835; Washington and Society, 1835; died Lithgow, January 
1st, 1867. A man with a peculiar individuality ; never married ; buried 
at Lithgow, but the body was removed. 

Chtjechill, J. H. Graduated Harvard, 1867; Pawling, 1890. 

Claek, Allen. Bom 1808; died Stone Church, July 21st, 1882. 

Claek, Feedeeick T. Born Granville, Mass., March 27th, 1874; 
graduated Albany, 1896; H. R. S. H., 1897-1900; Society, 1898. 

Claek, Philo Winchell. Born Millerton, December 18th, 1831; 
graduated P. and S., 1867; died Millerton, of pneumonia, November 
23d, 1880. 

Claek, Theodoee F. H. R. S. H. and Society, 1900. 

Claek, Waltee M. Born Belleville, N. Y., July 10th, 1875 ; grad- 
uated Albany, 1896 ; Matteawan S. H., 1897 ; Society, 1902. 

Claekson, Feedeeick Veemeule. Born New York City; gradu- 
ated P. and S., 1852; Northeast, 1865; died Asbury Park, N. J., 
February 9th, 1902. 



558 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Codding, Geobge H. Bom Egremont, Mass., August 1st, 1857; 
graduated P. and S., 1881 ; Amenia and Society, 1882. 

Cole, Chaei^s Edwin. Born Pine Plains, January 29th, 1850; 
graduated Bellevue, 1872; Jackson Comers, 1872; Pine Plains, 
1876-84; died July 23d, 1884. 

Cole, Peteb S. Bora Febmary 2d, 1812 ; Pine Plains from 1844- 
68; died at Jackson Comers, November 4th, 1870. 

CoitiNs, Geobge Milton. Born Fishkill about 1814; University 
Pennsylvania, 1838-9 ; died about 1841, aged 27. 

CoNKLiN, William James. Bom Cornwall, N. Y., January 28th, 
1846; son of Dr. Peter Elting Conklin; graduated University New 
York, 1870; Fishkill Village and Society, 1870. 

Cook, Albert Heemon. Bom Napanee, Ontario, Canada; gradu- 
ated Trinity Medical College, Toronto, 1900; Dover Plains and So- 
ciety, 1904. 

Cook, Geoege W. Clinton and Society, 1806. 

Cook, James S. Born March 17th, 1788; Clinton and Society, 
1811 ; died July 23d, 1869, at Verbank. Deranged for several years 
before his death from an injury to his head. 

Cook, Samuel. Poughkeepsie, 1767. 

CooKiNGHAM, Habbis L. Bom Hyde Park, N. Y., 1860; gradu- 
ated Albany, 1871 ; Staatsburg and Society, 1872 ; Red Hook, 1873. 

CooPEB, Ananias. The doctors Cooper were all descendants of 
John Cooper, of Olriey, Buckinghamshire, England, who came to 
America in the ship Hopewell, in 1635, and settled at Lyim, Mass. 
We first find Dr. Ananias at Bridge Hampton, L. I., in 1766. In 
1767 he lived in the Cooper house, on the west side of the Post Road, 
one mile above Rhinebeck. In 1769 he charged the county ten shil- 
lings for doctoring a soldier, the first charge made by a doctor against 
the county for professional work done. This soldier must have been 
in the French and Indian War. He was a member of Assembly, 1779- 
86. He died April 4th, 1797. He had a son, Dr. Charles De Kay 
Cooper, of Albany. 




W. J. CONKIJN, M. D. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 559 

Cooper, Jeremiah. Fishkill, 1759. A brother of Ananias Cooper, 
and probably the father of Dr. John Cooper. 

CooPEE, John. Born Fishkill, June 6th, 1786. Student of Dr. 
Bartow White; graduated P. and S., about 1808. He practiced in 
Poughkeepsie until the war of 1812, when he entered the service as 
surgeon, and was stationed at Fort Dearborn until the close of the 
war, when he returned to Poughkeepsie and remained in active prac- 
tice until his death, which was in 1863. He was a man of strong 
character, high principles, and of positive convictions. A contem- 
porary of Dr. John Barnes ; they were rivals in business. Dr. Barnes, 
giving undivided attention to his work, had the advaaitage. Dr. 
Cooper had a strain of sporting blood, which led him to keep a stable 
of thoroughbred horses, which he ran on the old Dutchess track, at 
East Poughkeepsie, with considerable success in winnings, though they 
proved an expensive amusement. 

CoopEE, John Reed. Born Poughkeepsie, January 25th, 1828; 
son of Dr. John Cooper. He studied medicine with his father, and 
attended lectures at the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the 
years 1848-50. He practiced one year at Wappingers Falls with Dr. 
Van Duser, when he moved to Poughkeepsie and continued there until 
his death. In 1861 Dr. Cooper was appointed Surgeon of the Fifth 
New York Cavalry; he served fourteen months, when he resigned. 
During their last illness, Drs. Hughson, the elder Cooper, and Varick 
threw their influence in Dr. Cooper's favor; this, with his positive 
manner and strong character, gave him a commanding position in the 
profession, and for years he did a large proportion of the surgery in 
the county. In his practice he trusted to his practical experience, 
and had no use for theories, and but little for books. He died April 
8th, 1887, and is buried at Greenwood. 

Cornelius, La Willa Mott. Born Lafayetteville, N. Y., October 
10th, 1858 ; graduated Bellevue, 1891 ; Staatsburg and Society, 1894 ; 
New York City, 1896; Brooklyn, 1906. 

Cornell, Isaac M. Born Defreetsville, N. Y., April 26th, 1851; 
student of Dr. S. S. Green of La Grangeville; graduated University 
New York, 1877; N6w Hamburgh, Wappingers and Society, 1878. 

Corning, J. Leonard. Graduate University of Wurzburg, 1878; 
H. R. S. H., 1878-82. 



560 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

CoETELTOu, Laueance V. Born Brooklyn, 1846; graduated A.M., 
Yale; M. D., Bellevue, 1864; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1873-88; 
died August 5tli, 1896. A man of very eccentric conduct ; never prac- 
ticed actively. 

CoTTEE, John H. Born Pleasant Valley, April 6th, 1851 ; gradu- 
ated Albany, 1878; Mount Ross to 1880; Jackson Corners to 1894; 
Society, 1893, and Poughkeepsie. 

Cotter, John H., Jb. Graduated Albany, 1894; Jackson Cor- 
ners and Society, 1895; Pine Plains, 1899-05. 

Cbamee, William. Bom Poughkeepsie, June 1st, 1860; gradu- 
ated A. B., Rutgers, 1879; M. D., P. and S., 1883; Poughkeepsie 
and Society, 1883; physician to Orphan Home. A modest, reticent 
man of studious habits. Died April 4th, 1899. 

Ceonk, James M. Bom Suydam, N. Y., 1867 ; graduated Albany, 
1898 ; Hyde Park and Society, 1898. 

Ceook, Chaeles. "Lately married at Poughkeepsie, Dr. Charles 
Crook to the amiable Miss PoUy Marsh of that place ;" November 7th, 
1786. "The house, instruments, &c., of the late Dr. Charles Crook, 
to be sold at auction, the house in Poughkeepsie near the English 
Church;" November 4th, 1788. It is regrettable that no further in- 
formation can be had of this representative of one of the oldest and 
most respectable of the county families. Their burial plot, on the 
west side of the Post Road, midway between Teller's HiU and the 
village of Hyde Park, is a scene of desecration and desolation. 

Ceosby, Cteenus. Born April 22nd, 1762; practiced Amenia 
Union about 1806; Society, 1813; died Amenia, December 22d, 1832. 

Cettse, Thomas K. Born Baltimore, March 3d, 1849; graduated 
A. M., College City of New York, 1868; M. D., Bellevue, 1870; Wap- 
pingers Falls, 1875; Society, 1876. 

Ctjck, Daniel. Born August 1st, 1777; Upper Red Hook; died 
November 1st, 1829. 

Davis, Jacob H. Born 1795 at Pine Plains; student of Drs. 
Gruemsey and Wilber ; Mount Ross, 1821 ; Pine Plains and Society, 
1834; died 1857 or '61. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 561 

Dayton, Daniel. Poughkeepsie and Society, 1806. 

De Lamatek, Abraham. Born 1771; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1807 ; died Rhinebeck, February 16th, 184-1. 

Delavan, David. Pawling and Society, 1806; Dover Plains pre- 
vious to 1824. 

De La Vekgne, Benjamin. Born August 18th, 1742, on his 
father's farm in the Town of Washington. He studied medicine with 
his father, and was practicing when the war of the Revolution called 
him to take an active part. On October 7th, 1775, he was commis- 
sioned Captain of the Seventh Company of the Sixth Regiment of 
Dutchess County Troops, and was soon after given a Majority. He 
served seven years in the army, and in 1776 was a delegate to the 
third Provincial Congress in New York City. He was a forceful, en- 
terprising man, a leader among his fellows, taking an active part in 
all the aflFairs of life, a successful business man, as well as a prominent 
physician. Dr. De La Vergne was the presiding officer of the meet- 
ing at which the Dutchess County Medical Society was organized, 
elected its first vice-president, and its second president. He died June 
25th, 1830, and is buried at Washington Hollow. 

De La Vergne, Isaac. Born Town of Washington, August 11th, 
1771 ; a son of Dr. Benjamin De La Vergne. His license to practice 
was issued by Jacob C. Bloom, Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, 
December 8th, 1797. He was of a quiet, retiring disposition, and 
did not take an active part in affairs, or even in his profession. He 
died November 1st, 1822, and lies buried with his father at Washing- 
ton Hollow. 

Denny, James. Bom Clinton about 1790; practiced at Pine Plains. 

Denny, James, Jr. Born October 30th, 1824; practiced at Milan 
and died there March 3d, 1905. 

Denny, Peter. Born June 9th, 1818. Brother of James, Jr. 
Died February 18th, 1888. 

Devine, Joel. Born Pleasant Valley, 1810; licensed Dutchess 
County Medical Society, 1841; practiced Poughkeepsie, 1841-4; 
Pleasant Valley, 1844-8. Shot a neighbor in a dispute over a line 



562 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

fence. At his trial his father testified: "He is my youngest son, and 
has never been controlled, but has always had his own way and done 
as he pleased." He cut his throat in jail while waiting for a second 
trial, November 26th, 1848. 

Deyo, Elvy. Born New Paltz, 1815 ; Poughkeepsie ; having a drug 
store, 137 Main; died April 29th, 1879. 

DiNGMAN, John Henry. Bom, 1876; graduated Albany, 1901; 
Stuyvesant Falls; Tivoli, 1902; Madalin and Society, 1903. 

DoBsoN, Waltham H. Born Amherst, Nova Scotia, August 27th, 
1858; graduated New York University, 1881; Poughkeepsie, 1890; 
Society, 1894; Opth. and Aural Surgeon, Vassar Brothers' Hospital; 
Opth. Surgeon, H. R. S. H. 

Dodge, Daniel L. Society, 1817; Hyde Park, 1861. 

Dodge, Samuel. Born 1820; graduated Albany, 1847; Wash- 
ington and Society, 1854; died Poughkeepsie, June 29th, 1863. 

DoRLAND, Elias T. Bom East Hamburgh, N. Y., April 12th, 
1830; La Grangeville, 1854-66; died Buffalo, N. Y., 1902. 

Doughty, John H. Bom La Grangeville, 1832 ; graduated A. B., 
Williams College, 1858; M. D., Michigan University, 1863; entered 
army as an Assistant Surgeon, resigning in 1865 as Medical Direc- 
tor ; Society, 1890 ; Matteawan, 1866 ; died January 28th, 1905. 

Doughty, Phoebe V. V. Matteawan and Society, 1904. Daugh- 
ter of Dr. J. H. Doughty. 

Doughty, Thomas J. Born May 5th, 1865 ; graduated University 
Michigan, 1896; Matteawan and Society, 1897; died August 2d, 
1898 ; son of Dr. J. H. Doughty. 

DowE, Harry P. New York University, 1886; Pawling, 1899. 

Downs, James. Clinton and Society, 1806; Pleasant Valley with 
and after Dr. Ely. 

Du Bois, Henry K. Graduated Bellevue, 1870; Bangall, 1884. 

DwAN, John M. Born August 25th, 1833, in Orange County; 
graduated Albany, 1861; Pleasant Valley, 1861; died March 26th, 
1884. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 563 

Ebstein, Ludwig. Born Germany, 1818; graduated University 
of Berlin; Poughkeepsie, 1850; Surgeon N. Y. S. V., 1863; Society, 
1869; returned to Germany, 1867, and died at Breslau, March 17th, 
1886. 

Eddy, Casper W. Rhinebeck and Society, 1817. 

Ely, William. Clinton and Society, 1806. Had at one time a 
large practice, but neglected his work, and died in the alms house. 

Ensign, Lee. Graduated P. and S., 1844; Clinton and Society, 
1841. 

EssELSTYNE, RiCHARD. Society, 1820. In the cemetery of Stone 
Church, just north of Rhinebeck, there is a well-kept lot and a stone 
with this inscription: "Friends of the late Dr. Richard Esselstyne, 
feeling that some insignia commemorative of his worth and services is 
justly due to him, have placed this stone and epitaph over his grave. 
Born in 1795, he died February 12th, 1868, in his 73d year. Of him 
it may be truly said, he was a Christian and philanthropist, and pro- 
fessionally self-sacrificing in the extreme; for neither inclemency of 
weather nor calls at unseasonable hours, or even the certainty of ser- 
vices illy repaid, ever deterred him from performing his duty to his 
fellow-man; and thus he left to the world, at least, this proof of his 
love for his Creator." 

Everett, Thomas J. Poughkeepsie and Society, 1832. 

Farewell, Gertrude. Graduated Woman's Medical College, 
New York City, 1878; Vassar College, 1891. 

Fink, Austin T. Born Westchester County, November 16th, 1843 ; 
graduated New York University, 1869; Freedom Plains, 1869; So- 
ciety, 1870. 

Flemming, Mark L. Born Townsburg, N. J., June 12th, 1880; 
graduated Cornell, 1901 ; H. R. S. H. and Society, 1904. 

Fletcher, Charles L. Born Milton, Vt., 1851 ; graduated Ver- 
mont University, 1873; South Dover, 1881; Society, 1883; Wing's 
Station, 1906. 

Foreman, James H. Born Kent, N. Y., April 19th, 1852 ; gradu- 
ated University N. Y., 1877 ; Hopewell, 1877 ; Society, 1878 ; moved 
to New York City. 



564 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Fowler, Benjamin Maltby. Born Northford, Conn., January 
2d, 1821 ; studied with Dr. L. W. Stanton, 1842, and with Dr. N. B. 
Ives in New Haven; graduated Yale, 1845; practiced first at Dur- 
ham, Conn., and removed to Poughkeepsie, 1856. He was fast build- 
ing up a large and successful practice at the time of his death, Sep- 
tember 8th, 1858. 

FaisBY, Joseph. Born 1787; Society, 1813; died Rhinebeck, Au- 
gust 11th, 1814. 

Gains, Josiah. There is in the Fisher Library at Yasser Brothers' 
Hospital a small book entitled "Arostittis Compleat and Experienced 
Midwife, London, n, d, 10th Edition." On the fly leaf is written 
"Josiah Gains, Man Midwife. His Book, 1755. Man Midwife at 
Poughkeepsie." And here we have our first specialist, though it does 
not appear that he claimed the title of doctor. 

Geeow, Elizabeth H. Born Plattekill, N. Y. ; graduated Univer- 
sity Michigan, 1875 ; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1875. 

GiLBEBT, Wheelee. Bom 1791 ; Beekman and Society, 1811 ; a 
Member of the Legislature and a County Judge; died June 10th, 
1847. 

Gill, Robeet Thomas. Bom Camelot, July 6th, 1821 ; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1854 ; died July 1st, 1873 ; he took a more active 
interest in his farm than in his profession; graduated A. B., Yale, 
1842 ; M. D., Jefferson, 1846. 

Geant, Edmttnd F. Licentiate of the Sullivan County Society; 
Poughkeepsie and Society, 1837; at "Eden Hill;" lost with steamship 
Arctic in 1853. 

Geant, James Peeston. Bom New Glasgow, Nova Scotia, Oc- 
tober 31st, 1872 ; graduated McGill, 1895 ; L. R. C. P., 1900 ; M. R. 
C. S., London; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1902. 

Geeene, Feedeeick H. Bom Otsego County, N. Y., 1872; grad- 
uated Albany, 1897; New Paltz, 1898; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1907. 

Geeen, Stephen S. Born Starksboro, Vt., January 9th, 1839; 
graduated New York University, 1864; Assistant Surgeon U. S. N., 
1864; La Grangeville and Society, 1867; Buffalo, 1875. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 665 

Guernsey, Calvin P. Born 1811, Clinton; died December 3d, 
1855. 

Guernsey, Desault. Born Milan, June 13th, 1830; student of 
Dr. Willard Parker ; graduated P. and S., 1850 ; Assistant Physician 
at Quarantine. In 1862 Surgeon N. Y. S. V. His horse fell on him 
at Port Hudson, necessitating his resignation; Amenia and Society, 
1866 ; Vice-president New York State Medical Association at the time 
of his death, December 9th, 1885. 

Guernsey, Ezekiel H. Born Amenia, April 12th, 1775; Stan- 
ford and Society, 1806 ; Doctors Calvin P. and Peter B. were his sons ; 
died September 17th, 1853. 

Guernsey, Peter Bennett. Born February 7th, 1804; Clinton 
and Society, 1826; licensed by the State Society, 1831; New York 
City, forty years; died November 26th, 1873. 

Gribbon, Henry Alexanber. Born Passaic, N. J., January 24th, 
1877; graduated University and Bellevue, 1899; Poughkeepsie and 
Society, 1902. 

Haidlaue, Joseph. Born Hohenzollern, Germany, June 19th, 
1825; graduated Wurzburg, 1860; New York University, 1882; 
Poughkeepsie and Society, 1882; died October 28th, 1894. 

Haight, Charles. Born June 15th, 1806, in Town of Washing- 
ton; Society, 1828; practiced Four Corners till 1845; died Pough- 
keepsie, September 26th, 1891. 

Hammond, Thomas, Jr. New York University, 1845 ; Dover, 
1845-85 ; Millerton and Society, 1888. 

Hammond, Thomas. Surgeon in war of 1812; Dover and Society, 
1821-69 ; died Port Huron, Mich., May, 1880. 

Harkness, James Rev. Born Roxburyshire, Scotland, March 3d, 
1803 ; graduated University Edinburgh. A Presbyterian minister at 
Fishkill Landing, who practiced medicine among his congregation; 
died July, 1878. 

Harley, Mary. Graduated W. M. College, New York, 1892 ; Vas- 
sar College, 1904. 



566 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Harkis, Isham G. Born Paris, Texas, February 23d, 1867; grad- 
uated New York University, 1890; H. R. S. H., 1891 ; Society, 1893. 

Hart, Henry A. Born New Britain, Conn., 1828; graduated 
P. and S., 1854; Millerton, 1874. 

Harvey, Albert B. Born Middlesex County, Massachusetts, 
March 2d', 1817; graduated Woodstock, Vt., about 1842; Pough- 
keepsie, 1844; Society, 1854; Physician St. Barnabas Hospital; an 
earnest, kindly man, of simple, unassuming life ; died July 5th, 1882. 

Harvey, Clarence. Born Manchester, N. H., October 2d, 1849; 
graduated New York University, 1880; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1881 ; a nephew of Dr. A. B. Harvey ; died December 26th, 1883. 

Hasbrotjck, Stephen. Born April 24th, 1794 ; A. B., Union Col- 
lege, 1815; student of Dr. B. White, M. D., P. and S., 1817; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1820-23; New York City to 1864; Jersey City, 
where he died December 28th, 1881. Decided in his convictions, tem- 
perate in his habits, upright in all his ways, he commanded respect 
among all who knew him. He was a scholar of more than ordinary 
attainments, and took an active editorial part in the Christian Ivr 
teUigencer. 

Hastings, William J. Born February 5th, 1843; Pleasant Val- 
ley; died June 1st, 1875. 

Hayt, Ralph Augustus. Bom Fishkill, N. Y., November 11th, 
1877 ; graduated P. and S., 1900 ; Fishkill and Society, 1902. 

Hazeltine, Hermon E. Matteawan S. H., 1904, and U. S. A. 

Heaton, Adna. Born New Haven, Conn., May 22d, 1762 ; student 
of Dr. Perry; Amenia, 1784; removed to Plattekill, 1800; died April 
24th, 1827. A minister of the Society of Friends and a successful 
practitioner. 

Hennessey, Frank A. Graduated Albany, 1896; Society and 
New Hackensack, 1898. 

• Herrick, Walter. Born Milan, 1820; graduated Berkshire, 
1849; Pine Plains, 1850; Milanville about 1866; Society, 1879. 




ISHAM G. HARRIS, M. D. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 567 

Hicks, Robert L. Society, 1817. On June 2d, 1819, Dr. Hicks 
moved to just below the Poughkeepsie Hotel on Main street. 

HiLus, James Grove. Born October 4th, 1825; U. S. M. Acad- 
emy, West Point. On Gen. Scott's Staff during the Mexican war. 
Received two medals for personal bravery. Poughkeepsie and So- 
ciety, 1854 ; died January 19th, 1861. 

HoAG, Arthur F. Bom Northeast, November 11th, 1856; gradu- 
ated P. and S., 1879 ; Amenia and Society, 1879 ; Millerton. 

H01.BR00E, Mellen R. Born New Hampshire, February 7th, 
1824; graduated Woodstock, 1850; Poughkeepsie, 1861; Society, 
1866. 

HoLDEN, Edwin. Union Vale and Society, 1833-61. 

Hooker, William. Society, 1822; Dover about 1830. 

Hopkins, William H. Bom Carmel, N. Y., 1814; Yale, 1837; 
Society, 1839; Sprout Creek, purchasing the place and practice of 
Dr. Sleight; died Hyde Park, May 22d, 1890. 

HosACK, David. Bom New York City, August 31st, 1769; grad- 
uated A. B., Princeton, 1789; student of Dr. Richard Bayley; Medi- 
cal College, Philadelphia, 1791 ; Edinburgh, 1794 ; Union College, 
L.L. D., F. R. S., London; F. R. S., Edinburgh; Society, Hon., Hyde 
Park ; died New York City, December 22d, 1835. 

HoYT, Daniel James. Born Galway, N. Y., January 29th, 1872; 
A. B.J Union University, 1899; M. D., University Vermont, 1902; 
Poughkeepsie and Society, 1903. 

HoTT, Edwin S. Bom Pleasant Plains, N. Y., April 5th, 1845; 
graduated Albany, 1874 ; Society, 1875 ; SchultzviUe, 1899. 

HuGHSON, Benjamin. Bom Hughsonville, January 2d, 1799; 
Fishkill and Society, 1822 ; died February 9th, 1856. 

Hull, William Bird. Born Pine Plains, June 26th, 1852; gradu- 
ated P. and S., 1874 ; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1874 ; retired, 1880. 

Hunting, Edward. Was married May 20th, 1790. Dr. Bartow 
White bought his home and practice at Fishkill in 1805. 



568 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Hunting, Isaac M. Graduated University Pennsylvania, 1841 ; 
Stanford and Society, 1871 ; died 1893. 

Huntington, Geokge. Born East Hampton, April 9th, 1850 ; son 
of Dr. George Lee Huntington, and grandson of Dr. Abel Hunting- 
ton; graduated P. and S., 1871; practiced East Hampton to 1874; 
LaGrange and Society, 1874. Dr. Huntington first described a pecu- 
liar form of hereditary chorea, which is known as "Huntington's 
Chorea." HopeweU Junction, 1906. 

HuBD, CuKTis J. MiUerton and Society, 1823; moved to Manlius, 
N. Y., 1837 ; dying there. 

HuED, Dabwin E. Son of Dr. Curtis J.; Northeast, 1833; Mil- 
lerton. 

HuRD, George F. Born 1808; graduated Pittsfield, 1829; Pleas- 
ant Valley, 1831-41; Society, 1833; Fayettville, 1841-54; died 
Rochester, December 1st, 1854. 

HuRD, MiLo. Northeast and Society, 1816. 

HuRLBERT, p. R. Born 1781 ; Poughkeepsie to 1855 ; died Troy, 
N. Y., April 4th, 1855. 

HusTED, Frank A. Born LaFayetteville, N. Y., May 3d, 1876; 
graduated Albany, 1892; Wassaic and Amsterdam, 1898. 

IvE, Charles William. Graduated A. B., St. Stephens, 1880; A. 
M., Columbia University ; M. D., P. and S., 1898 ; Hyde Park and So- 
ciety, 1900. 

Johnson, George Quinct. Born Hillsdale, December 5th, 1859 ; 
graduated P. and S., 1882; Pine Plains, 1885-95; Society, 1893; 
Ardsley, 1906. 

JuDD, Stoddard. Born Sharon, Conn., May 23d, 1797; Stanford, 
Dutchess County, 1798; Union Vale and Society, 1819; LaGrange 
previous to and after 1832; Member of Legislature, 1836; 1850 at 
Waushaba, Wis. A nephew of Dr. Uri Judd. 

JuDD, Uri. Born Waterbui'y, Conn., 1775. Grandson of Dr. 
Benjamin Judd, a noted doctor of Connecticut; Northeast and So- 
ciety, 1806; Milo, Yates County, 1831; Penn Yan, N. Y., 1850. A 
very prominent man professionally. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 569 

Julian, John M. Bom Hoboken, April 25th, 1854; son of Dr. 
John M. Julian; graduate L. I. C. Hospital, 1880; Moore's Mills, 
1880-92; Society, 1885; Pleasant Valley, 1906; died 1907. 

Kellogg, Abnee Otis. Born Colchester, Conn., April 24th, 1820; 
graduated Berkshire, 1844; P. and S., Canada, 1849; H. R. S. H., 
1871-84; Society, 1873; died Kentland, Ind., September 21, 1888. A 
student of Shakespeare, whom he quoted aptly and dramatically in his 
papers, which were scholarly and instructive and always most accepta- 
ble to the Society. 

Kellogg, Theodoee H. Graduated BeUevue, 1865; H. R. S. H., 
1888-91; Society, 1891; private hospital, Riverdale, 1897-1906. 

KiEESTEAD, Hans. Born Kingston, N. Y., 1743; Rhinebeck, 1769; 
died September 29th, 1811. 

Kimball, Geace N. Graduated W. M. C. of New York City, 
1892; Poughkeepsie, 1899; Society, 1900. 

Kinkead, John. Born Lexington, Ky., December 30th, 1848; 
graduated BeUevue, 1872 ; New York City to 1879 ; Poughkeepsie and 
Society, 1879; retired 1890; Opthal. and Aural Surgeon Vassar 
Brothers' Hospital; died June 29, 1909. 

KiPF, Isaac. Born 1733; Rhinebeck, 1760; died January 11th, 
1815. 

KiTTEEDGE, Chaeles M. Bom Mt. Vernon, N. H., 1838; gradu- 
ated A. B., Amherst, 1862; M. D., Harvard, 1867; Line Officer 
1862-5 in Civil War; Hyde Park; FishkiU-on-Hudson, 1870; So- 
ciety, 1875 ; died August 19th, 1896. 

Knapp, David A. Born New Fairfield, Conn., June 13th, 1820; 
student of Dr. Ezra P. Bennett, of Danbury, Conn.; graduated New 
York University, 1845; North Clove, 1846; Society, 1866; died Sep- 
tember 22d, 1907. 

Knickeebackee, Philip H. Born 1804 ; student of Dr. Broadhead, 
of Clermont; Upper Red Hook and Society, 1828; died April 9th, 
1864. 

La Geange, John H. Albany, 1871 ; Glenham and Society, 1882 
to 1894. 



570 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Lamb, Joseph T. Born New York City, July 9th, 1834; gradu- 
ated Bellevue, 1867; New York City and Hudson till 1880; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1880; retired, 1888. 

Lamb, Robert B. Bom Jamestown, N. Y., August 1st, 1869; 
graduated Albany, 1891 ; Matteawan S. H. and Society, 1893 ; Medi- 
cal Superintendent Matteawan S. H., 1906. 

La Mont, Austin. Born Charlotteville, N. Y., 1837; graduated 
University Michigan, 1861; Hyde Park and Society, 1861-76; Car- 
mel, 1906. 

Landon, Waltee R. Born 1790; died Rhinebeck June 11th, 
1855. 

Langdon, Chakles Heney. Born New York City, May 22d, 1853; 
P. and S., 1874 ; H. R. S. H. and Society, 1876-1905 ; died November 
15th, 1905. 

Lathkop, William. Born 1760 ; Washington about 1785 ; Society, 
1806; died April 18th, 1812. A well educated, successful physician, 
with the degree of M. D. 

Lape, Fredeeick Thomas. Born Athens, N. Y., December 21st, 
1873; graduated P. and S., Baltimore, 1896; Poughkeepsie and So- 
ciety, 1898; died Athens, September 4th, 1905. 

Latson, John Rodney. Born Rhinebeck, 1838 ; graduated Castle- 
ton, Vt. ; Acting Assistant Surgeon U. S. N. ; died 1900. 

Leach, Geoege W. Graduated P. and S., 1833; A. M., Hon. 
Wesleyan, 1846; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1833. 

Leonard, Alpheus. Amenia Union about 1806; died 1829. 

Le Roy, Irving Deyo. Born Highland, N. Y., April 18th, 1859 ; 
graduated Albany, 1883; Pleasant Valley and Society, 1884. A de- 
scendant of Frans Le Roy, who came to Poughkeepsie as early as 
1719, and bought land in the neighborhood of Smith street on the Fall- 
kill. 

Lewis, James M. Graduated University Buffalo, 1880; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1888. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION, 571 

Lewis, Jonathan, "The Tory." Practiced at Pine Plains before 
the Revolution. He had to move to Nova Scotia till the end of the 
war. On returning his life was made so uijhappy for him by his patri- 
otic neighbors, that he hung himself in the attic of his house, the 
Dibble-Booth house, in 1783. 

LiNSLY, WiiiLiAM B. Born New York City, 1840. Son of Dr. 
Jared Linsly. Graduated P. and S., 1864. During the Civil War 
was Assistant Surgeon for eighteen months; Pawling, 1880; Society, 
1882; died June 10th, 1890. 

LosEE, Edwin Knickeebockee. Born Upper Red Hook, May 16th, 
1863 ; graduated A. B., Rutgers, 1885 ; M. D., P. and S., 1888 ; Upper 
Red Hook, 1890. 

LosEE, Elmoee. Bom Saratoga County, May 23d, 1821 ; gradu- 
ated Castleton, 1846 ; Red Hook, 1850 ; Bangall, 1852 ; Society, 1854 ; 
died September 2d, 1904. 

LosEE, Haevey. Born Upper Red Hook, March 30th, 1867 ; grad- 
uated New York University, 1878; Upper Red Hook, 1902-4. 

LosEE, John E. Born Washington, September 18th, 1826 ; gradu- 
ated Albany, 1852; Red Hook, 1853; Society, 1878; died December 
20th, 1900. 

LowN, Maecus M. Graduated Albany, 1877; Rhinebeck and So- 
ciety. 

Mackenzie, David Hugh. Bom Nova Scotia, April 24th. 1860; 
graduated New York University, 1889; Mabbettsville and Society, 
1899; MiUbrook. 

MacNichol, B. W. Graduated Jefferson, Pa., 1884; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1884 ; Westchester County, 1899 ; died June 22d, 
1900. 

Mann, Feedeeick J. Born Utica, N. Y., October 13th, 1870; 
graduated Buffalo University, 1893 ; H. R. S. H. and Society, 1896 ; 
Poughkeepsie, 1899. 

Maeill, JoAftuiM. Born Havana, Cuba, December 21stt, 1841. 
Assistant Surgeon Volunteer Infantry, 1861. Taken prisoner at Bull 



572 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Run; in Libby prison till 1864. Discharged from service, 1865. 
Spanish army in Cuba, 1866-70. Highland till 1874; Poughkeepsie 
and Society, 1875. Died January 14th, 1908. 

Maeks, Louis Heney. Born Auburn, N. Y., September 17th, 
1872; graduated Trinity, Toronto, 1896; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1902. 

Maeschesseault, W. Wilfkid. Graduated Harvard, 1888; Mat- 
teawan, 1902. 

Mathews, Adelbeet C. Born Little France, N. Y., July 12th, 
1875 ; graduated Baltimore, 1903 ; H. R. S. H., 1905. 

McCabe, V. V. Graduated Baltimore Medical College, 1901. In 
practice at Worcester, N. Y., and New York City until May 1, 1908, 
when he located at Pleasant Valley. Society 1909. 

McCambeidge, Chaeles J. Born Kingston, September 25th, 
1875; graduated Queens, Canada, 1898; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1900. 

McClacey, Abeam. Born Kortright, N. Y., February 4th, 1821; 
Cairo till 1876 ; Pleasant Valley ; died January 13th, 1897. 

McCi/EI-lan, Chaeles H. P. Born Gorham, Me., June, 1803; 
Poughkeepsie, 1836 ; died April 2d, 1862. A gentleman and a scholar. 
Retired and opened a school for girls, which was successful. 

McFaeland, Waeeen C. Born Brooklyn, N. Y., November 6th, 
1865 ; graduated Yale, 1887 ; Matteawan and Society, 1893. 

McGeath, E. C. Poughkeepsie; office 126 Main street, 1861. 

Meap, Isaac Newton. Born Amenia, September 13th, 1840; 
graduated P. and S., 1866; a student of Dr. L. P. Wood of Miller- 
ton. Entered the army in 1862 as a private; promoted to be Assist- 
ant Surgeon and mustered out in 1865 ; Society, 1867 ; Amenia, 1869. 

MiLLEE, Geoege Noeton. Bom Rhinebeck, September 27th, 
1857; graduated A. B., Harvard, 1879; M. D., Harvard, 1882; 
Vienna and Heidelberg, 1882-4 ; Rhinebeck ; never practiced. 

Mills, John D. Born Dover, N. J., December 6th, 1811 ; Pough- 
keepsie, 1884; Society, 1889; died Pleasant Valley, December, 1893. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 573 

MiTCHELii, FuEDEEicK De Vine. Born Millbrook, June 22cl, 1859; 
graduated Bellevue, 1880 ; Pawling, 1899. 



MoiTH, Julius Edgar. Born Fishkill Landing, September a*u, 
1855; graduated P. and S., 1879; Matteawan and Society, 1879. 

MuanocK, Geobge W. P. and S., 1867; Assistant Surgeon U. S. 
v., 1865 ; Cold Spring, Putnam County ; Society, 1894. 

MuEPHY, Fbanklyn N. Born Williamsburg, N. Y., June 14th, 
1876; graduated L. I. C. Hospital, 1899; Staatsburg and Society, 
1902; New York, 1909. 

Myek, Elizabeth R. G. W. M. C, New York City, 1877 ; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1890; Turner, N. Y., 1905. , 

Nelson, Theopelus. Born October 17th, 1798; Pleasant Valley 
and Society, 1823. A partner of Dr. Piatt of Rhinebeck, and the 
surgeon of that section. Died April 4th, 1872. 

Newcomb, Zaccheus. Born July 22d, 1767; Pleasant Valley; 
died August 30th, 1831. 

Nicholson, Claekson A. Born South East, Putnam County, De- 
cember 29th, 1821 ; graduated University New York, 1847 ; Beekman, 
1847; Society, 1859. Died Sylvan Lake, January 14th, 1886. 

NoRTHKOP, Mortimer C. Graduated New York Medical College, 
1857; Northeast previous to 1864; South Dover and Society, 1867; 
Pleasant Valley, 1902. 

NoxoN, Robert. Born Poughkeepsie, July 31st, 1750; student 
of Dr. Robert Thorn; lived at 83 Market street, Poughkeepsie and 
Society, 1806. 

O'RiELLY, Miles J. Albany, 1874; Fishkill-on-Hudson, 1900. 

Orton, Henry Tudor, Born Woodbury, Conn., August 17th, 
1782. A son of Dr. Samuel Orton ; Hart's Village and Society, 1828. 
He spent a long and useful life in the practice of his profession. In 
later years he was remarkable for his custom of always making his calls 
on horseback. Summer and winter, rain and shine. Dr. Orton could 
be seen any day jogging along the country roads on his trotting 



574 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

horse, with his saddlebags filled with medicine any time up to 1864. 
He had a wide circuit to ride, and attended to business faithfully. He 
was greatly beloved and respected. He died in 1864, leaving a con- 
siderable fortune, and is buried by the side of his father in Woodbury 
Cemetery, Conn. 

Owsley, Henky F. Bom in Ohio, 1870; graduated P. and S., N. 
Y., 1896; practiced in New York until removal to Green Haven, 1908. 

Pain, Babnabas. Bom Canterbury, Conn., 1738; practiced in 
Amenia as early as 1767, and died there June 6th, 1822. He was a 
man of pecuHar and decided views. 

Pain, Ichabod B. Born Amenia, 1790; licensed by the State So- 
ciety, 1812. The Doctors Paine and Payne are all descendants of 
the Rev. Solomon Pain, of Canterbury, Conn. He died August 1st, 
1819. Society, 1817. 

Pain, Ichabod Spaebow. Born Canterbury, Conn., September 
11th, 1736. The seventh son and ninth child in a family of fifteen. 
Crum Elbow, 1759; died at or near Amenia before 1774. 

Payne, John Chestee. Bom Amenia, April 3d, 1819; graduated 
Berkshire, 1848; Amenia and Society, 1854; Poughkeepsie, 1858. 
Dr. Payne was ship's surgeon on the "Dreadnaught" under Captain 
Samuels for several voyages, and visited the hospitals of London and 
Paris while waiting between trips. He was a man of gentle manner, 
kind hearted, and had an inexhaustible fund of anecdote which made 
him popular with young and old. Physician to St. Barnabas and 
Vassar Brothers' Hospitals. Died April 10th, 1899. 

Peaece, Geoege Staek. Bom Pawling, N. Y., October 28th, 
1872. Son of Dr. Henry Pearce. Pawling, 1895; Dover Plains, 
1902; graduated P. and S., 1895. 

Peaece, Heney. Bom Pawling, N. Y., March 1st, 1833; gradu- 
ated University Michigan, 1857 ; Assistant Surgeon 150th Regiment, 
N. Y. S. V. While On the march to Lookout Mountain his horse fell 
on him, crushing his left leg, necessitating its amputation above the 
knse. Continued practice at JPawling until his death, December 30th, 
1905. 




K 
o 

o 



< 

In 
(— ( 
Pi 

o 

< 
Pi 



O 

CO 

Q 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 575 

Peck, Geoege. Born Town of Milan, April 8th, 1813; practiced 
and died in Town of Stanford, October ISth, 1873. 

Peeky, John. Born 1770; Pine Plains and Society, 1824; died 
April 22d, 1852, at Perry's Corners. 

Phillips, Paul A. Born Orangeburg, S. C, May 20th, 1869; 
graduated Bellevue, 1891 ; H. R. S. H., 1894-6. 

Phinney, Lorenzo N. Born Sugar Hill, N. Y., January 1st, 1841 ; 
graduated Geneva, 1866; Assistant Surgeon, 193d Regiment, N. Y. 
S. V. ; Wappingers Falls, 1902. 

Phinney, Sturgis. Born March 26th, 1789 ; died November ISth, 
1841 ; in the drug business many years in Pough^eepsie. 

Pilgrim, Charles W. Born Monroe, N. Y., March 27th, 1855; 
graduated Bellevue, 1880; studied in Munich and Vienna, 1885; 1890, 
Superintendent Willard S. H. ; 1893, Superintendent of H. R. S. H. ; 
Society, 1893. 

Pine, Per Lee. Born 269 Mill street, Poughkeepsie, March 14th, 
1809. His preceptor was Dr. Delafield, of New York City, and he 
graduated from P. and S., 1834. After two years spent in study in 
London and Paris he began the practice of medicine in Poughkeepsie, 
where he remained until his death. An unfortunate circumstance 
occurring soon after his return from Europe cast a shadow over his 
professional life. A cousin of Dr. Pine's was on trial for murder and 
Dr. Pine testified that there was insanity in his family, and that he 
realized this in his own case. Dr. Pine was a modest, unassuming, 
Christian gentleman. He brought into the practice of his profession 
an intelligence, zeal, industry and perseverance worthy of the largest 
measure of success, which was denied him. His work was among the 
poor, giving them the best he had, never shirking the call of duty, or 
humanity. He was known among his associates for his integrity, 
ability and courtesy. Dr. Pine never owned a horse, or drove, from 
choice, but made visits six miles from home on foot. He died of pneu- 
monia. May 13th, 1882, in the house in which he was born. 

PiNGRY, James O. Born Fishkill, July 21st, 1843 ; graduated Uni- 
versity New York, A. B., 1862; M. D., P. and S., 1868; Mabbetts- 
ville and Society, 1871 ; Millbrook. 



576 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Platt, Euphalet. Born June 6th, 1797; Rhinebeck and Society, 
1818; M. D. Hon. State Board of Regents, 1848; died May 16th, 
1868. A prominent member of the profession, and in civil life; a 
scholar, reading his Bible regularly in the Greek text up to the last 
week of his life. 

PoKTEOUs, James G. Born Moriah, N. Y., January 3d, 1839; 
M. D., Harvard, 1865; Surgeon in the Civil War; Luzerne, N. Y., 
fifteen years; Poughkeepsie, 1880; Society, 1882; died suddenly July 
11th, 1895. 

PoucHEK, J. Wilson. Born Claverack, N. Y., July 24th, 1859; 
Albany, 1879; Modena; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1887; Surgical 
Staff, Vassar Brothers' Hospital, 1887 to 1898. 

Powell, Hokace Rennie. Born February 16th, 1860 at Coey- 
mans, N. Y. ; graduated Albany, 1882; Poughkeepsie and Society, 
1883. 

Pbichabd, Chuechill a. Born December 5th, 1862, at Aylmer, 
Ontario, Canada ; graduated Bellevue, 1890 ; Tivoli and Society, 1891. 

Pkoal, William H. Born 1821 ; Wappingers Falls, 1847 ; Chan- 
ningville and Society, 1854; died July 16th, 1858. 

PuLTZ, Monroe Teavee. Born Rhinebeck, July 17th, 1843; 
graduated P. .and S., 1868; Stanfordville, 1868; Society, 1871. 
Found dead in his bedroom under the most distressing circumstances, 
September 9th, 1902. 

Quitman, William F. Born 1787. Stone Church. Died Decem- 
ber 4th, 1834. 

Radclifp, Petee Augustus. Born Rhinebeck, 1807; Society, 
1830; died July 7th, 1831. 

Reynolds, Iseael. Lincense to practice issued by Judge Isaac 
Bloom, 1797; Pine Plains, 1795; died March 28, 1824. 

RicKETSON, Shadeack. Bom 1768; New York City, 1808, where 
he wrote a book entitled "Means of Preserving Health and Prevent- 
ing Disease," published in New York City, September 1st, 1806; So- 
ciety, 1815. A member of the Society of Friends. He never mar- 
ried. Died Beekman, March 3d, 1839. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 577 

Ring, Lewis. Born 1785; Pleasant Valley and Society, 1810; 
died Hyde Parkj August SOth, 1867. 

Roberts, Chaki-es Fkedeeick. Born Lebanon, August 5tli, 1860; 
graduated P. and S., 1883; Dover Plains, 1902; Society, 1903. 

RocKWEii,, Lyman E. Bom Stockbridge, N. Y., January 12th, 
1846; graduated New York University, 1873; Amenia and Society, 
1878. 

Rogeks, Joseph. Bom Connecticut, October 31st, 1776; Fish- 
kill and Society, 1806; died March 16th, 1814. 

Roof, Francis H. Bom Cooperstown, N. Y., 1842; graduated 
P. and S., 1863; Assistant Surgeon N. Y. S. V.,*1865; Rhinebeck, 
1876. 

Ross, John Philip B. Bom Germany, January 28th, 1764; died 
Red Hook, January 22d, 1814. A Palatine. 

Roosevelt, Isaac. Bom New York City, April 21st, 1790; grad- 
uated A. B., Princeton, 1808; M. D., P. and S., 1812; pupil of Dr. 
David Hosack, Hyde Park, 1820; died October 23d, 1863. Though 
well educated in his profession and fond of its literature, its practice 
was distasteful to him, and being removed from the necessity of prac- 
tice, he never engaged in it, choosing rural enjoyments and agricul- 
tural pursuits. He was of a delicate constitution, with refined tastes, 
a gentleman of the old school. 

RuMSEY, James Sykes. Bom July 9th, 1800; educated in France; 
Fishkill Landing, 1846, until his death, November 1st, 1872. 

Russell, Selwyn A. Bom Jay, N. Y., 1851 ; graduated Albany, 
1877 ; practiced Albany, 1888 ; Attending Physician St. Peter's Hos- 
pital; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1892; died January 10th, 1906. 

RirssELL, William Logi. Bom Chatham, N. B., Canada, July 24th, 
1863; graduated New York University, 1885; Poughkeepsie, 1904; 
Medical Inspector of Institutions for the Insane of New York State. 

Sackett, James. On November 24th, 1791, advertisement of 
claims against the estate of, late of Frederickstown, Dutchess County. 



578 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Sadliek, James Edgak. Born Walden, N. Y., March 28th, 1866 ; 
graduated Albany, 1887; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1889; Medical 
Staff of Vassar Brothers' Hospital, 1890 to 1898. 

Sabten, Thomas. Born February 22d, 1768; Beekman and So- 
ciety, 1806; died July 21st, 1810. 

ScHENCK, John P. Born Matteawan, February 2d, 1798; gradu- 
ated P. and S., 1819 ; Society, 1820 ; died September 7th, 1872. 

ScHENCK, John P., Jk. Born Matteawan, February ISth, 1843; 
graduated P. and S., 1864; in army as Assistant Surgeon one year; 
Matteawan, 1864; Society, 1866; died December 14th, 1886. 

ScHENCK Peteb, D. Bom 1793 ; pupil of Dr. Bartow White ; Fish- 
kill and Society, 1817; died Wappingers Falls, April 29th, 1837. 

Segeb, Charles E. Born April 8th, 1842; graduated Albany, 
1863 ; Stockbridge, nine years ; Albany, nine years ; New Hackensack, 
1886 ; Society, 1891 ; died December 10th, 1896. 

Sheedy, Daniei, M. Bom Norwalk, Conn. ; graduated New York 
University, 1888; Poughkeepsie, 1888; Society, 1889. 

Sheppaed, John M. Poughkeepsie and Society, 1892. 

Sheeeill, Hunting. Born April 3d, 1783; licensed State Society, 
1809; Clinton and Society, 1809; Hyde Park. Author of "A Re- 
view of the Diseases of Dutchess County from 1809-1825," published 
1826. Also "An Essay on Epidemics as they Appeared in Dutchess 
County," 1809-1825, pubHshed 1832. Died New York City, Janu- 
ary 16th, 1866. 

Shook, Ueiah. Born February 16th, 1816: died Red Hook, July 
27th, 1842. 

Slack, Heney. Bom Albany, June 10th, 1826; A. M., Yale, 
1848 ; M. D., Albany, 1851 ; two years in Paris ; nine years in New 
York City; Fishkill Landing, 1865; Society, 1873; died December 
10th, 1886. 

Slocum, Claeence J. Bom Richmond, R. I., 1878; graduated 
Albany, 1897; H. R. S. H., 1897-1900; Society, 1900; Pleasantville, 
N. Y., 1906. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 579 

Smith, Steowbeidge. Born March 18th, 1825; graduated New 
York Medical College, 1851 ; Surgeon Civil War, 1868 ; Wappingers 
Falls and Society, 1874 ; died June 9th, 1876. 

Snyder, Peter. Born 1772 ; died Northeast, near the Slate Quar- 
ry, 18£6. Said to have been a good doctor. He had an apple brandy 
distillery near his house and he patronized it liberally. He abjured 
all religion, and that he might not be buried in a churchyard, set 
apart an acre of ground on his farm for his burial place. There is 
no evidence of a grave, and the place is desolate. 

Stackhottse, Oswald D. Born St. Andrews, Quebec, 1874; Mc- 
Gill, 1896; H. R. S. H. and Society, 1899; Niaga^ra Falls, 1900. 

Stanton, Ltjke W. Born Huntington, Mass., 1806; M. D., Bow- 
doin ; Pine Plains with Dr. Davis, afterward at Amenia ; Society, 1867. 
He was a man of more than usual ability and prominence, and many 
students were attracted to his office. He visited Europe, and kept 
abreast of the times professionally. Died Amenia, February 6th, 
1869. 

Stevenson, William George. Bom Cambridge, N. Y., 1843; son 
of Dr. WiUiam Stevenson; graduated P. and S., 1865; Poughkeepsie, 
1873; Society, 1874. Of an active, inquiring mind, without the dis- 
cipline of a classical education. Died July 81st, 1890. 

Stillman, D. E. Graduated Vermont Medical College, 1851; 
Pine Plains, 1862-76; Society, 1871; died Baltimore about 1900. 

Stillman, Sidney. Born Litchfield, Conn., 1814; student of Dr. 
Benj. Welch of Norfolk; graduated Berkshire, 1837; Northeast, 1846; 
Millerton, 1888; Society, 1867. 

Sutherland, Douglass Rudd. Born Bangall, November 9th, 1860 ; 
graduated P. and S., 1874; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1874; died 
Morris, Minn. 

Sutton, George Lemuel. Born Louisville, N. Y. ; graduated Cas- 
tleton, 1858; P. and S., 1859; Army as Assistant Surgeon, 1862; 
Ret. 1865 as Lieut-Col. Brevet; East Fishkill and Society, 1866; 
died Louisville, September 6th, 1888. 



580 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Sutton, Leslie A. Bom Louisville, N. Y., June 10th, 1866; a 
nephew of Dr. G. L. Sutton; graduated New York University, 1889; 
East Fishkill and Society, 1889 ; Brewster, N. Y., 1905. 

Tabee, James Russell. Bom Milton, N. Y., December 18th, 
1851 ; graduated P. and S., 1874 ; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1874 ; 
Brooklyn, 1896. 

Tanneu, William H. Born Amenia, September 12th, 1836 ; grad- 
uated New York University, 1860; Assistant Surgeon N. Y. S. V., 
1861; Surgeon, 1865; never active in civil practice. 

Tappen, Peteb. Born July 3d, 1748; Poughkeepsie, 1772; living 
on north side of Main street between Catharine and Crannell. Very 
active during the Revolutionary War; one of the committee on cor- 
respondence; a First Lieutenant of D. Co., Dutchess Co. Mil., 1775; 
died September 3d, 1792. 

Tappen, Peteb C. Bom April 13th, 1790 ; son of Dr. Peter Tap- 
pen; had a school on the north side of Main street between Academy 
and Hamilton; died July 9th, 1836. 

Tapping, Elisha C. Born 1789; Society, 1828; house southeast 
corner Mill and Washington streets; died September 6th, 1849. 

Thelbebg, Elizabeth B. Graduated Woman's Medical College, 
New York City, 1884; Physician at Vassar College, 1889; Society, 
1895. 

Thomas, William. Born Plymouth, Mass., 1786. He came to 
Poughkeepsie to study medicine with his uncle. Dr. John Thomas, 
about 1804. He was licensed to practice by the Society in 1808. Dr. 
Thomas entered the army about 1810 as a surgeon, and served through 
the war, resigning about 1816. After the close of the war, the troops 
with which he was serving were ordered from Baton Rouge to Buffalo, 
and were marched on foot that distance, proceding along the coast 
to New York, and from there via. the Post Road through Pough- 
keepsie. Died December 18th, 1860. 



, Thompson, Chaeles Henet. Born Freehold, N. J., August 
1843; graduated P. and S., 1868; Fishkill and Society, 1868; Bel- 
mar, N. J., 1906. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 581 

Thoen, Benjamin S. Born November 9th, 1814; brother of Dr. 
J. S. Thorn, Milan; died March 5th, 1877. 

Thorn, James. Born New Hackensack, N. Y., June 21st, 1763; 
Society, 1806. As a commentary on the changes in social customs, it 
may be noted that at Dr. Thome's funeral the best families were repre- 
sented, and the bearers were leading men socially and professionally. 
They were so drunk that the burial was delayed two hours for them 
to sober up suiBciently to be able to carry the body from the house. 
Died New Hackensack, June 26th, 1816. 

Thoene, John S. Born Milan, August 14th, 1821 ; graduated 
Castleton, Vt., 1843; practiced Bangall, Stanfordville and Millbrook; 
Society, 1854 ; died November 11th, 1879. 

Thobne, Rosert. Poughkeepsie. In 1795 the first charge for 
treating prisoners at the jail in this county was made by Dr. Thorn. 
He was prominent socially and professionally. 

Thorn, Stephen. Bom 1737; died October 16th, 1795. Dr. 
Thorn's charge book is still in existence, and shows very clearly the 
condition of the practice of medicine at that period. He did but 
three things, a puke, a purge, and a bleed, and the charge for each 
was two shillings. His medical library consisted of but one book, 
pubUshed at Montpelier in 1660, and a very curious book it is. He 
built the red brick house at New Hackensack on the farm adjoining 
the church on the north, now owned by Dr. Bayley, in 1772. 

TiCE, Leon. Bom Brooklyn, N. Y., November 13th, 1864; grad- 
uated L. I. C. Hospital, 1885 ; Rhinebeck and Society, 1895 ; died Oc- 
tober 19th, 1899. 

ToMMNsoN, David. Born 1772; Rhinebeck and Society, 1806; 
Member of Assembly, 1819 ; died New York City, April 25th, 1841 ; 
buried Rhinebeck. 

Traver, Isaac H. Born August 2d, 1814; graduated P. and S., 
1836; Pleasant Valley and Society, 1837; died June 8th, 1892. 

Treadway, Alfred. Bom Colchester, Conn., September 1st, 1781; 
educated at Plainfield Academy ; studied with Dr. Lathrop, settled, at 
South Dover till 1810 ; in 1811 at Hart's Village, succeeding Dr. La- 



582 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

throp, and having Dr. Orton as assistant. He was an excellent busi- 
ness man, slender, tall, with a bright, pleasant face, and courteous 
manners, and interesting in conversation. Died April 26th, 1826. 

Teipp, Chaeies H. Bom Town of Washington, December £5th, 
1855 ; graduated Bellevue, 1881 ; Washington and Society, 1882 ; 
Clinton Comers, 1884. 

Teipp, Delmae C. Born Ithaca, N. Y., July 6th, 1848 ; gradu- 
ated BellevTze, 1875; Beekmanville, 1885; Society, 1886; succeeding 
Dr. Nicholson. 

Tkivett, ; Elias C. Bom England, March 24th, 1790 ; licensed 
Society, 1814; State Society, 1836; Society, 1828. Had drug store 
288 Main street. Died April 12th, 1866. 

Undeehh/X, Anthony. Born Westchester County, November 12th, 
1818; son of Dr. Joshua B. Underbill; graduated Bowdoin, 1845; 
New Hackensack, 1845; Society, 1869; died September 4th, 1889. 

Upton Geoege. Bom Valatia, Columbia County, April 26th, 
1811; graduated Jefferson, 1833; LaGrange and Society, 1834-61; 
served in Civil War ; died January 10th, 1878. 

Van Deebuegh, Fedeeal Beekman. Bom May 11th, 1788 ; Beek- 
man and Society, 1810 ; removed, 1812 ; died January 23d, 1868. 

Vandeehofp, Thomas P. Bom 1805; died Rhinebeck, December 
3d, 1838. 

Van Dusee, Amos Edwaed. Bom 1835; graduated P. and S., 
1859 ; Assistant Surgeon Civil War ; Medical Staff of St. Barnabas 
Hospital; lost his business from neglect, and died July 19th, 1892. 

Van Dusee, Nathaniel M. Born Cornwall, N. Y., 1820; gradu- 
ated P. and S., 1852; Hughsonville, 1854; Society, 1859; Wapping- 
ers Falls, 1873; retired, 1885. 

Van Etten, Coenelius S. Bora Pike County, Pennsylvania, Sep- 
tecaber 13th, 1846 ; graduated University Pennsylvania, 1873 ; Rhine- 
beck, 1876; Society, 1905. 




GKORGE R. FINTON. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 583 

Van Kleeck, Baltus Livingston. Born 1774. Son of Dr. Law- 
rence Van Kleeck, a physician of New York City, who moved to Pough- 
keepsie, where he died before 1783. Dr. Van Kleeck, after practic- 
ing in Poughkeepsie for some years, removed to Newburgh, where he 
was a busy and honored practitioner until his death. May 9th, 1843. 

Van Kleeck, James Livingston, Brother of Baltus ; and M. D. ; 
died Poughkeepsie, 1816. The brothers joined the Society 1806. 

Van Vliet, Isaac Fisk. Born 1822; graduated P. and S., 1844; 
Rhinebeck and Society, 1866 ; died February 23d, 1876. 

Van Wagnek, Geoege H. Bom Lloyd, N. Y., July 1st, 1851 ; 
graduated Albany, 1881 ; Schoharie, 1881-6 ; Wappingers Falls and 
Society, 1887. * 

Van Wyck, David Baenes. Born LaGrange, April 24th, 1852; 
graduated Bellevue, 1889; LaGrangeville, Manchester Bridge; So- 
ciety, 1890. 

Van Wyck, Edmund. Born New Hamburgh, 1850; student of Dr. 
N. M. Van Duser; graduated P. and S., 1873; New Hamburgh and 
Society, 1875 ; Wappingers FaUs, 1876 ; died February 23d, 1885. 

Van Wyck, Richard C. Born East FishkiU, December 30th, 1843 ; 
graduated P. and S., 1867; practiced in Denver, in Virginia and 
Hopewell Junction and joined the Society 1883. Thrown from his 
carriage in his door-yard and killed January 28th, 1896. 

Veemilyea, John R. Bom October 17th, 1796; Fishkill and So- 
ciety, 1830-61 ; died June 7th, 1871. 

Veumilyea, Valentine Mott. Born LaGrange, 1818; graduated 
P. and S., 1844 ; Fishkill Landing, 1844-54 ; died Sandwich, HI., May 

7th, 1906. : ■ ' i' ij-i^iy 

ViGEANT, Joseph E. Born Lee, Mass., 1872; graduated Albany, 
1896; Red Hook and Society, 1904. 

VON Tiling, Johannes H. M. A. Born Dillmarshaf, Russia, 
1875 ; graduated Bonn, 1901 ; Poughkeepsie, 1904 ; Society, 1905. 

Waed, David Boyd. Born Pleasant Valley, N. Y., March 13th, 
1853; A. B., Hamilton College, 1873; student of Dr. E. H. Parker; 



584 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

graduated P. and S., 1876; Wheeling, W. V., till 1879; Poughkeep- 
sie and Society, 1879 ; Medical Staff of Vassar Brothers' Hospital and 
St. Barnabas Hospital; died 1908. 

Ward, Jonathan. Born 1780; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1807; 
his office was at No. 266 Main street; died typhoid fever, September 
13th, 1813. 

Watt, James. Graduated University Maryland, 1863; Pough- 
keepsie and Society, 1867 ; Union Bridge, Md., 1900. 

Weavee, Feedekick B. Born Galatinville, N. Y., 1875; gradu- 
ated Albany, 1898 ; Hyde Park and Society, 1901. 

Webb, DeWitt. Born Chnton, N. Y., December 19th, 1838; 
graduated P. and S., 1863; Chnton and Society, 1866; Poughkeepsie 
in the drug business at 339 Main street; Member of Assembly, 1887- 
8 ; St. Augustme, Fla., 1906. 

Webstee, Helen W. Born, 1837; graduated Woman's Medical 
College, Boston; Vassar College and Society, 1875; died New Bed- 
ford, Mass., July 19th, 1904. A woman of unusual professional 
ability and good common sense. 

Wellman, Geokge Makvin. Born Springfield, Mass., February 24, 
1837 ; graduated Amherst A. B., 1861 ; M. D., Georgetown, N. C, 
1868 ; Dover Plains, 1869 ; Society, 1871 ; died January 13th, 1902. 

WheeI/Ee, Gamelial. Born January 20th, 1786; Rhinebeck and 
Society, 1828; Upper Red Hook; died March 20th, 1859. 

Wheelee, William. Born August 12th, 1763 ; Rhinebeck and So- 
ciety, 1806 ; Upper Red Hook ; died April 14th, 1810. 

White, Baetow. Born Yorktown, Westchester County, N. Y., 
November 7th, 1776. A student of his father. Dr. Ebenezer White. 
He commenced the practice of his profession at Fishkill, succeeding 
Dr. Edward Hunting in 1800. Dr. White was not only an active, 
useful practitioner of medicine for forty-five years, but also a leader in 
all the useful activities of the community in which he hved so long. 
His*success brought many students to his office, some of whom attained 
high rank in their profession. Among them were Dr. Cornelius De 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 585 

Pew and Stephen Rapalje, Surgeons in the Navy, and Dr. John 
Cooper and Isaac Van Voorhis, who served in the army. Others were 
scattered through various parts of the State. In 1824< Dr. White 
was chosen to represent this district in Congress, and in 1840 he was 
a Presidential Elector. He received the honorary degree of M. D. 
from the Regents of the University in 1845. He was a strictly tem- 
perate man, of mild manners, making and keeping many valuable 
friends, who cheered and brightened his last days, which were passed 
amid an unusually happy environment. He died December 12th, 1862. 

White, Henky D. Born Brooklyn, N. Y., February 8th, 1866; 
great grandson of Dr. Ebenezer White, grandson of Dr. Bartow 
White ; graduated P. and S., 1887 ; Hopewell JuncJ^ion, 1896 ; Society, 
1897. 

White, Howell. Born Fishkill, N. Y., 1856 ; student of Dr. Oli- 
ver White ; graduated Bellevue, 1879 ; son of Dr. L. H. White ; Fish- 
kill, 1879 ; Society, 1880. 

Whitewell, William Scollay. Graduated Harvard, 1872; 
Fishkill-on-Hudson, 1901. 

WiLBEB, Benjamin S. Born July 22d, 1795; student of Dr. Uri 
Judd; Pine Plains and Society, 1822; died June 26th, 1871. 

WiLBER, Henry Clay. Born Pine Plains, 1845 ; graduated Belle- 
vue, 1867 ; Society, 1871 ; son of Dr. B. S. Wilber. 

Wilcox, Jekemiah. Amenia, 1784. 

Williams, George H. Born Johnstown, N. Y., May 30th, 1860; 
L. R. C. P. Edinburgh, 1883; M. R. C. S., London, 1884; M. D., 
Yale, 1890; FishkiU, 1894; Society, 1895. 

WiLLLVMs, Phebe Thorne. Born Millbrook, N. Y. ; daughter of 
Dr. J. S. Thorne; graduated Woman's Medical College, New York 
City, 1878 ; Millbrook and Society, 1878 ; Poughkeepsie. 

Wilson, Henry C. Bom Derby, Vt., 1837; M. D., University 
Vermont, 1863; Acting Assistant Surgeon, Civil War; Matteawan, 
1867. 

Wilson, John Powell. Born Hobart, N. Y., January 27th, 1845 ; 
graduated P. and S., 1870 ; Stanford, 1871 ; Pleasant Valley to 1879 ; 
Society, 1872; Poughkeepsie, 1906. 



586 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

WixsoN, John S. Bom Stuyvesant, N. Y., January 10th, 1865; 
graduated P. and S., 1887; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1888; Phy- 
sician to Orphans' Home. 

WiMPELBEKG, Samuel. Bom Poughkeepsie, March 27th, 1861; 
graduated Jefferson, 1883; Poughkeepsie and Society, 1884); re- 
signed; died July 12, 1907. 

Wood, Lottis C. Born New York City, July 24th, 1856; gradu- 
ated BeUevue, 1881; Wappingers Falls and Society, 1886; Pough- 
keepsie, 1899. 

WoETMAN, Dennis. Born Brooklyn, February 21st, 1796; East 
Fishkill and Society, 1817 ; died May 3d, 1864. 

Young, John. Bom Port Glenone, Ireland, April 16th, 1822; 
America, 1826 ; graduated P. and S., 1844 ; New York City to 1867 ; 
Fishkill; died September 2d, 1893. 

MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS. 

Hudson Riveb State Hospital. The erection of a State Hospital 
for the Insane somewhere along the Hudson River was authorized by 
the Legislature in 1866, but its location was left to a Commission, 
with power to obtain the most advantageous terms from the rival 
counties. It was brought to Poughkeepsie only after a considerable 
struggle on the part of the enterprising men of the day. When the 
Dutchess County Supervisors met in November the contest had nar- 
rowed down to Poughkeepsie and Newburgh. The site most favorably 
considered comprised two hundred acres belonging to James Roosevelt, 
about a mile north of the city. The city and county were asked to 
pay $30,000 towards its purchase, and on November 18th a paper, 
signed by Mayor Innis, the aldermen and a committee of citizens who 
pledged themselves to raise this amount, was submitted to the Super- 
visors, who were asked to issue county bonds for two-fifths of the 
amount. The aldermen who signed this paper were S. B. Wheeler, 
Sidney Fowler, Daniel Clifford, Robert Slee, Oscar A. Fowler, William 
Shields, Joseph H. Marshall, E. P. Bogardus, P. G. Beneway and 
Samuel TuthiU, and the citizens Cornelius DuBois, B. J. Lossing, 
George Corhes, E. L. Beadle, J. P. H. TaUman and George Innis. 

The Board of Supervisors passed a resolution December 4th, to 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 587 

issue $12,000 of county bonds, but Orange County raised its offer, 
and after overcoming considerable opposition from Fishkill and other 
towns whose Supervisors did not see how their sections could be bene- 
fitted, the board reconsidered its action and voted to issue bonds for 
two-fifths of the amount needed, "said two-fifths not to exceed 
$34,000." The expenses of the site were stated to be $80,000. By 
the time it had been definitely ascertained that the required amount 
would be raised it was too late on Saturday afternoon, December 29th, 
to catch a train for Newburgh, where the commission was in session, 
and about to decide the question of location. Nothing daunted, a 
telegram was sent asking the commission to wait for the arrival of a 
committee from Poughkeepsie. George Morgan brought out two of 
his "quick steppers," and a two-seated sleigh, aild with John P. H. 
Tallman, Alderman Slee and George W. Davids, began at 6. p. m. a 
memorable drive to Newburgh. Mr. Davids, describing it a day or 
two later wrote: "The night was a terrible one, the wind blowing a 
perfect hurricane and the snow drifting heavily. Twice we got off 
the road, the snow blinding us in such a manner, and the track blown 
so full, that it was utterly impossible in some places to find the way." 

Reaching Fishkill Landing after 9 o'clock they found that the ferry 
had ceased its regular trips and was only running occasionally to keep 
the ice from blocking it. The captain was at length found and in- 
formed the party that he would probably start in about an hour. 
"He was persuaded to go at once." Mr. Davids does not mention the 
persuasive force, but the story afterwards told placed it at $50. The 
commission had about given up the Poughkeepsie committee when they 
finally arrived, and after a conference lasting until 1 a. m. at the 
Orange Hotel, Poughkeepsie secured the prize. 

Work began at the hospital site the following summer, and in 1871 
sixty patients were admitted and a large amount of work was in 
progress. The State Hospital has been constantly increased in size 
until now it has a population of nearly 3,000 patients. The money 
disbursed to laboring men in its construction has been a factor of 
importance in local business, and its large force of physicians, nurses 
and attendants, numbering more than six hundred, add much to the 
life of the city. Dr. Joseph M. Cleaveland was made the superin- 
tendent at the opening and remained until May 1, 1893, when he was 
succeeded by Dr. Charles W. Pilgrim. The first board of managers. 



588 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

in 1867, was Dr. Charles P. Agnew and Dr. A. Cook Hull, of New 
York; State Treasurer WiUiam A. Howland, of Matteawan; Mayor 
George Clark, of Newburgh; Hon. A. W. Palmer, of Amenia; Dr. 
Beadle and Cornelius DuBois, of Poughkeepsie. The architects were 
Vaux, Withers & Co., of New York. 

Matteawan State Hospital. In 1846 a law was enacted which 
permitted officers of the State prison to transfer to the Utica Asylum 
any convict who became insane while serving sentence. These lunatics 
were so vicious and troublesome to the Utica management that eight 
years later it succeeded in convincing the Legislature that it would 
be a good plan to build a separate institution for this class of patients. 
Funds were appropriated and is 1856 work was commenced. This 
building was located at Auburn Prison, but had an independent and 
distinct administration, wholly apart from the prison proper. It 
was opened for patients February 2, 1859, and was the first institution 
of its kind in the world, so far as is known. At the beginning it 
cared for the convict class only and was known as the State Asylum 
for Insane Convicts. Some ten years after its opening the name was 
changed to the State Asylum for Insane Criminals and the Courts were 
given power to commit to its care criminals brought before them 
whose insanity was evident at the time of the commission of the crimi- 
nal act. The institution increased in size until finally the Auburn 
buildings became too small for their population. In 1886, largely 
through the efforts of Dr. Carlos F. Macdonald, a commission was 
appointed to determine the best method of caring for the criminal 
insane. This step had a cordial public and press support. The com- 
mission, after much consideration of the subject, advocated the pur- 
chase of the Dutchess County site and the erection thereon of the 
buildings now known as the Matteawan State Hospital. In April, 
1892, the first patients were received by transfer from the abandoned 
Auburn institution. The initial population was 261. In five years it 
had practically trebled. The convict part of the population were 
taken to Dannemora in 1900. So that the hospital now serves prin- 
cipally as an adjunct to the Courts, detaining patients under the 
following conditions: First — Those simply charged with crime. Sec- 
onds—Those accused of crime and awaiting indictment. Third — ■ 
Those under indictment and awaiting trial. Fourth — Those acquitted 
on ground of insanity. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 589 

In addition to the foregoing, all committed by the Courts directly, 
the hospital receives from penal and reformatory institutions all female 
inmates evincing insanity, as well as male patients held on simple mis- 
demeanor charges. The present population is about seven hundred 
and fifty. To provide for this number, a new group of buildings is 
in course of erection. When these shall be complete the capacity of 
the hospital will be about a thousand beds. At the time of the open- 
ing of the Matteawan buildings, Dr. Henry E. Allison was the Medi- 
cal Superintendent. He died in November, 1904, and was succeeded 
by Dr. Robert B. Lamb, who directs the hospital management at the 
present time. 

St, Baknabas Hospital, incorporated March 16, 1871, was started 
by Dr. Edward H. Parker. The first trustees were Rev. P. K. Cady, 
rector of Christ's Church; Rev. R. F. Crary, of the Church of the 
Holy Comforter; Rev. S. H. Synnott, of St. Paul's Church; WiUiam 
A. Davis, S. M. Buckingham, Robert Sanford, Dr. E. H. Parker, 
Benjamin Van Loon, and Winthrop Atwell. The Hospital was first 
opened in Garden street, then in 1873 was transferred to 108 North 
Chnton street, which was purchased for $5,200. Although St. Bar- 
nabas Hospital was abandoned when Vassar Hospital was opened, 
the St. Barnabas fund is stiU in existence, and there is now a prospect 
of using this money toward the erection of a new St. Barnabas Hos- 
pital. 

Vassar Beothees' Hospital was founded in 1882 by Matthew Vas- 
sar, Jr., under the name of Vassar Hospital. Following the further 
endowment of the institution by his brother, John Guy Vassar, the 
name was changed to Vassar Brothers' Hospital. 

The original board of trustees were John Guy Vassar, Irene B. Vas- 
sar, Oliver H. Booth, James H. Weeks, Stephen M. Buckingham, 
Henry L. Young and Joseph M. Cleaveland, M. D. 

The hospital located above the banks of the Hudson, on the out- 
skirts of the city, surrounded by seventeen acres of open grounds, is 
admirably situated for the care of the sick. 

Additions have been made from time to time to the original build- 
ing, these additions being required by the constantly increasing work 
of the hospital. A library building including modern laboratories was 
erected in 1898, and four years later additions were made to the main 



590 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

wards and new private rooms opened. At present there are fifty-two 
ward beds and eleven private rooms. Two years ago the re-equipment 
of the entire hospital was begun and has been continued to the present 
time. During these two years an isolated building for the care of 
contagious diseases arising in the hospital, has been erected. 

Dr. Guy Carleton Bayley was surgeon-in-chief and superintendent 
of the hospital from its opening until 1906, when he was succeeded by 
Dr. Henry Greenwood Bugbee. The present officers and board of 
trustees is composed of Frank Van Kleeck, President; Guilford Dud- 
ley, Vice-president; Henry Booth, Treasurer; Benjamin M. Fowler, 
Secretary and Assistant Treasurer; Floy M. Johnston, William F. 
Booth, William T. Reynolds and James Hyde Young. 

Highland Hospital, Town of FishkiU. This institution was 
founded May 1, 1871, as the result of a meeting held at the house of 
Henry Slack, M. D., January 19, 1871, at which were present Gen. 
Joseph Howland, Judge J. J. MoneU, Rev. Dr. Masters, Rev. H. E. 
Duncan and Dr. Slack. Gen Howland offered for use as a hospital 
for one year, a house owned by him in the village of Matteawan 

The first trustees and the incorporators were Joseph Howland, 
Silas G. Smith, Francis R. Masters, John J. MoneU, Rev. Henry E. 
Duncan, Walter Brett, Henry Slack, M. D., Lyman Robinson and 
Smith T. Van Buren, none of whom survive. 

The house, the use of which was given by Gen. Howland, continued to 
be so occupied until May, 1874, when it was deeded to the Hospital 
Association by Gen. Howland and his wife, as a free gift. In 1876 an 
addition was erected which nearly doubled the capacity of the institu- 
tion. In 1887 the need of new and larger quarters became apparent, 
but it was not until August 15, 1901, that ground was broken for the 
present spacious building, which was ready for occupancy May 1, 
1902. 

The officers of this hospital are Winthrop Sargent, President; 
William T. Blodgett, Vice-president; Mrs. Samuel Verplanck, Secre- 
tary; Samuel K. Phillips, Treasurer. 

It was a source of great satisfaction to the editor of this history that Dr. Guy 
Carleton Bayley consented to write the foregoing chapter, for there is no one as 
thqfoughly equipped with information and as well qualified for the task as he. 

In 1906 he prepared "An Historical Address delivered before the Dutchess 
County Medical Society at its Centennial Meeting at Vassar Institute, January 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 591 

lOthj 1906, with a Record of the Medical Profession of Dutchess County from 
1740 to 1906." 

This address was privately printed by its author. 

It is an exceedingly interesting record of the medical profession of our county 
and bears evidence of an immense amount of careful investigation. Not only the 
medical profession, but aU students of local history, are under obligations to Dr. 
Bayley for his pains-taking work — ^wholly a labor of love for his honored pro- 
fession. 

For the information concerning the Hudson River State Hospital for the Insane 
and the Matteawan State Hospital acknowledgment is given to the Superintend- 
ents of said Institutions, Dr. Charles W. Pilgrim and Dr. Robert B. Lamb. — ^Enrroa. 



THE HOMEOPATHIC MEDICAL SOCIETY OF DUTCHESS COUNTY. » 

IN 1860, the subject of the organization of a flounty Medical So- 
ciety was pressed upon the attention of the homeopathic physi- 
cians of Dutchess County by Horace M. Paine, M. D., secretary 
of the State Homeopathic Medical Society. The following year Dr. 
J. F. Merritt published in the two weekly papers in Poughkeepsie, a 
card to homeopathic physicians, naming a time and place of meeting 
of those favoring an immediate organization. Accordingly a meet- 
ing was held at the Gregory House in Poughkeepsie, November 27, 

1861, at which the Homeopathic Medical Society of Dutchess County 
was formed and the following officers chosen: Federal Vanderburg, 
Rhinebeck, President; Ephraim Case, Clinton Corners, Vice-president; 
Ernst F. Hoifman, Poughkeepsie, Secretary and Treasurer. The 
Censors were: John Hornby, Poughkeepsie; Stephen G. Cook, Stan- 
fordville, and Jesse F. Merritt, Pleasant Plains. A constitution and 
bylaws were then adopted. Article 5 of the constitution makes "any 
regularly licensed physician who has complied with the requisitions 
of the laws of the State and who shall avow his belief in the homeo- 
pathic maxim, svmilia similibus curantur, eligible to membership on a 
majority vote of the members present at a regular meeting." 

Under an act of the Legislature, passed April 17, 1862, a reorgani- 
zation of the State Society was effected whereby county societies then 
existing became auxihary to the State Society, and the next year it 
was formally inaugurated. 

At the second meeting of the Society of this county, February, 

1862, Dr. Vanderburg read a paper on the "Problem of Life," which 

1. We are Indebted to John C. Otis, M. D., for the historical review of this society. 



592 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

was deposited in the archives for future discussion. Accounts of in- 
teresting cases in practice were given verbally by Doctors Cook, Mer- 
ritt and Hornby. 

At the third meeting, held in May, 1862, Doctors G. Lorrillard, G. 
C. Lansing and Benjamin Lansing, all of Rhinebeck, were proposed 
for membership. The Society seal was received and attached to the 
by-laws, and the Secretary was ordered to deposit them with the 
Coxmty Clerk, in accordance with the laws of the State. 

April 2, 1867, communications from Dr. Jones, of Albany, and the 
Secretary of the State Society were read, "and it was resolved that 
members of the Society be requested to use their personal influence 
with their patrons, and endeavor to procure homeopathic treatment 
to be adopted by the authorities in the new insane asylum to be erected 
near this city." 

October 6, 1868, it was resolved: "That the code of medical ethics 
adopted by the American Institute of Homeopathy, at their 21st 
annual session, held in St. Louis in June, 1868, be the standard of 
professional behavior among the members of the Society." 

At the meeting held October, 1871, the Society was reported to be 
in a flourishing condition, and the Homeopathic Dispensary which 
had been established in Poughkeepsie, to be achieving excellent re- 
sults. No succeeding reports of the annual meetings, however, were 
recorded until 1874, when the following officers were chosen: Ephraim 
Case, President; John Hornby, Vice-president; John C. Otis, Secre- 
tary and Treasurer. In subsequent meetings there appears to have 
been a gradual decrease of interest — often no quorum — and in 1891, 
the organization is termed by the State Society, "Moribund." 

In 1893 the Society was reorganized, and the following officers 
elected : John C. Otis, President ; W. R. Case, Vice-president ; Anna 
C. Howland, Secretary and Treasurer. Doctors C. E. Lane, F. A. 
Faust, J. G. Dawson, J. F. Goodell, S. I. Jacobus and Milton Angell 
were elected members. A committee was appointed to write a new 
constitution and by-laws. Meetings were held regularly from Octo- 
ber, 1900, to October, 1906, and the following year the members united 
with the Dutchess County Medical Society. 

A history of homeopathy in Dutchess County must necessarily be 
intomplete from the fact that all records were burned on February 
19, 1900, necessitating recourse to memory alone. 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 593 

The first homeopathic physician of Dutchess County was, probably, 
Dr. Federal Vanderburg, a New York City practitioner, who had a 
country home at Rhinebeck about 1820. Dr. Vanderburg was a 
native of Beekman, Dutchess County, N. Y. He studied medicine with 
Dr. Stephen Smith, a leading physician of New Milford, Conn., and 
must have graduated about 1808. He commenced practice at Geneva, 
N. Y., remaining there for twenty years, and returned to New York 
about 1830. He obtained his knowledge of homeopathy from Dr. 
Gram, who was among the first homeopathic physicians in this coun- 
try. After giving up practice in New York City, Dr. Vanderburg 
did a great deal of work in the vicinity of Rhinebeck, mostly in con- 
sultation. During his residence in Rhinebeck he persuaded Dr. Mar- 
tin Freligh, who was then in practice at Sauge*ties, to remove to 
Rhinebeck, and for many years he was the local physician in that 
town. 

About 1843 Dr. Vanderburg induced Dr. Asahal Hall, of Fishkill, 
to adopt the new method of treatment. Dr. Hall soon after removed 
from Fishkill to Hart's Village, in the vicinity of the present Mill- 
brook, where he practiced for a number of years, finally removing to 
Rhinebeck; he remained there only about a year or two, and some- 
where about 1850 came to Poughkeepsie, where he practiced until his 
death, which occurred in 1878. 

Probably the next homeopathic physician of Dutchess County was 
Dr. Charles Haight, who was bom in the town of Washington, June 
6, 1806. After obtaining a good, common school education, he went 
to New York and studied medicine, returning to Dutchess County 
and practicing at Clinton Corners. He removed from there to 
Hart's Village, where he practiced for several years, finally going 
to Poughkeepsie in 1845, where he enjoyed a large practice until the 
time of his d^ath, September 26, 1891. 

Dr. Haight was succeeded at Clinton Corners by Dr. Ephraim 
Case. Dr. Case was born in Milan, Dutchess County, in the year 
1809, and remained at Clinton Corners until his death in 1880. 

"^'le next homeopathic physician in this county was Dr. Jesse F. 
■itt, of Pleasant Plains. Dr. Merritt was a student of Dr. Van- 
iirg's, a graduate of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and 



594 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

practiced at that place from 1860 to the time of his death, which was 
in 1870. 

About 1858 Dr. William Baxter located at Wappingers Falls, where 
he practiced for a number of years, and at his death, in 1873, he was 
succeeded by his son, Dr. William Baxter, Jr., who still is in practice 
at Wappingers Falls. 

About 1860 Dr. G. C. Lansing commenced practice at Rhinebeck, 
and was succeeded by his nephew. Dr. Benjamin Lansing, who had 
been in practice at Hyde Park for a short time, and who died at 
Rhinebeck in 1888. 

Li 1860 Dr. Ernst HoflFman, a German, came to Poughkeepsie, 
and for a time was associated with Dr. Hall. He was active in all 
pertaining to the homeopathic profession, and was a member of the 
Dutchess County Homeopathic Medical Society. 

Dr. Stephen G. Cook was in practice at Stanfordville for two or 
three years, removing from there to New York City, where he became 
a police surgeon, and died in 1900. 

Dr. George Lorillard was in practice at Red Hook about 1863. 

Dr. John Hornby located in Poughkeepsie in the early 60's, after 
having served seventeen years in the British army in India. He was 
a voluminous writer, very active in the Medical Society, and in the 
latter part of his residence in Poughkeepsie made a specialty of the 
diseases of women. His failing health compelled him to remove to 
Bermuda, where after a residence of about two years, he died, about 
1887. 

Dr. Levi Hubbard practiced homeopathy in Poughkeepsie from '65 
to '75. He was followed by Dr. I. S. P. Lord. Dr. I. S. P. Lord 
succeeded Dr. Ernst Hoffman in practice in the city of Poughkeepsie, 
and was active in medical, temperance and reUgious circles. In 1872 
he removed to California, where he lived until about two or three years 
ago, dying at the advanced age of 92 years. 

Dr. Walter R. Case, son of Dr. Ephraim Case, was graduated from 
tlie New York Homeopathic Medical College in 1865 and commenced 
practice at Hart's Village, where he remained until 1868, when he 



MEDICAL PROFESSION. 595 

removed to Salt Paint ; he practiced there until 1885, and then came 
to Poughkeepsie, in partnership with Dr. John C. Otis, until 1887. 
He then carried on practice by himself until his death, in 1904. 

Dr. Henry N. Avery came to Poughkeepsie in 1865 and remained 
until '71, when he was succeeded by his brother. Dr. Edward W. Avery, 
Henry Avery removing to Minnesota. After a year or two Dr. Ed- 
ward Avery removed to Brooklyn, where he is still in practice. 

In 1868 Dr. Anna C. Howland, a graduate of the Women's Homeo- 
pathic Medical College of New York, a lady from Maine, opened an 
office in Poughkeepsie, where she remained in active practice until her 
death, in 1902. 

Dr. John C. Otis was graduated from the New York Homeopathic 
Medical College, and the Medical Department of the University of 
Vermont, Allopathy, in 1868, and in October of that year located at 
Hart's Village, succeeding Dr. Case, where he remained until Janu- 
ary, 1871, when he removed to Poughkeepsie in partnership with Dr. 
A. Hall. After two years of partnership with Dr. Hall, he commenced 
practice by himself, and in 1878, took into partnership Dr. Taylor 
Lansing, a brother of Dr. Benjamin Lansing, of Rhinebeck. Dr. 
Lansing remained with him until his death in 1880. Dr. Otis is still 
in active practice in Poughkeepsie. Dr. Otis was succeeded at Mill- 
brook by Dr. P. A. Banker, who practiced there for three years and 
then removed to Rhinebeck. Dr. Banker was succeeded at Millbrook 
by Dr. J. F. Goodell, who removed to Rhinebeck, and was succeeded 
at Millbrook by Dr. S. I. Jacobus, who after spending a year in post 
graduate study, located at Millbrook in the spring of 1888, where he 
is still in active practice. 

Dr. Taylor Lansing was a graduate of the Philadelphia Homeo- 
pathic Medical College. He was born near Fonda, N. Y., and came 
to Poughkeepsie in 1877. 

Dr. G. B. I. Mitchell located in Fishkill in 1869, and practiced there 
until 1876, when he removed to New Jersey and practiced with his 
brother. Dr. John J. Mitchell. 

. Frederick A. Faust was graduated from the New York Homeo- 
c Medical College in 1886. After having practiced in Bern, 



596 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Albany County, for one year, he located in Poughkeepsie, where he 
remained until 1898, when continued ill health compelled him to remove 
to Colorado Springs, where he still is in practice. 

Dr. Charles E. Lane was graduated from the New York Homeo- 
pathic Medical College in 1883. After practicing in Clove, Dutchess 
County, for a year or two he removed to Poughkeepsie, where he is 
still in practice. 

Dr. Charles E. Lane was graduated from the New York Homeo- 
Dr. F. Reed Hawley was graduated in 1892 at the New York 
Homeopathic Medical College. Practiced in Brooklyn and Washing- 
ton, D. C, and removed to Staatsburgh, N. Y., in 1896. 

Dr. J. G. Dawson practiced at Fishkill and Matteawan for three 
years, removing to New Jersey about 1905. 

Dr. Augustus Angell was graduated at the New York Homeopathic 
Medical College. He practiced at Salt Point for two years, and then 
removed to Hartford, Conn., where he is still in practice as an eye 
and ear speciahst. He was followed at Salt Point by his brother. Dr. 
Milton Angell, who still remains there. 

Dr. John H. Otis was graduated at the New York Homeopathic 
Medical College in 1894, and immediately commenced practice in 
Poughkeepsie, where he remained until his death, June 30, 1907. 

Dr. A. L. Peckham was graduated at the Hahnemann Medical Col- 
lege, Philadelphia, in 1899. He immediately commenced practice in 
Poughkeepsie, where he still remains. 

Dr. C. Knight Deyo was graduated at the New York Homeopathic 
Medical College in 1905. After a hospital course he came to Pough- 
keepsie in 1907. 




DERRICK BROWN. 



MASONIC FRATERNITY, 597 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 
THE MASONIC FRATERNITY.' 

Ancient Ceaft Masonry. 

THE earliest authentic record of masonry in New York, or, in 
fact, in the American colonies, is the deputation appointing 
Daniel Coxe, of New Jersey, to be provincial grand master 
of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, signed by the Duke of 
Norfolk, grand master of the grand lodge of England, and dated 
"this fifth day of June, 1730, and of Masonry 5730." 

From that date and until 1781 there were five different masonic 
deputations granted to provincial grand masters for New York, by 
the grand lodge of England. 

During this period there were two provincial grand lodges in the 
State of New York, organized at different periods by authority of 
rival grand lodges in England, which were termed the "Moderns" 
and "Ancients." In 1813 these two grand bodies united into what 
is now the "United Grand Lodge of England." 

The provincial grand lodge authorized by the Atholl warrant, 
dated September 5, 1781, existed from December 5, 1782, lo Septem- 
ber 19, 1783, when the British troops evacuated New York City, 
and as the grand lodge was essentially a royalist institution, and a 
majority of its ofllcers and members were connected with the evacuat- 
ing army, the brethren were in a quandry, the solution of which we 
find in the minutes of a grand lodge of emergency, held on the nine- 
teenth of September, 1783, when "The propriety of leaving the grand 
warrant by which this lodge is established in the province of New 
York, being fully discussed, it was resolved that the same should be 
left and remain in the care of such brethren as may hereafter be 
appointed to succeed the present grand officers, the most of whom 
being under the necessity of leaving New York upon the removal of 

1. We are indebted to Bight Worshipful Derrick Brown for the greater portion of the 
material embodied in this chapter. 



598 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

his majesty's troops." This necessitated the election of a complete 
new set of officers, which was immediately done. 

The lodges throughout the State which had received charters from 
the "Modern" provincial grand lodge, in the interim between the dis- 
solution of that body and the organization of the "Ancient" pro- 
vincial grand lodge, had pursued an independent existence, and, 
naturally, under their existing conditions, were loath to surrender 
their warrants to the new body; therefore it was a number of years 
before all the lodges were brought under the control of the new grand 
lodge. This provincial grand lodge, so far as existing records show, 
made no returns to the parent grand body, and in all matters acted 
as an independent grand lodge. 

This state of affairs caused some of the lodges to question the 
legality of its proceedings, and the propriety of paying grand lodge 
dues. This question was settled for all time on the 6th of June, 1787, 
by the grand lodge adopting the report of a committee which re- 
ported : 

"Your committee appointed at the last quarterly communication, in consequence 
of certain resolutions of St. John's lodge, respecting the warrant under which the 
grand lodge isi established, report their opinion as foUows, viz: That the grand 
lodge of this State is established, according to ancient and universal usages of 
masonry, upon a constitution formed by the representatives of the regular lodges, 
convened under a legal warrant from the grand lodge of England, dated the fifth 
day of September, in the year of masonry five thousand seven hundred and 
eighty-one, the most noble Prince John the Third, Duke of Atholl, being the 
then grand master. And your committee further beg leave to report that in their 
opinion, nothing is necessary or essential in the future proceedings of the grand 
lodge upon the subject matter referred to them, but that a committee be appointed 
to prepare a draft of the style of warrant to be hereafter granted by the grand 
lodge, conformable to the said constitution. All of which is, nevertheless, most 
respectfully submitted to the wisdom of the most worshipful grand lodge." 

In this manner the grand lodge declared itself an independent grand 
body, supreme within its own jurisdiction. The date of transition of 
the grand lodge from a provincial to an independent State masonic 
organization might be a subject of difference of opinion, but the 
grand lodge, however, numbers its annual communications from the 
earlier date, viz., 1781, under the charter issued by the "Ancients." 
• At different times the grand lodge has been disrupted by internal 
strife and schisms which continued several years, but since June, 



MASONIC FRATERNITY. 599 

1858, peace and harmony have prevailed among the fraternity. The 
severest trial that freemasonry has had to endure was the anti- 
masonic crusade that began in 1826, which assailed the fraternity 
throughout the land and resulted in many of the lodges having their 
charters forfeited. 

A political party was founded at the tjme on prejudice and hatred. 
Politicians mounted the whirlwind, and rode into power on the storm. 
Fanatics in the forum, at the bar and in the pulpit inflamed the pas- 
sions of men, and aroused the bitterest enmity against freemasonry. 
Men of the highest social and masonic standing were threatened with 
poHtical ostracism; to be a mason was to be an object of suspicion, 
and often of persecution; the lodge rooms were deserted, charters 
were surrendered, and the craft became disheartenifd at the situation. 
Some members of the fraternity openly declared their withdrawal, 
and were known as "seceding masons" in the community. After ten 
years of bitter feeling and hatred against the society of Free and 
Accepted Masons, the storm of persecution began to subside; the 
calmer and better judgment of men prevailed ; the craft took courage, 
and masonic lodges again opened their doors and resumed labor. 

Wabeen Lodge, No. 32. The first Masonic lodge organized in 
Dutchess County, now in existence, was Warren Lodge, No. 32, 
located at Schultzville in the town of Clinton. It is one of the oldest 
lodges in this section of the State, and one of the few that did not 
succumb to the anti-masonic storm of 1826. 

The records of the Grand Lodge say that on the 10th of June, 
1807, a dispensation was issued to certain members of the order 
living at Pine Plains, which was then a part of the Northeast town- 
ship, authorizing them to establish a lodge of Free Masons at that 
point. Under that dispensation from the Hon. De Witt Clinton, who 
was then a Grand Master, the lodge was constituted and dedicated on 
the 24th of January, 1808. At its constitution the following mem- 
bers of the order acted as grand lodge officers: Worshipful Brother 
Samuel Edmonds of St. Tammany Lodge, Grand Master; S. Carol, 
Deputy Grand Master; I Pierson, Grand Senior Warden; Samuel 
Owen, Grand Junior Warden; Enos Hopkins, Grand Secretary; 
Aaron E. Winchell, Grand Treasurer; Peter Mills, Grand Senior 
Deacon ; Jonathan Reynolds, Grand Junior Deacon. 

On this occasion the following named brethren were installed as 



600 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

officers of Warren Lodge, No. 157: Martin Lawrence, Worshipful 
Master; Ezra L. Barrett, Senior Warden; Leonard Barton, Junior 
Warden; Benjamin R. Bostwick, Secretary; Israel Harris, Treas- 
urer; Joshua Culver, Senior Deacon; Thomas Stevenson, Junior 
Deacon. At this communication Benjamin Lewis was proposed for 
membership, and he was initiated as Entered Apprentice on March 
8th, 1808. 

During the time that the lodge was located at Pine Plains, the 
meetings were held in a room which might be rented in a private house, 
and for various reasons the place of meeting was changed almost 
every year. The meetings were usually held at four o'clock in the 
afternoon on Tuesday preceding a full moon, but changes in the day 
and hour were very frequent until 1812, when the first Tuesday on 
or after a full moon was adopted, and still later the time was changed 
to Thursday on or preceding a full moon, and the third Saturday 
following. 

In those days it was the custom of the fraternity to celebrate the 
anniversary of St. John the Evangelist on the 24th of June, and 
Warren Lodge observed the anniversary either by inviting other 
lodges to be their guests, or they being the guests of some sister 
lodge. There were four lodges that celebrated this festival together 
quite frequently; they were Temple, Lafayette, Hiram and Washing- 
ton, and they must have been located not very far apart as late as the 
year 1812. In 1817 Temple Lodge extended an invitation to cele- 
brate the occasion with them at the house of S. Dakin in the town 
of Northeast, of which town the village of Pine Plains forms part, 
but whether Temple Lodge was at that time located in the village of 
Northeast, it is difficult to say. 

In 1823 these lodges and Widow's Son Lodge, located at Clermont ; 
Montgomery, located at Salisbury, Conn., and Montgomery, located 
at Rhinebeck, celebrated the festival on the invitation of Warren 
Lodge. 

In 1824! a lodge named Columbia is mentioned, and in that same 
year Warren Lodge was invited to celebrate St. John's Day with 
Solomon's Lodge, which was located at Poughkeepsie. 

In celebrating these festivals the lodges would meet early in the 
dgijr, have a parade with a band of music composed of clarionets, bas- 
soons and drums, and then listen to a sermon, or an address, by a 



MASONIC FRATERNITY. 601 

minister, to be followed by a dinner. Such a band of music in those 
days cost $25.00, and as the ministers were not expected to preach 
for nothing, they received about $20.00 each for their addresses. 

It is recorded that in 1826 the lodge met as early as five o'clock in 
the morning In order to enable it to celebrate the festival with Mont- 
gomery Lodge at Rhinebeck. 

In 184tl an invitation was accepted to celebrate with a lodge in the 
City of Hudson, wMch was probably Hudson Lodge, No. 7. In 1844 
Warren Lodge extended an invitation to all the regular lodges be- 
tween Troy and New York City to celebrate the anniversary of St. 
John the Evangelist. 

With the exception of three, all of the lodges mentioned have be- 
come extinct and others have replaced them. Wfcile a lodge existed 
at Pine Plains village, candidates were received from Ancram, Gala- 
tia, Stanford, Milan and Clinton, and the record shows that one was 
received from Connecticut, and another from Kingston. 

It is to be noted that originally Warren Lodge was No. 157, and 
it held that number until 1839, when on June 7th, the Grand Lodge 
ordered that this lodge No. 157 should be reorganized as No. 32. 
This certificate is in existence, and it is signed and sealed January 1, 
1840. 

While located at Pine Plains the original charter was lost, and 
application was made to the Grand Master for a substitute, and he 
being absent from the State, the Deputy Grand Master, John L. 
Lewis, Sr., granted a dispensation for the lodge to continue its work, 
the dispensation to be in force until the close of the session of the 
Grand Lodge, when Warren Lodge could be present and present a 
petition for a new warrant. Accordingly, on the 8th of May, 1856, 
a new warrant was issued, and Brother Lewis having been elected 
Grand Master, signed the substitute charter. 

Warren Lodge was located at the village of Pine Plains until 1861, 
when it was allowed to change its place of meeting to Lafayetteville 
in the town of Milan, and that continued to be its location until 1864, 
when a masonic hall was built at Schultzville, and in this hall it has 
since held its communications. The hall was erected on a site be- 
queathed by the will of Theodore Schultz, who was a devoted member 
of the lodge, and who died in 1862. He also left the sum of $2,000 
for the erection of a building, which with the contributions of the 



602 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

members, enabled the lodge to complete the building and furnish the 
lodge room. 

In order that the lodge might receive the bequest of Brother Schultz 
it was necessary that the Legislature should pass an act to enable 
Warren Lodge to hold real and personal property. To secure this 
legislative action Benjamin Thorne and Peter Denny, members of the 
lodge, were appointed a committee to make an effort to get a special 
act passed by the Legislature. The enactment was passed, and this 
secured the validity of the bequest, which was never afterward ques- 
tioned. It is hardly possible that Warren Lodge was the first to be 
the beneficiary under a will, yet at that time there was no law on the 
statute books enabling a lodge to hold real and personal property, 
which seemed to have been necessary in this instance, so that Warren 
Lodge may be credited with being the pioneer in this movement, which 
in 1896 was made general by the Legislature of this State, the act 
being known as the Benevolent Orders Act. 

From its constitution in 1808 until 1856 the lodge was opened and 
closed on what was then called "The First Step in Masonry." About 
1824 the word step was expunged and degree inserted. ^All^ lodge 
business was regularly transacted in the Entered Apprentice Degree. 
The Fellow Craft and Master Mason Degrees were simply for the 
purpose of passing the candidates on. This form must have been 
proper at the time, for it is on record that on an official visit of the 
Grand Visitor he presided in the East and the lodge was conducted 
in this manner. 

In the year 1856 the method was changed. The lodge was opened 
on the Master Mason Degree, business was transacted in that degree, 
and the lodge was closed upon it. Candidates were proposed in 
open lodge by the members, and on a motion that must be made and 
carried. Then the name would be placed upon the minutes, and an 
investigating committee appointed, sometimes consisting of as many 
as six members. This was regulated by the maker of the motion. 
In the course of time a motion would be made that the committee 
report, and if the committee reported favorably, a motion would then 
be made that the candidate be balloted for, and, if elected, a motion 
would then be made that the candidate be initiated. Being an initi- 
ated Entered Apprentice he could be present at the opening of the 



MASONIC FRATERNITY. 603 

lodge^ and on motion he could be passed to the order of Fellow Craft, 
or passed to the sublime degree of Master Mason. 

At a communication held in 1856 the petitions of twelve candidates 
were presented. This is notable on account of the large number pre- 
sented at one time. They were all elected. The first record of a 
printed petition being used by the candidate was in the year 1823. 

The Grand Lodge honors have been bestowed upon Warren Lodge 
only once. Brother EHas Hicks filled the position of Grand Secre- 
tary to Grand Lodge in 1822 and 1824. 

Royal Aech Masonky. Royal Arch Masonry in Dutchess County 
is represented by Foughkeepsie Chapter, No. 172, which is located and 
holds its regular convocations in the City of Foughkeepsie. This 
chapter was organized under a dispensation from#the Grand Chapter 
to Royal Arch Masons in the State of New York, and its first con- 
vocation was held on the 11th day of June in the year 1860. At the 
following annual convocation of the Grand Chapter, held in the City 
of Albany in February, 1861, a charter was issued bearing date Feb- 
ruary 7, 1861. The officers of the Grand Chapter at that time were: 
James M. Austin, Grand High Friest; Sylvester Gilbert, Deputy 
High Friest ; Augustus Willard, Grand King ; George N. Williams, 
Grand Scribe, and John O. Cole, Grand Secretary. 

The charter members of Foughkeepsie Chapter were John Trow- 
bridge, John Hamlin, Elias G. Hopkins, Albert H. Champlin, William 
C. Arnold, Lemuel A. Chichester, Oliver W. Doty, John Freeman, 
Feter B. -Lawson. The Council oflScers were: John Trowbridge, 
High Friest; John Hamlin, King; Elias G. Hopkins, Scribe. 

The Chapter has been fairly well represented in the Grand Chapter. 
The first appointment from its members was made in 1877, when 
Grand High Friest George Van Vliet appointed William Morgan 
Lee to the position of Grand Frincipal Sojourner in the Grand Chap- 
ter. In 1899 Grand High Friest John W. Palmer appointed Derrick 
Brown to the position of Grand Royal Arch Captain. He held that 
position for two terms, and then was regularly advanced through the 
different chairs of the Grand Chapter, and was its Grand High Friest 
in 1906. He served in that station one year. 

William S. Ackert, of this Chapter, was appointed Assistant Grand 
Lecturer in 1908, and served in that position for two years. 

That the Chapter has done efficient work is shown by the fact that 



604 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



at the beginning of the year 1909 its membership was 274, and that 
there are but twenty-one Chapters in the State with a larger member- 
ship. 

Up to June 8, 1909, there had been registered 568 members, classi- 
fied as follows: Charter members, 9; affiliated members, 31; exalted 
members, 523. 

CnYPTic Masoney. Cryptic Masonry in this county is represented 
by King Solomon Council, No. 31, R. and S. M., which is located in 
the city of Poughkeepsie and holds its stated assemblies in that city. 
Its charter, dated February 4, 1868, permits it to hold assemblies in 
Poughkeepsie or Newburgh, and in its early life it held them at New- 
burgh. For a quarter of a century or more, preceding the date of 
this record, its assemblies have been held in the city of Poughkeepsie. 
It has a membership of 141, and holds its assemblies once in each month. 
Chivalkic Masoney. Chivalric Masonry is represented in this 
county by Poughkeepsie Commandery, No. 43, Knights Templar. It 
was organized October 16, 1867, and worked under dispensation until 
October 7, 1868, when a charter was granted by the Grand Com- 
mandery in annual conclave at New York City. 

Sir Knight John Hamlin was the Commander under dispensation, 
as well as the first Commander under the charter, and the organization 
began its "history" with the following charter members : 

Oliver S. Atkins, of Lafayette, No. 7. 

William Baird, " 

Albert H. Champlin, " 

James H. Cronk, " 

John Hamlin, " 

Elias G. Hopkins, " 

George Lyon " 

Edward B. Parker, " 

Thomas S. Parker, " 

Samuel H. Paulding, " 

James Smith " 

John Schickle, « 

Edward Blankenhorn, Hudson River, No. 35. 

John C. Chatterton, " 

Herman King, " 

John H. Lindley 



MASONIC FRATERNITY. 606 

The commandery has appeared in pubhc on many occasions and 
has made a number of notable pilgrimages. 

On the 24th of June, 1871, it participated in the ceremonies of 
laying the corner stone of the State Capitol at Albany. 

It also acted as escort to the Grand Lodge at the laying of the 
corner stone of the Poughkeepsie Bridge on the 17th of December, 
1873, and at the laying of the corner stone of Eastman College in 
July, 1883. 

Perhaps the most memorable pilgrimage of the commandery was 
that to Washington in 1889, on the occasion of the conclave of the 
Grand Encampment in that city. 

The Grand Commandery of New York met in Poughkeepsie in 
October, 1881, and was entertained by the local commandery. 

The membership at the close of the year 1908 was 171. 

PoUGHKEEPSLE LoDGE, No. 266, was Organized at Poughkeepsie 
May 12, 1852, with nine charter members. The first officers Were: 
A. M. Sweet, W. M. ; John Broas, S. W. ; Samuel Chichester, J. W. ; 
John E. Eisel, Treasurer; Isaac F. Russell, Secretary. The lodge, 
January 1, 1909, reported 321 members. 

Beacon Lodge, No. 283. This lodge is located at Fishkill-on- 
Hudson, and was opened under dispensation October 12, 1852, and 
was consecrated and officers elected March 8, 1853, Rev. Isaac Fran- 
cis being the first W. M. About 460 persons have been members of 
this lodge by initiation and affiliation. July 1, 1909, there were 170 
members. The semi-centennial anniversary of the lodge was cele- 
brated in October, 1903. 

Monumentai. Lodge, No. 374. This lodge is located at Tivoli, 
and was organized July 8, 1855. The charter bears date of July 6, 
and contains the following names as charter officers: Rev. John A. 
Edmonds, Master; Simon Van Namee, S. W. ; Benjamin F. Gedney, 
J. W. Charter members: Samuel Nelson, William Whitting, N. P. 
Tylar. The lodge was incorporated in 1878. 

Rhinebeck Lodge, No. 432, was organized on the 9th day of 
July, 1857. The charter members were: Smith Quick, James Hogan, 
De Witt C. Marshall, Richard R. Sylands, Ambrose Wager and 
Henry M. Taylor. 

The lodge celebrated its fiftieth anniversary July 9, 1907, and its 
first W. M., Smith Quick, then over eighty years of age, presided. 



606 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Shekomeeo Lodge, No. 468, was organized at Mabbettsville. The 
charter is dated June 20, 1858, and its semi-centennial was observed 
with fitting ceremonies. John S. Parker was chosen the first W. M. 
David TaUman, of South Millbrook, is the only living charter member. 

The lodge was removed to Washington Hollow in 1868. January 
1, 1909, there were 111 members. 

Webotuck Lodge, No. 480, was instituted at Millerton in 1859, 
and received its charter June 19, 1860. The officers at that time 
were as follows : L. P. Woods, W. M. ; S. L. Bagley, S. W. ; I. C. 
Smith, J. W. ; Wm. Kelsey, Treasurer ; C. Patterson, Secretary ; P. C. 
Trowbridge, J. D. ; W. N. Knight, S. D. ; L S. Colgrove and John 
Scutt, Masters of Ceremony; Horace Jenks, Tyler. The lodge in 
1909 has a membership of 80. 

Stissing Lodge, No. 615, was organized at Pine Plains in 1866, 
and held its first meeting under a dispensation, July 2d of that 
year, in the hotel then kept by Mrs. Jones. The room set apart for 
the meeting was formerly utilized by old Warren Lodge. The first 
officers were : Lewis D. Huntting, W. M. ; William H. Scutt, S. W. ; 
Clark Guernsey, J. W. ; Isaiah Dibble, Secretary ; Mulford Conkhn, 
Treasurer ; CorneUus Pitcher, S. D. ; Fred Dibble, J. D. ; William 
Carskaddan, Tyler. The lodge moved to their room over the harness 
shop of the late R. D. Hicks in 1868. 

Wappinger's Lodge, No. 671, was instituted September 25, 1867, 
the first W. M. being Mr. John Hunter, who was also a charter mem- 
ber. All the other charter members are dead, with the exception of 
Mr. Thomas W. Goring, now living in Chicago. There have been 
twenty-six Masters of the lodge, eight of whom have passed away. 
This lodge in 1909 has a membership of 90. The elective officers for 
1909 are as follows: James Hunter, W. M. ; Myatt E. Goring, S. 
W. ; I. Raymond Macaulay, J. W. ; J. W. Cornell, Treasurer ; Jos. 
D. Thompson, Secretary; John Bogle, John Hunter, William Halli- 
well, Trustees. 

DovEa Plains Lodge, No. 666, was organized August 13, 1867. 
The charter officers were : Andrew B. Hammond, W. M. ; Andris 
Brant, S. W. ; Isaac G. Sherman, J. W. ; George Hufcut, Treasurer; 
Horace D. Hufcut, Secretary ; Thomas Hammond, Jr., S. D. ; Robert 
C. Swift, J. D. ; p,ev. A. P. Lyon, Chaplain; Isaac A. Morse, Tyler. 
It has a membership, according to the last report, of 116. 



MASONIC FRATERNITY. 607 

Amenia Lodge, No. 672. This lodge is located in Amenia village, 
and was organized January 11, 1868, with the following charter 
members: John H. Thompson, Isaac N. Mead, James T. Upington, 
W. C. Payne, William Reed, A. B. Vedder, J. G. Husted, E. H. N. 
Warner, Henry S. Chapman, John J. Capron, Peter W. Husted, Ros- 
well B. Taylor, Abiah W. Palmer, Allen Wiley, 

Teiune Lodge, No. 782, was organized at Poughkeepsie Febru- 
ary 6, 1879, with thirteen charter members. The charter is dated 
June 7, 1879. The first officers were : William Morgan Lee, W. M. ; 
Henry Hasbrouck, S. W. ; Charles D. Johnson, J. W. ; Ohver S. At- 
kins, Treasurer; Samuel K. Rupley, Secretary. The lodge, January 
1, 1909, had 34.7 members. 

Harlem Valley Lodge, No. 827, was organizedi at Pawling April 
4, 1898, with twenty-four charter members. The membership in 1909 
is 103. C. L. Fletcher was the first W. M. 

Halcyon Lodge, No. 832, was instituted at MiUbrook, May 9, 
1900, with twenty-one charter members. There are, in 1909, 63 
members. John H. Allen held the office of W. M. for the first three 
years. 

Hendrick Hudson Lodge. This lodge is located at Red Hook 
and is the youngest in the county. It was instituted W. D. June 22, 
1909, by Right Worthy George H. Sherman of Poughkeepsie. The 
thirty-one charter members were nearly all affiliated with Monumental 
Lodge of Tivoli. The dispensation was granted to Frank E. Bur- 
nett, W. M. 



608 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.' 

THE first Catholic missionary who came to Manhattan Island 
and who traveled through the State of New York, was the 
Rev. Isaac Jogues, a member of the Society of Jesus. On 
one of his missionary trips among the Indians, in 1642, he was taken 
prisoner and during his captivity they tore oif his finger-nails and 
cut oflF the thumb of his right hand. Four years later, in 1646, he 
was again captured and kiUed by the Indians. 

In 1786, St. Peter's Church — the first Catholic Church in the dio- 
cese of New York — ^was erected in New York City, on the corner of 
Barclay and Church streets. In 1809 the corner stone of St. Pat- 
rick's Cathedral, on Mott street, was laid, and the church consecrated 
in 1815 by Right Rev. Bishop Cheverus, of Boston. 

The priest principally connected with the early missions in New 
York, Pennsylvania and New Jersey was Ferdinand Farmer. He was 
born in South Germany in 1720, and having entered the Society of 
Jesus, was sent to Maryland in 1752. His real name was Steenmeyer, 
but on coming to this country he changed it to one more easily pro- 
nounced by the English speaking people. He was learned and zealous 
and for many years performed priestly duties in Pennsylvania and in 
New Jersey, and seems to have been the first priest to visit Dutchess 
County. This visit appears to have been about October 5, 6 and 7, 



1. For the Interesting bistorlcal matter with reference to the presence and Bettle- 
ment In the County of Dutchess of Catholics, as well as for the account of St. Peter's 
Church, the Marlsts Brothers, St. Andrew's Novitiate, and other general information, the 
editor wishes to acknowledge his Indebtedness to John J. Mylod, Esq., of Poughkeepsie, 
whose careful researches have unearthed much new and interesting material not gen- 
erally known. 

Acknowledgment is also made to the Very Rev. Patrick Daly, V. F., for the account 
of St. Mary's Church, as well as for his interest and assistance In the preparation of 
tbis^ chapter. 

Other acknowledgments of obligation are specifically made under the different headings, 
with reference to the various churches mentioned in the chapter. 




VERY REV. PATRICK DALY, V. F. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 609 

1781, as appears from the records of The American Catholic His- 
torical Society, Vol. 11, page 305. 

In Shea's "Life and Times of Archbishop Carroll," at page 202, 
there appears an account of one of Father Farmer's missionary trips 
and of a visit by him to Dutchess County : 

"In June and July he was again at Philadelphia and in lower Jersey; then in 
September, crossing to Greenwich, N. J., he made his way to Mount Hope, Green- 
wood Lake, Ringwood, and hearing of Canadian and Acadian Catholics at Fishkill, 
passed through the valley by a well-known route. We can conceive the joy of 
these forlorn Catholics at the sudden appearance of a priest. He records the bap- 
tism of fourteen near FishldU, in New York, with names like Monly, Merlet, Por- 
teau, Ferriole, Bouvet, Lafleur, PoUin, Constantin, Feniole, Varley, Guilmet. Carry- 
ing his chapel service as he did, we may infer that he said mass, at this time, 
October, 1781, in the Canadian camp near Fishkill." 

In "Catholics and the American Revolution," by Martin I. J. Griffin, 
published by the author in 1907, Volume 1st, pages ll*, et seq., we 
find some interesting and valuable information as to the presence in 
Dutchess County during the Revolutionary War of Catholics in the 
military service: 

"When in the fall of 1775, the Americans under Generals Schuyler, Montgomery 
and Arnold invaded Canada with the purpose of holding it by conquest or to 
insure its neutrality, the great body of the Canadian people, undoubtedly, welcomed 
the 'Rebels,' aided by the ready sale of supplies, though of course, all increased 
prices as a more active demand had arisen, and also co-operated in various ways 
In helpfulness to those who had, though as an armed body, come to their country. 
This spirit of good wiU was in a short time destroyed by the course of conduct 
of the Americans and by the Canadians, the expected failure of the expeditions. 

"However while the good will spirit existed and many were joining the several 
corps as volunteers. Congress resolved, on January 30, 1776, to organize two regi- 
ments of Canadians. As they were not to be attached to any of the States they 
became known as Congress' Own regiments. The First was organized by Colonel 
James Livingston. Though one of the well-known Livingston family of New York 
he was by birth a Canadian. He was born in 1747 and died at Saratoga, New 
York, November 30, 1833. » * * * 

"General Richard Montgomery had married into the Livingston family of New 
York. When he was preparing for the invasion of Canada, James Livingston, 
then at Montreal, succeeded in enlisting the services of over three hundred 
Canadians in and about Montreal. These he hurried to New York, when they 
joined Montgomery's army. 

"This band of refugee recruits greatly aided Montgomery in the capture of 
Montreal, St. John and other points along the St. Lawrence River, and were with 
Montgomery in the assault on Quebec. December 31, 1775. 



610 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

"General Montgomery appointed Livingston a Colonel. On August IS, 1775, 
Congress confirmed the appointment and directed that a commission should be 
given him as Colonel, with authority to enlist as many Canadians as desired to 
engage in the service. » * * * 

"On November 7, 1775, Congress ordered commissions to be sent General Schuy- 
ler for all officers of Livingston's regiment who served in Canada. 

"Major Henry Livingston enlisted a company at or near Rhinebeck, New Yoric, 
and on August 8, 1775, reported the completion of his quota to the New York 
Congress, where it was on August 13, 1775, read. Here are a few Irish names 
among those he enlisted — ^possibly some were Catholics or ought to be so: John 
Rogers (corporal), John Moody, M. M'DonneU (drummer), John Rogers, Jr., 
Ephraim Welsh, James Sullivan, John Flinn, John Casey, Thomas Quinn, Michael 
W. Carter, David Bums, John Bradie, William Kearney. * » * * 

"The Major did so well in Canada that on December 11, 1775, the Continental 
Congress ordered 'a Sword, of the value of one himdred dollars be presented to 
Captain Henry B. Livingston as a testimony of their sense of his services to this 
country and that they will embrace the first opportimity of promoting him in the 
Army.' 

"On April 15, 1776, the time of about two hundred of Livingston's Canadians 
expired. 'Few if any will reengage,' wrote Colonel Hazen to General Schuyler, 
April 1. 

"Congress, August 21, 1776. A Petition from Preudhomme La Jeunesse was pre- 
sented and read and referred to the Board of War. It is in Papers of Congress 
No. 41, IV, p. 376. 

"The Board reported That the Petition be granted and a Commission be given 
him to be B, Captain of a Company of Canadians, Acadians and French to belong 
to Colonel Livingston's Regiment and to join the army at Ticonderoga as soon as 
may be. * * * * 

"At this time also had Colonel Moses Hazen, Commander of the Second Canadian 
Regiment, as well as Colonel Livingston, authority of Congress to enlist men in any 
of the States. Livingston and Hazen, endeavoring to recruit in New York, inter- 
ferred with the filling of the five Battalions at Albany and neighborhood so that 
the Provincial Congress informed Washington that it was owing to this that the 
delay in completing New York's quota was due. 

"Colonel Livingston and his Canadians were at this time in service under Gen- 
eral Montgomery. 

"On September 28, 1775, General Montgomery wrote Gieneral Schuyler: 'Livings- 
ton has a considerable body of Canadians in arms; is very active and they have 
great confidence in him, I believe. I wish to have him taken notice of by Congress, 
in a manner suitable to his services and the risk he runs.' 

"After the defeat of Montgomery, Congress on January 20, 1776, resolved to 
raise two regiments of Canadians. That appears to have meant that all the 
Canadians now in the service should be the nucleus of two regiments under Liv- 
ingston and Hazen, who already were Colonels, and that endeavors should be made 
to fill up the quota of four battalions in each regiment. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 611 

"Colonel Livingston and his Canadians retreated from Canada with the American 
forces. So many of the Canadians seeing that their country was being abandoned 
deserted and remained at home. 

"Livingston, and such Canadians as remained, came to Northern New York. 
New recruits were obtained wherever possible. 

"In August, 1780, Livingston's regiment was on duty along the Hudson, pro- 
tecting the passes of King's Perry and Verplanck's Point. Washington from 
Peekskill on August 3, 1780, directed 'Colonel James Livingston to garrison the 
redoubts at Stony and Verplanck's Point.' * • • • 

"The Second Regiment of Canadians was commanded by Colonel Moses Hazen. 
It was formed in pursuance of the authority of Congress, January 20th, 1776, 
though under way prior to that date. On January 33nd, 1776, Congress elected 
Hazen Colonel and Edward Antill Lieutenant Colonel. 

"Nearly five hundred Canadians had enlisted under Hazen and did good service 
at Chambly and St. John's, at which many Canadians w^re taken prisoners. On 
the evacuation of Canada the regiment had so much decreased that on its arrival 
at Albany, in August, 1776, it had been reduced to about one hundred men — ^yet 
'calling it a regiment,' Hazen and AntiU came to Congress, sitting at Philadel- 
phia, and reported the condition of the command. It was agreed to continue the 
'regiment' on its old foundation, but to enlist recruits from any State. Colonel 
Hazen theron engaged in recruiting service in New York State, while Lieutenant 
Colonel Antill did like duty throughout New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland and 
Virginia. 

"Colonel Moses Hazen, April 1, 1776, wrote General Schuyler; 

'On ISth April the Soldiers who wintered in this Country will be free and in my 
opinion, neither art, craft or money will prevail on many to reenlist to serve in 
Canada.' 

'Colonel Livingston's regiment consisting of about two hundred Canadians will 
be free on the same day. Very few of them will reengage.' 

"Hazen wrote: 'Of my intended regiment I have about 350.'" 
The two Canadian regiments, known as "Congress' Own'" — ^those 
of Colonel James Livingston and Colonel Moses Hazen — after the re- 
treat of the Americans from Canada, operated in New York, along 
the Hudson River. The battle of White Plains was fought October 
29, 1776. On November 12, 1776, the Canadian Corps is noted as 
being at Fishkill, N. Y., where a priest, whose name is not given, 



1. "The soiaiers of 'Congress' Own," the two Canadian regiments and their families, 
were left at the close of the war In great distress. Many of them, with other Canadian 
refugees, gathered near Fishkill till the State of New York set apart lands for them near 
Jiake Champlaln. The general government provided transportation, and In the summer of 
1786 two hundred and fifty were conveyed to their new homes In Chazy and Coopers- 
viUe. They were thus within access of the Catholic clergy In Canada, but In that prov- 
ince the ban of excommunication rested on them. Hence they were long without a priest, 
and though they assembled to say mass, prayers and sing their old hymns, many In time 
were lost to the faith" (pp. 268-269, "Life of Archbishop Carroll"). 



612 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

attended the wounded and dying Maryland and Pennsylvania Catholic 
soldiers. This had been no other than Fr. Lotbinier. Congress on 
August 10th, 1776, had confirmed his appointment as Chaplain, made 
January 26th, 1776, by General Arnold at Montreal. 

From Martin I. J. Griffin's "Catholics and the American Revolu- 
tion," Vol. 1, page 67: 

"Undoubtedly many of "these French Canadian and Acadian soldiers remained 
in the army and were encamped at Fishkill Landing during the long period of 
inactivity in the Continental armies after campaigning had ceased and while nego- 
tiations for peace were going on." 

As proof of this assertion we quote again from "Catholics and the 
American Revolution" at pages 125 and 126: 

"On October 6, 6 and 7, 1781, Father Ferdinand Farmer, of Philadelphia, was 
at Fishkill, New York. During these days he baptized fourteen 'children and 
infants.' He also blessed the marriages of 'a son of Joseph and Mary Ursula 
(Enbair) Chartier and Mary, daughter of James and Mary Frances (Chandron) 
Robinet, and Francis Guilmet and Mary Frances Chandron.' (Registers at St. 
Joseph's Records, A. C. H. S., p. 305.) 

"These were undoubtedly Canadians of the encampment of 'Congress' Own.' The 
Marquis de Chastellux visited Fishkill, December 21, 1780. He relates that four or 
five miles away in the woods was » camp of 'some hundreds of invalid soldiers' — 
but 'it was their clothes were truly invalid. These honest fellows were not covered 
even with rags; but their steady countenances and their arms in good order seemed 
to supply the defects of clothes and to display nothing but their courage and 
their patience.' " 

In the autumn of 1783 Fr. Farmer again made his way to Fishkill 
Landing where he remained from the last day of October to the 4th 
of November. (Page 202, "Life of Archbishop Carroll.") Fr. Far- 
mer died at Philadelphia, August 17, 1786. 

The following is taken from a Souvenir of the 36th Anniversary of 
the Solemn Dedication of St. Joachim's Church, Matteawan, New 
York, August 22, 1907: 

"According to the earliest and most authentic records, the first mass in this 
vicinity was celebrated in Fishkill Landing some time during the Revolutionary 
War by a French clergyman from Rhode Island. He visited the Continental 
Troops then stationed at New Windsor, Orange County, N. Y., having admin- 
istered to the spiritual wants of the Catholic soldiers, he crossed the river to pay 
a vigjt of courtesy to Baron Steuben, who occupied the well-known Verplanck 
mansion, and it was on this occasion that the Holy Sacrifice was offered for the 
first time. At the successful termination of the war, the troops returned to their 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 613 

homes and a few Catholics remaining in this neighborhood were subjected to many 
and grave inconveniences in order that they might comply with their religious 
obligations." 

In a note-book kept by Bishop Connolly of the date of October 22, 
1817, is the following note : "I addressed a letter to Rev. Arthur Lang- 
dill at New Burg, empowering him to celebrate mass, administer the 
sacraments and perform all priestly duties that do not require the 
Episcopal character throughout this diocese of New York (excepting 
the Districts of New York and Albany, unless with the consent of the 
clergy serving those two districts), until further orders or until I 
consider it necessary to recall said power." 

Again, on January 29, 1818, he notes: "I answered the Rev Ar- 
thur Langdill's three letters and sent him said jndult (for the ensu- 
ing Lent) and addressed the letters to the care of Mr. M'Intire, New 
Burg." 

While no record is found of Rev. Arthur Langdill having visited 
Dutchess County, there can be but little doubt that he did so, as at 
that time it was the custom for the priests to visit many sections of 
the country in their vicinity, and as he was stationed at New Burg 
from 1817 to 1818, it is fair to assume that he did visit Dutchess 
County. 

In the Catholic Almanac for 1822, the following is a Ust of the 
clergy of the diocese: 

Rev. Dr. John Connolly, St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York. 

Rev. Michael O'Gorman, St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York. 

Rev. Charles French, St. Peter's, New York. 

Rev. John Power, St. Peter's, New York. 

Rev. Mr. Bulger, Patterson. 

Rev. Michael Carroll, Albany and vicinify. 

Rev. John Faman, Utica and vicinity. 

Rev. Patrick Kelly, Auburn, Rochester and other districts in the western part 
of the State. 

Rev. Philip Larissy, attends regularly at Staten Island and different other con- 
gregations along the Hudson River. 

Fr. Philip Larissy is said to have said the first mass in Patterson, 
N. J., and in 1822 was commissioned to look after the missions on the 
Hudson River. He was a native of Cork, Ireland, and was a member 
of the Augustinian Order and was said to have been a man of abun- 
dant energy, zealous and untiring. He built St. Augustine's Church 



614 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

in Boston. He died April 6, 1824, at the house of his order, the 
Augustinian, in Philadelphia, Pa. 

The Rev. Philip O'Rielly, a member of the Order of St. Dominick, 
was in 1830, authorized by Right Rev. John Du Bois, Bishop of New 
York, to form missions and build churches on the banks of the Hudson 
River. He was born in Scab' ', County Cavan, Ireland, and was edu- 
cated in Bologna, Italy. It said he had come to New York about 
1818. Father O'Rielly was for some years Chaplain to the Duke of 
Norfolk, a position of ease and honor. The duties of this office were, 
however, not enough for the restless and untiring spirit of Fr. O'Rielly 
and so, when less than thirty years of age he left Europe to seek 
sterner duties in this country. 

He first erected at Cold Spring, on a rock overlooking the Hudson 
River, the romantic church of "Our Lady of Loretto," which was dedi- 
cated September, 1834, by Bishop Du Bois. At this time Fr. O'Rielly 
was doing missionary work along the river, holding religious ser- 
vices in various private dwellings, and we find in the Poughkeepsie 
Telegraph of July 2, 1834, that a letter was advertised for Rev. Fr. 
O'Rielly, this being some evidence that he visited Poughkeepsie during 
this time. 

He was pastor of St. John's Church, Patterson, N. J., from 1837 
to 1844, from which place he went to West Troy, finally becoming 
pastor of St. Bridget's Church in New York, and remained as such 
until the 7th of December, 1854, when he died in his sixty-second year 
His remains were interred on the 9th day of the same month in St. 
Patrick's Cathedral, the funeral being attended by a large concourse 
of admiring and sorrowing friends, both clergy and laity. 

In the year 1832 and during Fr. O'Rielly's time there were a num- 
ber of Catholic families in the City of Poughkeepsie, and they had 
been here for some time prior to that. In the book No. 1 of the 
Declaration of Intention of persons intending to become citizens of 
this country, on file in the Dutchess County Clerk's office, it would 
appear that, commencing perhaps about the year 1820, the Irish 
Catholic people were beginning to settle in Dutchess County, as a 
reference to said book will more fully disclose. A number of Catho- 
lics, many of them residing in the City of Poughkeepsie, on October 
14th>, 1832, organized themselves into what was called the Catholic 
Association. The object of this Association was to raise a fund to 




JOHN J. MYLOD. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 615 

be used for the erection of a church, each member agreeing to con- 
tribute a certain amount each month. The following is a list of the 
names of those who were charter members of this Association: 

William Williams George Belton 

Thomas Kane Robert Belton 

John Quinn Thomas Ryan 

William Belton Peter Mullhollan 

John Gile James Mullhollan 

Patrick Mullhollan Thomas T. Baker 

Roger Fitzpatrick James Eagan 

Bernard Manion Patrick Terriel 

John McCaUin John Atchinson 

Thomas Mahoney Michael Murtiguh 

James Quinn Peter Mahoney 

John Madden John Shields * 

Lawrence Murphy Patrick Gallagher 

Patrick Cox Martin Welch 

Subsequently the following became members of this Association and 
paid their monthly dues for the purpose for which the Association was 
organized : 

William Duffey Daniel Dorran i 

Michael Felvey William Brown 

Robert Anderson Peter Kennedy 

James Dorran Edward Black 

Joseph O'Hare James Tomey 

James Carson Pat. Ward 

Patrick Bahret William Cunningham 

James Beck David O'Connor 

Neil Brosnel Andrew Key 

James ShofFrey John Crilly 

Patrick Butler Pat. Hopkins 

Michael O'Rielly Joseph Donaghue 

Maurice Pendegrast Finton Shelar 

William Fibes Andrew Murtaugh 

James Gilligan Hugh Hart 

Hugh Mullhollan Patrick O'Mara 

Among those whose names are mentioned above, the following were 
residents of Hyde Park: 

William Cunningham Pat. Butler 

James Shoffrey David O'Connor 

Pat. O'Mara Michael O'Rielly 

Finton Shelar Andrew Key 



616 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

On August 8, 1835, a deed was executed by John Delafield and 
Harriet Delafield his wife, to the Rev. John Du Bois, Catholic Bishop 
of New York. This deed was recorded May 21, 18S6, in the 
Dutchess County Clerk's office in Liber 59 of Deeds, at page 263. 
Consideration, $1. 

This deed conveyed a lot on Mill street and it was given to the 
Catholics by Mr. Delafield "to have and to hold the same and every 
part and parcel thereof unto the said party of the second part and 
his successors in office as Catholic Bishop of New York, forever; 
nevertheless upon the following express conditions: That the erection 
of a Catholic church be commenced on said premises within a con- 
venient time and be completed within two years from this date and 
that the said premises be occupied forever for Catholic worship and 
for no other purpose whatever, and in case said church shall not be 
erected and completed after said two years, and in case the premises 
shall at any time be used for any other purpose than that of a 
Catholic church, then and in that case the estate hereby granted shall 
cease and determine and shall revert to the grantor, his heirs and 
assigns as fuUy and as amply as same would have been held by him or 
them in case this conveyance had never been made." 

This was the first property obtained by the church authorities, and 
it was on this lot that the first church in Dutchess County was erected. 
This edifice was small in comparison to the. present building. It now 
forms the rear portion of the present church. It extended east and 
west, instead of north and south and stood well back from the street. 
The front of the little church faced the river, and the entrance was 
through the alley which now runs parallel with the modern church 
and between it and the rectory. 

Subsequently the church authorities purchased a number of other 
lots of land adjacent to the above, upon which the rectory and the 
old building known as the "Library Building" are built. 

Fr. Philip O'Rielly was succeeded by Rev. Patrick DufFey (1837) 
who became pastor at Cold Spring. His missionary field extended to 
Newburgh, Poughkeepsie, and Saugerties. Towards the end of this 
year, Newburgh was made a separate mission, and Fr. Duffey was 
appointed its pastor. It was at the termination of his brief adminis- 
tration that St. Peter's Church was dedicated, viz: November 26, 
1837, by Bishop Du Bois, assisted by Rev. William Quarter and 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 617 

Bev. Patrick Duffey. Towards the end of this year Poughkeepsie 
was made a separate parish, with Saugerties and Rondout as its 
dependencies. Fr. DufFey died at Newburgh June 20th, 1863, in the 
fifty-ninth years of his age. 

The Rev. John McGinnis was, about No/ember 24, 1837, appointed 
by Bishop Du Bois, pastor of Poughkeepsie, Saugerties and Rondout, 
as appears by the following letter, a copy of which is to be found in 
the church records: 

"November 24, 1837, New York: 
A copy of the letter of the Right Rev. John Du Bois appointing me to the 
pastorate of Poughkeepsie, Rondout and Saugerties. 

'The Rev. John McGinnis, in whose prudence and zeal I can rely, is authorized 
by me to attend as Pastor, the three congregations of Poughkeepsie, Rondout and 
Saugerties if they wiU all concur, to the best of their abilifies to contribute to his 
decent support. I leave to his prudence to distribute his services among these 
three so that they each shall be attended at least once a month.' 

Signed, 

John, Bishop or New York." 

About the end of 1839 he was transferred to New York City. There 
he built the Church of St. John the Evangelist and was made pastor 
•of St. Andrew's, New York, and subsequently transferred to Jamaica, 
Long Island. 

Following Fr. McGinnis January, 1839, came the Rev. John N. 
Smith, who became pastor of Poughkeepsie, Saugerties and Rondout. 
He was bom in County Tyrone, Ireland. He came to the United 
States in early youth, in 1818, and was ordained in about 1828. In 
1833 to 1837 he did service in Alexandria, District of Columbia. He was 
assistant at St. Peter's, New York, in 1838 to Rev. Dr. Power, V. G. He 
was an energetic and charitable priest. He erected a small frame church 
at Rondout. In 1842 he was sent from the Poughkeepsie pastorate 
to St. James's Church, New York, where he remained as pastor until 
1848. He died February 16th, 1848, a martyr to charity, having 
contracted ship fever at the dying bed of Fr. Frank Murphy, then at 
the quarantine station of Staten Island, taking care of the immi- 
grants. He was buried under the Cathedral. 

His successor as pastor of Poughkeepsie, Saugerties and Rondout 
was the Rev. Myles Maxwell, who was bom in Ireland, educated for 
"the priesthood at LaFargeviUe, N. Y., and at St. Joseph's Seminary, 
Fordham, ordained by Bishop Hughes January 5, 1841. Fr. Max- 



618 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

well became pastor at Poughkeepsie about July, 1842, succeeding Fr. 
John N. Smith, and remained until about September, 1844. Fr. Max- 
well was noted for his zeal, learning and fidelity to duty, as well as for 
his candor and winning simplicity. He was pastor also at Rondout. 
He died August 31st, 1849. 

Following Fr. Maxwell, about May, 1844, came Rev. Joseph P. 
Burke, who remained until about September, 1844, when Rev. Michael 
Riordan became pastor of St. Peter's Church, Poughkeepsie. 

Rev. Michael Riordan was born in Kilfennane, County Limerick, 
Ireland, Christmas Day, 1821. He came to this country when young 
and entered Fordham. He was ordained a priest April 14, 1844, by 
most Rev. John Hughes, and was by him assigned to Poughkeepsie. 
He came here about September, 1844, where he remained until his 
death, June 13, 1870. Fr. Riordan has been practically regarded as 
the founder of the church. His pastorate of twenty-six years was 
one of faithful and useful work. When he came to Poughkeepsie the 
number of Catholics was small and a strong prejudice existed against 
them in the community. Fr. Riordan, by his benevolent work and his 
upright life, succeeded in overcoming this prejudice almost entirely, 
and though he was not a man of broad and liberal habit of thought 
as have been some of his successors, he was universally respected and 
esteemed, and his death was sincerely mourned by many outside his 
own communion. 

During his administration the church was enlarged. In 1850 the 
house and lot. No. 15 Mansion street, was sold at auction and Mr. 
Peter Thielman, a German member of the church, bought it for the 
parish for a rectory, the deed being executed to Archbishop Hughes 
of New York. It continued to be used as a rectory until 1860, when 
the present house adjoining the church on the west was built and the 
property on Mansion street was sold to Peter Shields. In 1852-3 the 
church was enlarged to nearly its present size and shape. The old 
building was remodeled so as to form the transept, and the main 
body of the church, or nave, was built. It was dedicated in 1853, 
and its completion was the beginning of a new era in the history of 
the Catholic Church in Poughkeepsie. Its construction was due 
almost entirely to the persevering efforts of Fr. Riordan, who also 
succeeded, during his long term of service, in erecting the rectory 
above referred to, a library connected with the church and the two 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 619 

large commodious parochial schools now being used, together with the 
house occupied by the Sisters, on North Clover street. During his 
whole term, the church continued to grow and prosper, increasing in 
numbers, means and influence. He performed his work well. He was 
a power for good. He aimed to be of service, spiritually and materi- 
ally, to his people. He worked for the cause of education, for a 
loftier civilization and a higher grade of citizenship. He was a strong 
advocate of Christian education. On May 1st, 1860, he purchased 
the property upon which the girls' school is erected, on North Clover 
street, and on April 7, 1868, he purchased the property on the south 
side of Mill street upon which the boys' school is situated. Prior to 
the opening of these schools he provided teachers for the education of 
his children, and the old library and the basem^t of St. Peter's 
Church were used as school-rooms. Fr. Riordan, during the early 
days of the Rebellion showed his patriotism and sympathy for the 
Northern cause by his speech at the flag raising on Market street. 
May 28, 1861. He also presided at a flag raising at St. Peter's 
Church, Saturday evening. May 18, 1861. The PougKkeepsie Daily 
Eagle of that time said that Fr. Riordan's address was "a sound and 
eloquent appeal to the patriotism of his auditors and well worthy his 
reputation as a man and a scholar." 

He was a strong advocate of temperance, and during his pastorate 
St. Peter's Temperance Society was organized, and upon the occasion 
when he presented the Temperance Society with the American Flag, 
November 2, 1867, he said: "Take this and in my heart I know that 
none of my children will ever dishonor it." During his time the ceme- 
tery on East Mansion street was enlarged by purchases of land adjoin- 
ing. The first lot had been purchased in 1841 ; the cemetery on the 
Salt Point Road was purchased by him December 30, 1854. In this 
cemetery a handsome monument is erected to his memory, and on 
March 22, 1908, a handsome memorial window was placed in St. 
Peter's Church. The funeral of Fr. Riordan was one of the largest 
ever held in Poughkeepsie, and was attended by all classes of people. 

After the death of Fr. Riordan, Rev. Francis Caro, of Cold Spring, 
was sent to St. Peter's as its pastor, and he remained at Poughkeepsie 
a little more than a year. Fr. Caro was bom in Italy. During his 
pastorate, one of the finest celebrations of St. Patrick's Day ever held 
in Poughkeepsie took place, Friday, March 17, 1871. The day was 



620 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

observed by four masses at St. Peter's Church and by a parade in the 
afternoon of the various societies attached to the church, the parade 
being reviewed by Mayor Eastman and the Common Council from the 
stoop of the old Poughkeepsie Hotel. Succeeding Fr. Caro, came 
Rev. Patrick Francis McSweeney, D. D., in February, 1872. He was 
bom in Ireland in 1838. He came to this country with his father 
when he was about eleven years of age and the ship on which they 
made the voyage was wrecked off the coast of Delaware and the two 
barely escaped with their lives and were compelled to walk forty miles 
afoot to the Delaware River, where they got a boat to take 
them to Philadelphia. In 1862 Fr. McSweeney was ordained 
a priest at Rome. He was appointed to the Church of St. Joseph, 
Sixth avenue. New York, and from there he went to the old Cathedral 
Church on.Mott street. New York. In January, 1871, he was ap- 
pointed pastor at Peekskill, N. Y. Subsequently he was transferred 
to Poughkeepsie in February, 1872, and remained until November, 
1877, when he went to St. Bridget's Church, New York City. Dur- 
ing his term he transferred the control of the two parochial schools 
to the Board of Education of Poughkeepsie, so that the same could 
be used as a part of the regular pubhc school system. At the time 
they had an average attendance of about seven hundred scholars. 
This was known as "The Poughkeepsie Plan" and it worked well for 
many, years. It was during this time that the Church of St. Mary 
was organized (1873) but not incorporated until 1879. It was also 
during his time that the Church of St. Peter was incorporated, the 
certificate of incorporation being dated April 19, 1875, and recorded 
in the Dutchess County Clerk's office May 1st, 1875, the first trus- 
tees being the Most Rev. John McCloskey, Archbishop ; the Very Rev. 
William Quinn, Vicar-General; Rev. Patrick F. McSweeney, D. D., 
pastor; John Kelly and John Hart. The beautiful painting back of 
the altar, which came from Rome, was presented to the church by Fr. 
McSweeney just about the time he was leaving. From Poughkeepsie 
Fr. McSweeney went to St. Bridget's, New York, as pastor, where he 
remained until he died, February 24th, 1907.^ 

1. The star of the Sea Council, C. W. B. L., has placed In St. Peter's Church as a 
memorial to Rer. Patrick F. McSweeney a handsome painting called "The Angel of the 
tfesurrectlon." It was presented to the church In September, 1908. 

Dr. Edward McSweeney, In August, 1908, arranged for a permanent scholarship at 
St. Joseph's Seminary, Dunwoodle, N. T., for St. Peter's parish, In memory of the late 




REV. JOHN H. BRIODY. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 621 

Following Fr. McSweeney came Rev. James Nilan. Fr. Nilan was 
born at Castle Daly, County of Galway, Ireland, September 27, 1838. 
At the age of fourteen his uncle. Rev. John Ryan, brought him to this 
country and placed him at St. John's College, Fordham, N. Y., from 
which he graduated in 1860 as one of the honor men of his class. 
After graduating he entered the Diocesan Theological Seminary at 
Fordham, where he remained a year and then, with Rev. Dr. Morrow, 
he went to Rome. At the American College there he completed his 
theological course, and had the distinction of being the first priest 
ordained in it for New York. In the same class was ordained the 
late Archbishop Corrigan for the diocese of Newark. The ceremony 
was performed in the Basilica of St. John Lateran by His Eminence 
Cardinal Patrizzi, on the 19th of September, 1863. « Upon his return 
to this country in 1864, his first mission was to the Church of the 
Holy Cross, New York City, where for four years, August 21st, 1864, 
to August 7, 1868, he labored with all the zeal of a newly ordained 
priest. He was then promoted to the pastorate at Port Jervis. Here 
a new church edifice and an orphan asylum are monuments to his 
labors. At that time Port Jervis had ten out-stations and all these 
it was the duty of Fr. Nilan to attend. It was at Port Jervis that the 
system by which the parish schools were placed under the direction of 
the Board of Education was originated. Later it was tried success- 
fully by Dr. McSweeney, as before mentioned in our own St. Peter's 
schools here in Poughkeepsie. Fr. Nilan became pastor of St. Peter's 
Church, Poughkeepsie, November 16, 1877. His untiring labor in 
this part of God's vineyard has brought it to where it now is, a model 
parish spiritually, intellectually and socially. In season and out of 
season he strove to lift his fold to his plane of sanctity. He was 
most attentive to the sick. Day or night, rain or shine, he answered 
to the call of duty. During his pastorate many important changes 
and improvements were made in St. Peter's Church. He had the four 
beautiful paintings placed in the sanctuary, representing "The giving 



Eev. Patrick F. McSweeney. In speaking of the scholarship, Dr. McSweeney said: "My 
brother wanted this scholarship established, and I had it placed in St. Peter's parish 
here, because, although my brother had been away from Poughkeepsie thirty years when 
he died, I am sure that his heart was here and that he loved St. Peter's. I therefore 
wanted to have his monument here, such a monument as will be better than brass or 
stone." 

The scholarship will be for a boy from St. Peter's, who can pass the required ex- 
aminations. 



622 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

of the key to St. Peter," "The restoration of sight to St. Paul, after 
his conversion," "St. John, the beloved Disciple," and "St. James." 
He had the church enlarged. New stained glass windows, new sta- 
tions, a new marble altar, new heating system, the frescoing of the 
interior of the church and the acquiring of adjacent property and 
other things might be mentioned in connection with the fact that prior 
to the time of his death he paid oflF the debt on the church and left it 
clear and unincumbered. No one who has had the privilege of close 
contact with Fr. Nilan can question his wide range of subjects, the 
wonderful accuracy and ripeness of his knowledge. As a theologian, 
he stood in front rank. As a linguist, there were few to excel him. 
He spoke Italian fluently, being the spiritual director of the Italian 
Benevolent Society. He numbered German also among his linguistic 
acquirements. As a citizen he was ever ready to further any project 
for the city's advancement. Many civic societies had his name on the 
list of members. He was well known as an advocate of temperance, 
believing, and truly, that much of life's misery is caused directly or 
indirectly by intemperance. It would be impossible to condense into 
the short space here allowed, a life history crowded with events worthy 
of record. Fr. Nilan's life and deeds are indelibly impressed on the 
hearts and souls of a loving people. Toward the close of his twenty- 
fifth year as pastor of St. Peter's a most elaborate program to cele- 
brate worthily the glorious event was being prepared by a committee 
organized for such purpose. Suddenly, in the middle of the arrange- 
ments, Fr. Nilan became sick and died ; Saturday, November 16, 1902. 
His body lay in state tiU the morning of the 18th of November, when 
the solemn High Mass of Requiem was sung. Rev. Patrick F. Mc- 
Sweeney was Celebrant, Rev. Henry F. Brann, D. D., Deacon, and 
Rev. Gallus Bruder, Sub-Deacon. A panegyric was delivered by his 
life long friend. Very Rev. R. L. Burtsell, D. D. The mass was at- 
tended by His Grace Most Rev. John M. Farley, Archbishop of New 
York, who pronounced the absolution at its close. Among those pres- 
ent were Archbishop Ireland of St. Paul, Bishop Quiglev of Buffalo, 
Monsignor Mooney and Monsignor Edwards of New York, Monsig- 
nor Cannon of Lock Port, Monsignor Kennedy of the American Col- 
lege at Rome, Monsignor Nugent of Liverpool, Eng., and upwards 
of one hundred and fifty priests. The funeral was one of the most 
imposing, if not the most imposing the City of Poughkeepsie has ever 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 623 

witnessed. A number of reKgious societies of St. Peter's and other 
parishes walked in procession to the grave. The funeral cortege was 
over a mile in length, and both sides of the street were crowded with 
people, whose tear bedimmed eyes gave proof of the affection they 
bore to him whose remains were passing to their last resting place in 
St. Peter's Cemetery. The thought has occurred to many, how 
strange it was that the Angel of Death should call him away on the 
eve of the day upon which he was to celebrate his jubilee. God knew 
best. He wished Fr. Nilan to celebrate his jubilee with Him in heaven. 
The pall bearers were Dr. Edward M. Bums, Dr. John H. Cotter, 
Patrick C. Doherty, Thomas J. Furlong, William J. Leahey, Hugh 
Lavery, John J. Mylod and John Nevins. 

Fr. Nilan was chaplain of Florentine Council, ^o. 304, Knights 
of Columbus. 

His parishioners have erected to his memory a handsome monument 
in the cemetery on the Salt Point Road, and on July 12, 1908, they 
also placed in St. Peter's Church a handsome memorial window. 

After Fr. Nilan's death Rev. William Livingston was, on Wednes- 
day, December 31st, 1902, appointed pastor of St. Peter's Church by 
Right Rev. Archbishop Farley. Fr. Livingston is a native of Ire- 
land, having been bom in County Monohan in 1867. At the age of 
fifteen years he came to this country and entered the dry goods house 
of A. T. Stewart as a cash boy. He was advanced while in the employ 
of Mr. Stewart, but notwithstanding this, he did not remain. He 
then in succession worked in an importing house, a drug store, and 
as a newspaper reporter. He was not satisfied in any of these posi- 
tions but assumed them that he might eventually be able to enter 
college and prepare himself for a more holy and elevated life. In 
1880 his desire was gratified when he entered the college of St. Francis 
Xavier in New York City. So zealously did he apply himself to his 
studies and so great was his capacity for mental exertion and hard 
work, that at the time of graduation he was conceded to be one of 
the most promising young men that had ever been graduated from the 
college. In September of the same year Fr. Livingston went to Troy, 
N. Y., and entered the Seminary there. Here he continued until his 
ordination to the priesthood. That took place in 1887. He was, 
shortly after being ordained, assigned to St. Stephen's Church, New 
York City. In 1889 he was made rector pro tern of the church of 



624 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

White Plains. In September of the same year he was appointed 
director of St. Joseph's Seminary at Troy, remaining there in that 
capacity until the Seminary was closed, in 1896. He was then trans- 
ferred to the Seminary at Dunwoodie, Yonkers, N. Y., where he be- 
came professor of Church History and Liturgy. A year later he 
became Chaplain of the House of Good Shepherd in New York, and 
in 1900 he was assigned as pastor of St. Mary's Church at New- 
burgh, N. Y. While there he succeeded in enlisting the co-operation 
of his parishioners to a most remarkable degree and was able to pay 
$9,000 of the church debt. Fr. Livingston is one of the brightest 
and ablest priests of the State. He is a true gentleman of culture 
and refinement and has attained a prominence in ecclesiastical circles 
that is remarkable in so young a man. He is a lecturer of wide repu- 
tation, and his services as such are earnestly sought after. In many 
important stations filled by Fr. Livingston since his ordination he has 
been an energetic and indefatigable worker. He has shown wisdom 
and discretion and rare administrative power and is a man of pro- 
gressive ideas. 

He is a man of frank, honest disposition, one who combines in an 
admirable manner dignity with cordiality, and one to whom people 
are drawn irresistably. 

Fr. Livingston, while in Poughkeepsie, was a prominent member of 
Florentine Council, No. 304, Knights of Columbus. He was Chap- 
lain of the Council, and laid the corner stone of Columbus Institute 
on Washington street, on October 12th, 1904. 

During his administration of the affairs of St. Peter's Church, Fr. 
Livingston made it a point to keep his people in thorough touch with 
his plans. He was an eloquent preacher and interpreted the lessons 
of Christ's life in a manner interesting and instructive, and explained 
the Gospel so clearly that he never failed to make a vivid impression 
on his hearers. He had the happy faculty of interesting in various 
phases of his work all classes of his parishioners. He took particular 
interest in the young people, and as a consequence he was idolized by 
the boys, with whom, at times, he was most strict, and by the mem- 
bers of the young ladies' societies. While in Poughkeepsie, he proved 
himself a good, true priest, kind, benevolent, and sympathetic, an 
id^al administrator of the material matters that must be looked after 
by a rector, a citizen, loyal, patriotic and public spirited. Through 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 625 

Fr. Livingston's efforts, a monument was erected to the memory of 
Samuel Neilson, the Irish patriot, who died in exile at the home of a 
friend in Poughkeepsie, August 29, 1803. The monument was erected 
in the Rural Cemetery on the one hundred and second anniversary of 
the death of Neilson. The inscription on the monument is as follows : 

"Sacred to the memory of Samuel Neilson, an Irish Patriot of 1798, one of the 
founders of the United Irishmen, who sacrificed his fortune and his life in the 
cause of his country. Born in County Down, Ireland, in September, 1761. Died 
in Poughkeepsie, N. Y., August 38, 1803. Erected by the Ancient Order of Hiber- 
nians, Division No. 3, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., August 29, 1905." 

The oration on the occasion was delivered by Fr. Livingston. In 
January, 1906, Fr. Livingston was appointed pastor of St. Gabriel's 
Church, New York City. * 

Succeeeding Fr. Livingston came Rev. Joseph F. Sheahan. Fr. 
Sheahan was born in Lowell, Mass., July 22, 1861. He graduated 
from St. Francis Xavier's College, New York City, in 1882, and was 
ordained at St. Joseph's Provincial Seminary at Troy in December, 
1886. After his ordination he was sent as assistant to the Church of 
the Natiirity on Second avenue. New York City. He was also assist- 
ant at St. Agnes's Church on East 4<3rd street,' New York City. 
From this church he was sent as pastor to the Church of the Magda- 
lene at Pocantico Hills, Westchester County, N. Y. From here he 
was sent to St. Peter's Church, Poughkeepsie, as its pastor, March 
24, 1906. During his brief pastorate he has made many improve- 
ments to the church. It has been repainted and redecorated, and he 
has also improved the boys' school. He was very active in raising 
the funds for the memorial windows for Fr. Riordan and Fr. Nilan. 
Since he became pastor he has brought the Marists Brothers to St. 
Peter's for the purpose of teaching the boys in his parish, using the 
Mill Street school for that purpose. Fr. Sheahan has also greatly im- 
proved the cemetery belonging to St. Peter's Church. He is deeply 
interested in the various societies within his parish. The Aquinas 
Club, which is in St. Peter's parish, under Fr. Sheahan's assistant, the 
Rev. Wm. J. B. Daly, has become noted for the literary advancement 
made by its members. 

Fr. Sheahan is noted for his kind and sympathetic nature and his 
genial and affable manner has won for him a host of friends among 
all classes, who admire him for his many noble qualities and especially 



626 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

because of his priestly character and zeal. His love and care for 
souls marks a beautiful trait in his priestly career. 

The lay trustees of St. Peter's Church since its incorporation were 
John Hart, John Kelly, Peter Shields, WiUiam Maher, Hugh Lavery 
and John Nevins. 

The present lay trustees are Peter Shields and John Nevins. 

At the time of the Civil War many Catholic immigrants, or sons of 
immigrants, sprang bravely forward from the two parishes then in 
Poughkeepsie, to defend the Stars and Stripes. Many of them never 
returned to their homes, and of those who did return many are now 
buried in St. Peter's cemeteries. In a recent article in the May, 1907, 
Fraternal News, by Mr. Andrew G. Corcoran, it is stated that at least 
seventy-one graves in St. Peter's cemetery are those of Catholic sol- 
diers. 

In the year 1808 Pope Pius the Vllth cut oiF from the See of Balti- 
more, which then embraced the entire portion of the United States 
lying east of the Mississippi River, the four Sees of Bardstown, (Ky.), 
Philadelphia, New York, and Boston. The Centennial celebration of 
the diocese of New York was celebrated in Poughkeepsie on Sunday, 
April 26, 1908. The celebration consisted of a parade in the after- 
noon in which all the Catholic societies in Poughkeepsie took part. 
After the parade, a public meeting was held in Columbus Institute, 
which was presided over by Hon. Joseph Morschauser, Justice of 
the Supreme Court. The speakers on the occasion were: Hon. Lewis 
S. Chanler, Lieutenant Governor of New York State; Hon. John S. 
Whalen, Secretary of State; Hon. John K. Sague, Mayor of the City 
of Poughkeepsie; Dr. John G. Coyle, of New York; Rev. Francis 
Donnelly, S. J., of St. Andrew's, and Richard E. Connell, editor 
Poughkeepsie News-Press. 

The committee in charge of the celebration were: Rev. Dean Pat- 
rick Daly, chairman; John J. Mylod, treasurer; James A. Tolland, 
secretary; Rev. Joseph F. Sheahan, Rev. Gallus Bruder, Rev. Charles 
Galuska, Rev. Nicolas Pavone, James A. Lavery, John Nevins, Pat- 
rick C. Doherty, Thomas A. Waters, Dr. John E. Patterson, John 
J. Hogan, Richard E. Connell, James H. Mullen, Peter Miller, John 
B. Wermuth, L. L. Herles, Nicola Manna, P. A. Tesone, S. Gawli- 
ko^ski, A. Wierzhoski, Frank Zenkier, T. Dettmer. 

The churches in Poughkeepsie on this date were St. Peter's, Nativity 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 627 

(German), St. Mary's, and St. Joseph's (Polish). The Church of 
"Our Lady of Mount Carmel" (Italian) is about to be organized. 

The Chuech of St. MAey. During the time that Rev. Patrick F. 
McSweeney was pastor of St. Peter's Church, he purchased from the 
Universalist Society their church property on the south side of Cannon 
street, near Academy street, for the sum of $10,000. This property 
is now owned by the Young Women's Christian Association. On 
July 20, 1873, the church was dedicated by Most Rev. John Mc- 
Closkey, Archbishop of New York. The ceremony of dedication com- 
menced with the celebration of a solemn high mass, the Rev. Dr. Pat- 
rick F. McSweeney, pastor of St. Peter's Church, acting as celebrant; 
Rev. Dr. R. L. Burtsell, pastor of the Church of the Epiphany, New 
York, Deacon; Rev. P. S. Rigney, of St. Peter's}> Sub-Deacon, and 
Rev. John M. Farley, Secretary to the Archbishop (now Archbishop), 
Master of Ceremonies. The sermon on the occasion being delivered 
by the Most Rev. John McCloskey, Archbishop. At the evening ser- 
vice the Rev. Dr. Edward McGlynn, pastor of St. Stephen's Church, 
New York, delivered the sermon. 

Dr. Edward McSweeney, brother of Rev. Patrick F. McSweeney, was 
appointed pastor, and thus began the Church of St. Mary. Rev. 
Edward McSweeney, S. T. D., was born in Cork, Ireland, in 1843. 
He came to New York in 1850 ; graduated from St. Francis Xavier's 
College, in New York, in 1862; went to Propaganda, Rome, where he 
remained for five years and where he was ordained a priest in 1867. 
Returning to New York, he was stationed at St. Stephen's, afterward 
at Newburgh, and came to Poughkeepsie in 1873. 

St. Mary's Church was incorported by certificate of incorporation, 
dated March 12, 1879, and filed and recorded in the Dutchess County 
Clerk's office, March 18, 1879, the trustees named therein being John 
McCloskey, Archbishop; William Quinn, Vicar-General; Edward Mc- 
Sweeney, Pastor, and James Mulrein and John Coghill, Lay Trustees. 

During his (Dr. McSweeny's) pastorate of St. Mary's Church, the 
funds to purchase the school property and build the school house and 
for the purchase of the priest's house, on the northwest comer of 
Cannon and South Hamilton streets, were raised. 

In 1880 Dr. McSweeney made a trip to Europe, and during his 
absence. Rev. Michael M. J. McSwiggan was acting pastor, and it was 
during this time that St. Mary's parochial school, on South Hamilton 



628 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Street, was built. Fr. McSwiggan remained until November 15, 1880. 
Fr. McSwiggan was born in Ireland and died while pastor of St. 
Joachim's Church, Matteawan, N. Y. The Poughkeepsie News-Press, 
in speaking of him said: 

"Fr. McSwiggan was one of the finest specimens of manhood in Dutchess County. 
He was of massive frame and giant strength. He was a man of studious habits 
and of an aggressive temperament that made him a conspicuous priest in the 
diocese. He was a man of positive opinion and fearless in opposing and attack- 
ing that which he deemed it his duty to oppose. He was above all things, » 
priest, and his life and best energies were devoted entirely to the discharging of 
his duties as a priest and pastor. His church and his people were the sole objects 
of his care. He held aloof from all association outside of his parish and at times 
seemed rigid in his exactness. But to know Rev. Michael J. McSwiggan was to 
know a giant in heart and kindness as well as in structure. One grasp of his great 
hand left a memory for a lifetime. He loved the poor and sought them out while 
he was able. He was a temperance man of the truest type and by precept and 
the example of his own life did much good work for his people. His sermons were 
plain statements of truth, and while he made no pretentions to oratory, he always 
had something edifying and instructive to say, and the courage to say it." 

On January 7, 1881, Rev. John B. Creedan was appointed assist- 
ant to Fr. McSweeney. In 1883 Dr. Edward McSweeney left Pough- 
keepsie and went to teach philosophy and theology at Mt. St. Mary's 
College, Maryland, but continued as pastor until January 2, 1885, 
when he resigned. 

Fr. McSweeney, while pastor of St. Mary's, was always very solici- 
tous for the flock committed to his care. Every member was dear to 
him, and he took a lively interest in each one's concerns, temporal as 
well as spiritual. They were all his chidren. No father's heart ever 
warmed with more generous aiFection or overflowed with more tender 
solicitude. He was noted for his culture of mind, soundness of judg- 
ment, knowledge of men, tact and afFability of manner. It was there- 
fore not surprising to those who knew him that his fitness and ability 
were recognized and that he was chosen as Professor of Philosophy 
and Theology at Mt. St. Mary's College, Md., the second oldest 
Catholic coUege in the United States. 

During the absence of Fr. McSweeney at Mt. St. Mary's, Rev. John 
B. Creedan was the acting pastor and continued as such until Febru- 
ary 2, 1885. Fr. Creedan was educated at Manhattan College and 
ordained at Troy Seminary in 1881. He began his mission as assist- 
ant at St. Mary's Church, where he remained eight years. He was 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 629 

then appointed, by Archbishop Corrigan, pastor at Warwick and 
Florida, Orange County, N, Y. From there he was transferred to 
Ossining, N. Y., where he became widely known through his adminis- 
tration as Chaplain of Sing Sing prison. Fr. Creedan was noted for 
his kindly nature, and he was beloved by the people of St. Mary's 
parish. He died at Ossining, N. Y., January 4, 1903. He was a 
member of Ossining Council Knights of Columbus. 

On February 2, 1885, Rev. Cornelius Donovan was appointed pastor 
of St. Mary's Church and remained as such until May 18, 1886, when 
he was transferred to the Mortuary Chapel at Calvary Cemetery, N. 
Y. Previous to coming to Poughkeepsie he was assistant at the 
Cathedral, New York City. He died in Montreal the latter part of 
September, 1887. • 

On May 18, 1886, Rev. Terence J. Earley was appointed pastor of 
St. Mary's Church. Fr. Earley was bom in Drumshambo, County 
Leitrim, Ireland, in 1843. He came to this country in 1860 and 
entered St. Francis Xavier's College, New York City, remaining two 
years, and then went to St. Mary's College, Emmitsburgh, Md. Owing 
to the Civil War, he returned to St. Francis Xavier's College in Sep- 
tember, 1863, where he graduated July 5, 1864, with the highest hon- 
ors of the College. He completed his theological studies at St. 
Joseph's Seminary, Troy, N. Y., and was ordained a priest December 
21st, 1867, and was sent immediately as assistant to St. Stephen's 
Church of New York City. He was also assistant at St. Bridget's 
Church, New York City. Cardinal McCloskey recognized the zeal 
and industry of Fr. Earley and appointed him rector at West Point 
and Highland, where he remained for sixteen years. During Fr. 
Farley's pastorate at St. Mary's. Church the property was purchased 
upon which the present church is built. The corner stone of the new 
St. Mary's was blessed September 10th, 1888, by the Most Rev. 
Michael A. Corrigan, Archbishop. The Rev. Dean Mooney, of St. 
Patrick's, Newburgh, preached the sermon for the occasion. Among 
the large concourse of people present was the Common Council and 
acting Mayor F. J. Nesbitt. The stone came from Poughkeepsie 
Bridge, Pier No. 2, one which had been removed. The Bridge Com- 
pany presented it to the church. All the various Catholic Societies 
in the city took part in the ceremony. The committee in charge of 
the affair was Peter B. Cusack, Pierce J. Hayden, Owen Cook, Thomas 



630 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

A. Waters, George Hughes, John GafFney, John Fitzpatrick, Timothy 
Shay, and William J. Talbot, secretary. About May 1st, 1891, Fr. 
Earley was appointed by Archbishop Corrigan to the rectorship of 
the parish of St. Peter's at New Brighton, Staten Island. Fr. Earley 
is now pastor at Irvington, N. Y. He is a member of the Knights 
of Columbus. 

Succeeding Fr. Earley came Rev. Edward J. Conroy. Fr. Conroy 
was born in New York, July 10, 1853. He was educated in the New 
York schools, and in 1866 he entered St. Francis Xavier's College. He 
graduated with honor in 1873, and in 1875 sailed for Europe and in 
the same year entered the American College at Rome. He was or- 
dained to the priesthood in 1877. Fr. Conroy was first assigned to 
do missionary work in New York. Subsequently he was made assist- 
ant to Rev. Arthur J. Donnelly at St. Michael's Church, New York. 
After a lapse of three years he was transferred to St. Monica's. His 
first charge as pastor was ten years later when he completed the 
Church of St. Francis Assisi, at Mt. Kisco. From there he was trans- 
ferred to St. Joseph's Church, Kingston, N. Y., where he served as 
pastor for three years. He was appointed pastor of St. Mary's 
Church, Poughkeepsie, April 23, 1891. During Fr. Conroy's admin- 
istration of the afi'airs of St. Mary's Church the new Church of 
St. Mary's was dedicated, October 22, 1893, the ceremony of dedica- 
tion being unusually grand and imposing. People professing ad- 
herence to all Christian denominations crowded the edifice. In the 
absence of Archbishop Corrigan the church was blessed by Bishop 
Silas Chatard, of Vincennes, Ind., formerly director of the American 
College at Rome. The Chaplains to the Bishop were Mgrs. Calasrini 
and Raimondi. Masters of Ceremony, Rev. James J. Connelly, secre- 
tary to Archbishop Corrigan, and Rev. John J. Barrett. In the even- 
ing Pontifical Vespers was held and a sermon delivered by Very Rev. 
Joseph F. Mooney, V. G. Rev. Edward McSweeney was the Officiant, 
and Rev. Edwin M. Sweeney, Deacon. During the evening services 
the following cablegram was received from Rome: 

Rome, October 22, 1893. 
Rev. E. J. Conroy, Pastor, 
Poughkeepsie, N. Y. 
VoT the inauguration of your Church the Holy Father sends to you the Apostolic 
Benediction. MaZzollibti, 

Papal Secretary. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 631 

Fr. Conroy died at St. Vincent's Hospital, New York, Tuesday, 
February 14, 1899. Fr. Conroy was a member of Florentine Council, 
No. 304, Knights of Columbus. 

After the death of Fr. Conroy, Fr. Patrick Daly was appointed 
pastor of St. Mary's Church. The Very Rev. Patrick Daly, V. F., 
was appointed rector of St. Mary's Church March 3, 1899. He was 
bom in Ireland, November 12, 1859. As a boy he attended the dis- 
trict schools of his native place. In 1876 he became a student at 
St. Brendan's College, Killarney, from which he graduated in 1878. 
In September, 1878, he entered St. Patrick's College, Maynooth, 
where, at the end of a seven-year course of training, he was ordained 
a priest June 29, 1885. He served as curate in St. John's Church, 
Glasgow, Scotland, from November, 1885, to JOne, 1889. With a 
promise from Archbishop Corrigan of an assignment in the Arch- 
diocese of New York, he came to America August, 1889. On his 
arrival he was appointed as one of the assistants to the rector of St. 
Patrick's Cathedral, Ne^ York City. He held this position until his 
appointment as rector of St. Mary's, Poughkeepsie. 

Upon the promotion of Fr. Livingston to St. Gabriel's, New York, 
Fr. Daly was appointed Dean of the Counties of Dutchess and Putnam. 
In this capacity it is his duty to make periodical visits of inspection 
to the Catholic churches of these counties, and to report to the Arch- 
bishop the conditions which such visits disclose. Under Fr. Daly's 
wise and careful administration, he reduced the debt of St. Mary's 
$30,000, notwithstanding the fact that during the same period he 
expended for improvements and repairs the sum of $25,000. 

The Centenary Celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of the 
New York diocese was celebrated in Poughkeepsie by a monster parade 
of Catholic men and a mass meeting in Columbus Institute, and this 
celebration was carried out under Fr. Daly's direction. 

Fr. Daly is chaplain of Florentine Council, No. 304, Knights of 
Columbus. 

The Sisters of St. Dominic have charge of St. Mary's parochial school 
and have a convent at No. 32 South Hamilton street. The lay trus- 
tees of St. Mary's Church since its organization have been James 
Mulrein, John Coghill, Michael Lawler, John J. McCann, John Colle- 
ton, John Talbot, Timothy G. Kelly, James H. Mullen and Dr. Daniel 



632 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

M. Sheedy, James H. Mullen and Dr. Daniel M. Sheedy being the 
present lay trustees. 

The Chuech of the Nativity.'^ Fifty years ago the German 
Catholics in Poughkeepsie depended upon priests from New York City 
for holding their church services. Fr. Joseph Schaefler was among 
the first to officiate. The Irish Catholic rector, Fr. Riordan, allowed 
them to use St. Peter's Church for this purpose. Fr. Schaefler en- 
couraged them to form a society under the leadership* of Frank Heng- 
stebeck, which they called St. Michael's, and soon raised funds enough 
to purchase the property on Union street on which the church, school 
and rectory now stand. 

In 1852, after paying $991.00 for the land, they erected a frame 
building twenty-five by fifty feet, which was for both school and 
church purposes. This served as a place of worship imtil 1859, when 
the increase in numbers necessitated a new building which was erected 
at a cost of $4500. 

Most important changes took place during the pastorate of Father 
Metzler from 1864 to 1873. A fine building with two school rooms 
and dwelling for the teachers of the parochial school was added. The 
Right Rev. Franz Joseph Hundhausen, who was next in charge, 
brought the Franciscan Sisters from Peekskill to serve as teachers in 
this school. 

During the pastorate of Rev. Dr. Schraeder a rectory was added. 

The Right Rev. Gallus Rruder was appointed rector, July 20, 
1879. At this time a church cemetery was purchased, an organ placed 
in the church, and later the steeple and additions were completed. A 
fire on the 9th of January, 1894, injured the interior of the church 
to such an extent that new altars had to be built. A chime of bells 
and new chahce were consecrated September 8th, 1895, by Arch- 
bishop Corrigan of New York. 

The parochial school had increased so that in 1895 an addition to 
the building became necessary. 

The prosperous condition of this church is largely due to the inter- 
est taken by the older as well as the younger members of the many 
flourishing societies connected with it, whose contributions so 
greatly assist in carrying out the plans for continued improvement. 
The Right Rev. Gallus Rruder, to whose zeal and encouragement the 

1. Translated from the German by Amalla Halght. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHXIRCH. 633 

church owes its strength and prosperity, is the leader and organizer 
of these. 

The St. Elizabeth Society, composed mostly of mothers, numbers 
about 150, and is one of the most helpful institutions. The Ladies' 
Auxiliary and the Cecehan Choir are the next important factors in 
the work of the church. The Society of St. Philip is composed mostly 
of young men under twenty-one years of age, and is the so-called 
kindergarten of the church. St. Michael's Society, the oldest, in- 
cludes aU the men, and is most interesting, not only on account of its 
starting with the pioneers of the church, but also that it has a military 
company in its organization which saw actual service in our Civil 
War. The Knights of St. George, who held their first regular meet- 
ing September 4, 1883 — ^twenty-six in number — ^has, since grown into 
a strong company, finely uniformed and of great importance to the 
church. Beside the German societies, there are three Slavish organi- 
zations, numbering nearly one hundred members. 

The twenty-fifth anniversary of the pastorate of the Right Rev. 
Gallus Bruder and the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the 
Church of the Nativity were celebrated with great ceremony in 1903. 
This church is now one of the most influential and attractive ecclesi- 
astical edifices in Poughkeepsie. 

The vestrymen are Elias Spross, John B. Wermuth, L. L. Herles, 
Florian Hall, Martin Heller, Aloys MuUer. 

The Pomsh Church, Poughkeepsie.^ The Poles came to the 
friendly and beautiful city of Poughkeepsie in the year 1887. After 
finding work here, they induced others of their nationality to immi- 
grate, so that their numbers increased rapidly. In 1893 they founded 
a society which they called Josephsverein and united with the German 
Catholic Church, as many of them were able to understand German. 
Various circumstances and diiFerences of opinion induced some to 
separate from the Josephsverein in 1897, and to form a second society 
to which they gave the name of Maria von Czenstochan Verein. 

The members of the Josephsverein remained with the German 
Catholic Church, while the new society joined the Cathohc St. Peter's 
Church. 

In the year 1900 both societies took measures to found a church 
for the fast Increasing population of Poles, and presented to the 

1. Translated from the German by Amalia Halght. 



634 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Right Rev. Archbishop Michael Corrigan a petition to send them a 
priest. He granted their request, and commissioned Father Franz 
Fabian, pastor of the Polish Church of Rondout, to take up the work 
of organization. 

The Poles bought the hall of the Germania Singing Society on Lafay- 
ette Place, which originally had been used as a place of worship by the 
Baptists, and rebuilt it for their use as a church. 

Father Fabian held the first service there March 17th, 1901. In 
the following year, on the 12th of October, the church was solemnly 
consecrated by the Right Rev. Archbishop John M. Farley, the suc- 
cessor of the deceased Archbishop Michael Corrigan. Father Carl 
Galuska, who had been assisting Father Fabian in Rondout and 
Poughkeepsie, was appointed by the Right Rev. John M. Farley as 
the permanent pastor. 

During his pastorate, the rectory on Lafayette Place was pur- 
chased; a vestry room, new transept, organ, and two new side altars 
were added to the church. 

To this congregation belong one hundred and ten Polish families, 
and about one hundred unmarried persons, making in all about eight 
hundred members. 

The trustees are Stanislaus Garlikorski and Peter Koralski. 

The Catholic Chubch in the Town of Fishkill.^ The follow- 
ing facts concerning this church are gathered from a historical sketch 
made by the Rev. T. F. Kelly, formerly pastor of St. Joachim's 
Church, Matteawan, and printed in 1897. He says: 

"According to the earliest and most authentic records, the first Mass In this- 
vicinity was celebrated in Fishkill Landing some time during the Revolutionary 
War, by a French clergyman from Rhode Island. This priest visited the conti- 
nental troops, then stationed at New Windsor, Orange Coimty, New York. Having 
administered to the spiritual wants of the Catholic soldiers, he crossed the river 
to pay a visit of courtesy to Baron Steuben, who occupied the well-known Ver- 
planck mansion, and it was on this occasion that the ' Holy Sacrifice was offered 
here for the first time. At the successful termination of the war the troops re- 
turned to their homes, and the few Catholics remaining in this neighborhood were 
subjected to many and grave inconveniences in order that they might comply with 
their religious obligations. In the year 1836, however, a resident pastor was ap- 
pointed to Poughkeepsie, whose parish included all of Dutchess County. But two 
yeajs had elapsed when St. Patrick's parish, Newburgh, was organized under the 

1. Contributed by Rev. J. H. Briody. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 635 

pastoral care of the Rev. Patrick Duffy, and although the Catholic residents on 
this side of the river were stiU members of St. Peter's Church, Poughkeepsie, they 
frequently attended Mass and received the Sacraments in Newburgh, and as a 
matter of convenience. Father Duffy vi^as often called upon to minister to the sick 
and dying, though no reliable mention is made of his having said Mass here." 

The writer tells us that in the year 1845 Father Sullivan was ap- 
pointed pastor of Wappingers Falls, from which sprung, five years 
later, the nucleus of what later became St. Joachim's Church. This 
Mission was successful principally through the efforts of the late Mr. 
and Mrs. Michael Toohey and others. The building used in this 
Mission was situated on the corner of Main and Cliff streets. The 
Rev. George R. Brophy was the pastor in charge at this time. Not 
long after the Rev. Denis Sheahan succeeded to the pastorate of 
Wappingers Falls, which included Matteawan and Fishkill as mission 
stations, and finding the building incapable of accommodating the 
rapidly increasing congregation, he sold the property and thereupon 
purchased the site of the present church from the late Mathias 
Toohey, and gradually began the erection of the new church, which 
was called St. Mary's. In the fall of 1860 the Rev. James Coyle was 
appointed the first resident pastor of Matteawan, which also included 
Fishkill Landing, Low Point and Fishkill Village. The continued 
growth of the parish led to the purchase of additional property. 
Soon after the church was completed, and on the 18th day of August, 
1861, the new building was dedicated under the name of St. Joachim's 
by Archbishop Hughes. A short time after the dedication of the 
church wherein the congregation worshipped for several years, there 
was opened a parochial school under the tutorship of Mr, James Mac- 
Hugk,"who also provided here and at Glenham a night school for such 
young men as could not attend during the day. To Fr. Coyle also 
belongs the credit of having erected St. Mary's Church, Fishkill Vil- 
lage, which was dedicated in October, 1864. He also purchased land 
in Matteawan for the cemetery. Soon after his death, which occurred 
suddenly in the City of New York, the Rev. C. H. Farrell became 
the pastor, which was in the year 1867. "His eloquent preaching 
quickly increased the size of his congregation, and induced many 
persons who had been careless for a long time to return to the prac- 
tice of their rehgious duties * * * the young men and women 
of the parish were also carefully looked after ; dramatic societies were 
established to keep them from evil associations ; they were carefully 



636 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

instructed regarding their reading, and advised as to the books which 
should prove entertaining and profitable. The material wants of the 
aged poor were also provided for, but so secretly that it was only 
after his death that Fr. Farrell's extensive charities became known." 
The health of Fr. Farrell having become seriously impaired, he found 
it necessary to resign and go to Europe. It happened that the Rev. 
Peter McCourt, who became Fr. Farrell's successor, was on board the 
same steamer and devoted himself in caring for his dying friend. Fr. 
McCourt was succeeded by the Rev. John C. Henry in May, 1877, 
and he in turn by the Rev. Michael McSwiggan, a native of Ireland, 
who officiated for the first time September 15, 1884. During his 
pastorate Archbishop Corrigan visited the parish and blessed the new 
bell. During these past twenty years or more the large building had 
been kept in the best order, and improvements and embellishments of 
various kinds owing to the hberahty of the members were being made 
from time to time. On the 16th of August, 1891, the parish cele- 
brated the thirtieth anniversary of its dedication. Fr. McSwiggan 
died in Belgium, October 25, 1890, and as if anticipating his death, 
one of his last acts was the purchase of additional ground for the 
cemetery. His funeral, which took place on the 22d of November 
following, was attended by a large number of the clergy and the 
laity. On this occasion Mr. James Forrestal acted as grand marshal 
of the procession which acted as an escort, bearing the body of the 
dead priest from the railroad station to the cemetery. 

The next pastor of the parish was the Rev. Terence P. Kelly, who 
was installed on the 1st day of December, 1890. During his pas- 
torate the parish continued to expand and the number of the faith- 
ful having so increased in the town of Fishkill that it was decided to 
establish a new parish. Accordingly on the 26th day of April, 1891, 
the corner stone of St. John's Church was laid in the Village of Fish- 
kill-on-the-Hudson. The Rev. T. F. Kelly having been transferred 
to Villa Nova he was succeeded by the Rev. J. H. Briody, who is pas- 
tor of the church now. 

The following information concerning St. John's Church, Fishkill, 
appeared in St. John's Fair Journal, printed December 5th, 1891, 
signed "One of St. John's Members." 

"This parish was established by his grace. Archbishop Corrigan, of New York, 
and the first pastor, Rev. John A. Hurley, was appointed December 12th, 1887. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 637 

The formation of the new parish from a part of the old parish of St. Joachim's, 
Matteawan, was brought about by the men who lived in Fishkill-on-Hudson call- 
ing meetings and debating the advantages to be gained by having a church in the 
village here, instead of going two or three miles to Matteawan to attend divine 
service. 

Those meetings were held during September, 1887, and committees appointed 
to learn facts as to the number of famiUes belonging to the Catholic Church in 
FishkiU-on-Hudson. Mr. William A. Toohey was chairman of those meetings and 
Mr. James Peattie, secretary. The committee on census, Messrs. Andrew Kane 
and John McManus, reported two hundred Catholic families in the village. Of 
this nimiber one hundred and seventy-five families joined the new parish and 
twenty-five families remained attached to the old one. 

The committee on suitable building, Messrs. "William A. Toohey and John Crea- 
gan, reported that Swift's Hall, on Main street, could be leased for a period of 
five years or could be purchased for $4,000. 

Mr. William A. Toohey received a letter from the Archbishop a few weeks later, 
saying that our petition for a new parish had been granted and a pastor would 
be appointed in the course of a few weeks. Our building committee had learned 
in the meantime that the owner of Swift's Hall would not lease it. This gentle- 
man, Mr. David Graham, asked $4,000 for the property and very generously 
offered to donate $200 to a fund for our new church. His terms were $400 cash, 
$1200 at end of four months and balance on mortgage for five years. His terms 
were accepted, and carpenters and others set to work to fit the old hall for use 
for a church. 

Rev. John A. Hurley arrived at Fishkill-on-Hudson December 13, 1887, and at 
once took charge of the new parish. He approved of all the work and plans the 
committee had arranged and all being in readiness, on Christmas Day, Sunday, 
1887, the first Mass was celebrated in the new church. A small organ had been 
engaged and a choir had prepared suitable music for the opening occasion. 

On October 21, 1888, Rev. Archbishop Corrigan visited Fishkill-on-Hudson and 
dedicated St. John's Church. 

On February 11, 1890, the old Swift's Hall, or St. John's Church as it was now 
known, was burned to the ground, also all its contents, excepting the many sets 
of vestments and boys' suits belonging to the parish, which alone were saved. 

The old 'Elm Tree' property was then purchased from Mr. Lewis Tompkins at 
a cost of $3,500 and plans were drawn for a new church. 

On December 1, 1890, Rev. J. A. Hurley was moved to Williamsbridge, N. Y., 
and Rev. John J. McGrath, of Croton Falls, N. Y., was appointed second pastor 
of St. John's parish. 

The difficulties which beset this gentleman's path from his first assuming charge 
until he had a church erected, were numerous and most discouraging. However, 
by untiring zeal, the great help which he received from many of his people, and 
from numerous friends in town and God's blessing over all, he and we had the 
happiness of seeing our church completed on November 22, 1891. The corner stone 
was laid April 26, 1891. 



638 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

DovEB AND Pawling Chueches/ Usually men of experience ad- 
mit in friendly conversation that wherever the Church of the Apostles, 
the Church of Ages, has held sway, the precepts of her wise and salu- 
tary teachings have been a factor indeed, both potential and influen- 
tial for the moral, religious and intellectual good of all classes of 
people. In the region covered by the churches of St. John the Evan- 
gelist at Pawling, and St. Charles Borromeo at Dover Plains, much 
has been done, and a great good has been accomphshed. Yet it can- 
not be said that the people were affluent; quite the reverse has been 
the case. Still, out of their Uttle they gave much, and the grand joint 
parish of St. John's and St. Charles is to-day the result — a monu- 
ment for all time to the steadfast faith of the Catholic. 

The first priest to visit Pawling and Dover Plains was of French- 
Canadian birth, by name Fr. Cheveau, about 184!8, the year the Har- 
lem railroad was built to South Dover. So it happened, when he 
visited Pawling and Dover, bulletins were posted announcing the 
coming of the missionary priest, for the first time, the following Sun- 
day. The place of worship selected for the reKgious exercises at 
Pawhng was at the Le Grande Hall Hotel and opposite the old rail- 
road depot ; and at Dover Plains, the old Union Church that stood 
near the Brown vault in the present Valley View Cemetery. Prior to 
that time, and at long intervals, Catholics, for miles around, had 
been compelled to go afoot to Danbury, Conn., a journey both ways 
of thirty-two miles, to hear Mass. With no church in either of the 
missions (excepting the Union Church at Dover) the sturdy people 
of that abiding day were compelled, from their limited means, to have 
recourse to barns and dwelling houses to hear Mass. Still they, their 
children and their children's children, have by trials and many priva- 
tions, proved themselves equal to the task of keeping alive and spread- 
ing the faith for God's greater glory and their own spiritual welfare. 
Owing to the dearth of priests at that time in this and other sections 
of the country, Catholicity was somewhat impeded in its advancement. 

The next priest to come into this section was Fr. Riordan, who had 
succeeded Fr. Duffy, the founder of the first Catholic Church in 
Poughkeepsie, and who was also pastor of all Dutchess County. Fr. Rior- 
daii came to Dover Pla,ins in 1852, and afterward ministered to the peo- 
ple tof Dover Plains and Pawling at long intervals. He was succeeded 

1. Contributed by Richard F. Maber, Dover Plains, N. Y. 




REV. CHARLES SLE\aN. 





REV. D. J. McCORMACK. 



REV. JOSEPH A. MAHER. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 639 

by the pious and learned Fr. Sheahan, who was installed as pastor of 
Wappingers Falls in 1854. During Fr. Sheahan's administration 
Mass was celebrated once a month, and in turn at the house of Messrs. 
Connell and Maher at Dover Plains, and Begley and Hopper at Paw- 
ling. While the best was being done for the people spiritually, other 
arrangements were being made for closer relationship between priest 
and people, until, finally, news began to spread that a resident priest 
would shortly be appointed, and in 1859, Archbishop Hughes ap- 
pointed the Rev. Charles Slevin, Dover Plains being centrally 
located was chosen as the parish, about which encircled the missions 
of Pawhng, Amenia, Millbrook, Beekman and Millerton, in which 
places there were as yet no churches. The extensive territory em- 
bracing the missions running north and south covered something over 
fifty miles by about twenty-five miles east and west. On taking charge 
of the parish in 1859 Fr. Slevin set to work to secure, by purchase, 
a site for the church. He met with disappointment in buying, and 
William Maher presented the present site to him, on which he erected 
a handsome frame edifice, and dedicated it to God in the name of the 
pious St. Charles Borroraeo, the patron and protector of young men 
preparing for the priesthood. South and east of the church, in the 
same lot, ground was surveyed and marked off for the burial of those 
dying in the Lord. Prominent among the active workers in build- 
ing and paying off the indebtedness may be mentioned, with credit, 
Mr. Jeremiah Whalen, Mr. Michael Maher, Mr. Patrick Wetheral, 
and Mr. Terrence Connell, at whose homes Mass was said frequently 
prior to the erection of the church. Fr. Slevin remained in charge 
five or six years. During his pastorate the Civil War broke out and 
he was drafted; but his congregation made up the sum of $300 to 
release him and furnish a substitute. He left Dover Plains in 1864. 
The next priest to take charge of the parish was the Rev. John 
Arsenigo. He lived at Purdy's Station, but used to come up Saturday 
nights, and Sundays, after Mass, David Maher would drive him one 
Sunday to say Mass in the Union Church at Hartsville, near Mill- 
brook, and the next Sunday to Amenia to say Mass in Gilroy's house. 
Fr. Arsenigo gave the beautiful oil painting of St. Charles Borromeo 
that hangs over the altar at Dover Plains. Worn out by the strain 
endured by the care and laborious work of the distant missions, Fr. 
Arsenigo was obliged to resign in 1866. Soon after, in 1866, Rev. 



640 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Fr. Tandy was sent from New York to Amenia, becoming resident 
pastor of that town. Dover Plains, Pawling, Millerton, Millbrook 
and Beekman were connected as out missions from that point. Fr. 
Tandy secured the present site of the church at Pawling from Mr. 
A. Arnold. He built the Catholic Church in 1869. In 1872 the 
church was totally destroyed by fire, and it was practically proven 
that the fire was of incendiary origin. Not to be dismayed, however, 
by the severe tests of poverty and the machinations of men, he set to 
work and erected another and handsomer church edifice. The indebt- 
edness assumed amounted to $7,500. Fr. Tandy, sufi'ering greatly 
from the strain of mind and body, was replaced in 1872 by the Rev. 
Father Healy, who for the first time became the resident pastor of 
the newly established parish of St. John the Evangelist in Pawling, 
with Dover Plains and Beekman as outlying missions. In 1872 the 
country was in bad shape financially, owing to the noted failure of 
Jay Cooke & Co. Hard times were the result of the panic. People 
everywhere suffered by the stringency of money. Along with others, 
Fr. Healy was found unable to meet the demands made upon him. 
Defeated in a lawsuit over the boundary of church grounds at Dover 
Plains, overwhelmed with the new church at Pawling, burdened by 
great debt, and unable to meet payments, Fr. Healy resigned. At 
this change of affairs the parish of Pawling again became a mission 
church and reverted to the care of Fr. Tandy, the pastor of Amenia, 
who shortly applied to his superiors for an assistant to help him in 
his labors. His request was granted. The Rev. Michael J. Mc- 
Swiggan was appointed pastor of PawUng, Dover Plains and Sylvan 
Lake in 1877. Under the good management of Fr. McSwiggan's 
rectorship, the Rev. Joseph A. Maher, the first and only boy from 
the parish of Dover Plains who ever embraced the priesthood, came 
home from Rome. Father Maher received his early education at 
Fordham University, graduating in the class of 1876. Taking a post- 
graduate course he received the degree of A. M. in 1877. He spent 
four years in Rome, where he was ordained priest at the Church of 
St. John Lateran, by His Eminence, Cardinal Monaco La Valetta, on 
June 3, 1882. Fr. Maher died September 14, 1886, and is buried 
in the Maher plot at Dover Plains. Succeeding Fr. McSwiggan came 
Fb. William Murphy and Fr. McMullen in 1883. In 1884 the Rev. 
Daniel J. McCormick took charge of the parish of Dover and Paw- 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 641 

ling. With no rectory or residence he was obKged to board at the 
Dutcher house (the Doctor Gammage School), Pawling. Fr. Mc- 
Cormick bought the present rectory at Pawling for $7,200 in 1886, 
from the estate of Alexander Allen. He also bought the new ceme- 
tery at Dover Plains, in 1888, paying $900 for it. Fr. McCormick 
was a good business man, and during his pastorate the parish and 
surrounding missions prospered greatly to the satisfaction of all. The 
next pastor was the Rev. Edward Sweeney, appointed by His Grace 
Archbishop Corrigan in 1889. Father Sweeney stayed about two 
years and made many improvements. He paid off a floating debt of 
$300, and built St. John's Lyceum (the parish hall) at Pawling. 
Fr. Donhn succeeded Fr. Sweeney in 1891. Fr. Donlin did good 
work in the parish. He beautified the churches at Pawling and 
Dover Plains by placing stained glass memorial windows in them. 
After remaining as rector for ten years he was succeeded by the Rev. 
Eugene Shine, in 1901, who was the former pastor of Sylvan Lake, 
N. Y. Fr. Shine, in the first six years of his pastorate, paid off the 
entire parish debt. 

iMMActriiATE Conception Pakish, Amenia.^ In the year 1847 
there were several Catholic families living in Amenia, and a number 
of Catholic men were employed in the iron ore beds of Sharon Station 
in Amenia. The first priest tradition makes mention of as minister- 
ing to the Cathohcs of this section is Fr. Kelly, of Connecticut. As 
often as this zealous priest visited Sharon, CathoHcs gathered from 
far and near to hear Mass and have their children baptized. On 
rare occasions, such as Christmas and Easter, the people attended 
Mass at St. Peter's, Poughkeepsie, their parish church. Fr. Riordan, 
pastor of St. Peter's, learning that a number of Catholics had settled 
in Amenia visited this distant portion of his vineyard, and was the 
first priest to celebrate Mass in Amenia. The Holy Sacrifice was 
offered in the house of Thomas McEnroe, at the Ore Bed, about 1852. 
Fr. Riordan visited Amenia semi-annually until the appointment in 
1859 of Rev. Charles Slevin as pastor of Dover Plains and its out- 
lying missions, including Amenia, Millerton, Millbrook, etc. Fr. 
Slevin celebrated Mass in the house of Daniel Gilroy. In 1864 Fr. 
Slevin was transferred to Yonkers, and his church at Dover, with its 
missions, became attached to Croton Falls. Rev. John Arsenigo, 

1. Contributed by the Rev. Francis E. LaTelle, Amenia, N. T. 



642 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

pastor of Croton Falls, succeeded Fr. Slevin, and at his direction the 
first Catholic Church in Amenia was built in 1866-'67, and also the 
Catholic Church at Millerton in 1867. The Rev. Patrick W. Tandy 
succeeded Fr. Arsenigo, and was the first resident priest of the Amenia 
parish. He assumed charge October 15, 1868. The churches in 
Amenia and Millerton begun by Fr. Arsenigo were finished by Fr. 
Tandy. He also purchased ground for a Catholic cemetery in 
Amenia. Fr. Tandy was succeeded by Rev. Daniel J. Corkery, in 
June, 1880. In September, 1881, Fr. Corkery established a Catholic 
school with sixty pupils in attendance. On July 29, 1886, while Fr. 
Corkery was pastor, the Amenia church was destroyed by lightning, 
and on June 12, 1887, the comer stone of a new church was laid by 
Archbishop Corrigan. The sermon on the occasion was preached by 
Rev. Charles Corley. 

Fr. Corkery was succeeded by Rev. Anthony Molloy, 1888-1894. 
Rev. James McEntyre, 1894-1899. Rev. Dennis F. Coyle, 1899-1907. 
The present rector is Rev. Francis E. Lavelle, who assumed charge 
April 28, 1907. The parish has a population of six hundred. 

Catholic Mission, Millekton. It may be said that the founder 
of the Catholic Mission in Millerton was the good priest, Fr. Riordan, 
of the First Catholic Church, Poughkeepsie, and who was some fifty 
years ago pastor of all Dutchess County. In 1859 Archbishop 
Hughes appointed Fr. Charles Slevin pastor of the Dover Plains par- 
ish, of which Millerton was one of the outlying missions. During 
Slevin's pastorate this society prospered greatly, and when in 1864 
he was retired on account of ill health, the office of that pastorate was 
filled by Rev. Fr. Arsenigo, of Croton Falls parish. The strain of 
attending to so many outlying stations proved too great, and he was 
compelled to resign. He was succeeded by Rev. Father Tandy, resi- 
dent pastor of Amenia. 

When Fr. Arsenigo first visited Millerton the people of that mission 
held services in private houses. Under his ministration the people 
took heart, and a church edifice was begun. It was left for Fr. Tandy 
to continue the work of building, and about 1866 the house was com- 
pleted. Fr. E. F. Lavelle succeeded Fr. Tandy, and with the care of 
the spiritual interest of his parishioners was the burden of the church 
deb* of $2,000. To meet the interest of this indebtedness was really 
a severe tax on the congregation of the struggling Millerton mission. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 643 

This was the more apparent as the membership had been diminished 
by the closing of neighboring mines and furnaces. 

It was left to the pastorate of Rev. Fr. Coyle, the present incum- 
bent, to be signalized by the removal of this source of anxiety to the 
Millerton parish. Fr. Coyle one day remarked to some of his parish- 
ioners that if a sum could be paid towards liquidating the mortgage, 
it would prove very pleasing. "Why not make it $1,000," suggested 
Martin Griffin, "wouldn't that be better still.?" The result of the 
interview was that Mr. Griffin was authorized to raise what amount 
he could, in his own way, which he proceeded to do in a very unique 
fashion. He set down and penned polite notes to the county officials, 
stating the needs of the mission, and that any sum they might give 
would be very thankfully received. From County Treasurer Hauben- 
nestel. Surrogate Hoysradt, and County Judge PhilKps he received 
substantial cheques by return mail, as well as another from Assembly- 
man Smith. Doctors Wilbur and Cotter, of Pine Plains, responded 
handsomely. Robert Chanler sent in a handsome remembrance, as did 
John Campbell, of Lagrange, Illinois. John M. Garvin, of Rock 
River, Alabama, sent a prompt answer, enclosing cheque for $50.00. 
These gifts were mostly from non-residents of Millerton with whom 
Mr. Griffin had an acquaintance; but they were interested in the 
prosperity of the town, and were pleased at the opportunity to help 
the struggling mission. This was about the year 1905. At this 
time an entertainment was given for the church's benefit. The net 
proceeds of the collection and the entertainment amounted to over 
$1,300.00, which Mr. Griffin had the pleasure of presenting to the 
mission as the result of his proposition to raise $1,000.00 for the pur- 
pose. It is needless to add that he was warmly congratulated for the 
splendid result of his efforts by Fr. Coyle, who declared that he 
had looked upon Mr. Griffin's proposition to raise $1,000.00 as vision- 
ary. The next year the church debt was lifted, and the mission now 
has a house free from encumbrance, with grounds and cemetery en- 
closed in a neat iron fence. 

Paeish of Saint Denis, Sylvan Lake, Town of Beekman.^ The 
Church of St. Denis was built in June, 1859 — ^just fifty years ago. 
It was then a mission of Wappingers Falls. Fr. Powers was the 
rector. 

1. Contributed by the Bev. William Patrick Eagen. 



644 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In 1874 it was made a parish. Rev. P. J. Healy was the first rec- 
tor. He was succeeded by Rev. M. J. McSwiggan, who had two 
assistants, Revs. W. H. Murphy and Charles McMullen, because of 
the missions at Pawling and Dover, then under Sylvan Lake. Fr. 
McMullen succeeded Fr. McSwiggan as rector. In 1891 Rev. E. J. 
Byrnes took charge and was succeeded by Rev. John McAvoy in 1903. 
In July, 1905, the present rector, Rev. William Patrick Eagen, took 
charge. 

The parish originally embraced all the territory east of Wapping- 
ers Falls to the Connecticut line, and meeting the parishes of Mattea- 
wan on the south, and Amenia on the north, some six hundred square 
miles of territory. At present it has four hundred square miles, and 
three churches, viz: Sylvan Lake, Hopewell Junction, and Clove, 
as well as stations at Moore's Mills and Poughquag. 

There are about three hundred souls, Hopewell Junction having 
seventy-five of that number. 

St. Maby's Chuuch, Wappingers Falls. Previous to 1850 there 
was no resident pastor at Wappingers Falls. In that year the Rev. 
Fr. Brophy assumed control of this parish, and held services in the 
old frame building which stood near the entrance to the old cemetery. 
He was succeeded in 1853 by Rev. Dennis Sheahan, who remained pas- 
tor until his death in 1875. Fr. Sheahan enlarged, at various times, 
the original church edifice. He was succeeded by Rev. Charles M. 
O'Keefe, who remained until January, 1885. He built the new church, 
the corner stone of which was laid September 27, 1877, by Cardinal 
McCloskey, this being the first ceremony of the kind performed by 
him since he was created Cardinal, three years previous. The sermon 
was preached by his private secretary, the Rev. J. M. Farley. After 
the Cardinal touched the stone, it was laid in place. The clergymen 
present were Rev. Dr. E. F. McSweeney and Rev. P. F. McSweeney, 
of Poughkeepsie ; Rev. M. Fitzsimmons, of Rhinebeck; Rev. James 
Doherty, of Kingston; Rev. A. J. Canary, of Matteawan; Rev. Fr. 
Coghlin, of Brooklyn; Rev. Fr. Hogan, of St. Paul's Cathedral, New 
York, and the Rev. A. Lings, of Yonkers. The church edifice is built 
of stone, and is of English Gothic style, with a seating capacity of 
abouti one thousand. It cost about $30,000. The bell was blessed by 
Vicar-General Quinn, November 30, 1879. 

Rev. Cornelius B. Mahony assumed control of the parish in 1885. 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 645 

Under his pastorate the school building was erected, the convent pur- 
chased, and grounds comprising twelve acres on the banks of Wap- 
pingers Lake secured for a new cemetery. 

The Rev. Charles F. Reid succeeded Fr. Mahony in January, 1903. 
The following year he erected a convent for the Sisters of Charity, 
who are instructors in the parochial school. Fr. Reid has eifected 
many improvements in the church edifice and other buildings belong- 
ing to the parish. 

Among the various societies of the parish may be mentioned the 
Holy Name Society, for all men; St. Aloysius' Society, for boys; the 
Sodality of the Blessed Virgin, for single young ladies; the Society 
of the Holy Angels, which was organized about 1882, and is under 
the charge of the Sisters ; and the Lyceum Society for young men. 

St. Joseph's Parish, Rhinebck. This parish includes St. Joseph's 
Church at Rhinecliff and the Church of the Good Shepherd in Rhine- 
beck village. 

Previous to 1862 the Catholics in this neighborhood attended ser- 
vice at Rondout. In that year the Rev. Michael Scully came to the 
village to organize a parish. It was at first decided to build a church 
in the village and a lot was purchased at the corner of Livingston 
and Mulberry streets, but the parishioners at Rhinechff were strong 
in numbers and objected to the village location. This lot was then 
sold and a church edifice erected at Rhinecliff in 1864, on land deeded 
to Fr. Scully by George Rogers of Tivoli. Upon the death of Fr. 
Scully in 1872, the Rev. James Fitzsimmons was appointed rector. 
During his pastorate of seventeen years the church made substantial 
progress." He built the rectory and organized other churches in the 
parish which then extended as far north as the Columbia County line. 
Subsequent rectors were Revs. William O'Neil, Terrence Kelly, M. J. 
Murray, James B. Curry, James S. Finton, James D. Lennon and 
M. F. Aylward, the present rector. 

In 1901 the Episcopal Church property in Rhinebeck village was 
purchased, repaired and improved, and the Church of the Good Shep- 
herd established. Rev. M. F. Aylward is also in charge here. 

Church of the Sacred Heart, Barrttown. This society was in- 
corporated November 17, 1876. Originally Barrytown was a mission 
attended from Rhineclifi', until September 1, 1886, when the entire 
township of Red Hook was set off as a new parish, and Rev. William 



646 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

J. McClure appointed resident rector. He was succeeded in 1893 by 
Rev. Daniel J. Cronin, who remained until June 27, 1899. The Rev. 
Hugh P. Cullum then became resident rector, and was followed in 1901 
by Rev. Matthew J. F. Scanlon, the present incumbent. 

The church edifice, which is a frame structure, was erected in 1875, 
during the pastorate of Rev. James Fitzsimmons, of Rhinechff, on 
land donated by the Donaldson family, who also deeded to the church 
land for a rectory and for a cemetery. The rectory was built in 1887. 
When Fr. Scanlon was appointed, in 1901, the church was struggUng 
under a debt of $2,400. Through his efforts and those of the lay 
trustees, Messrs. Daniel O'Connell and James Baxter, Sr., the parish 
was thoroughly canvassed and this indebtedness was wiped out. 

St. Sylvia's Chubch, Tivom. In 1852 the Rev. Michael C. Power 
was appointed by the Bishop of Albany to the pastorate of Sauger- 
ties, Ulster County. He administered the Sacrament to the Catholics 
in Tivoli and neighboring districts, and was succeeded in the work of 
soul saving by the Rev. Michael Scully, who was stationed at Rhine- 
cliff. Then came the Rev. James Fitzsimmons, who succeeded Fr. 
Scully at Rhinecliff. He built the first Catholic Church in Tivoli, 
and with his assistants, served the entire eastern shore of the Hudson 
from Albany to Poughkeepsie. 

In 1886 Rev. W. J. McClure took possession of Barrytown parish, 
with Tivoli as a mission, and February 18, 1890 Tivoli was elevated 
to the rank of an independent parish, with the Rev. J. S. Finton its 
first rector. Subsequent rectors were Revs. Michael Reinhart, P. F. 
Maughan, Francis C. Lenes, J. H. Dooley, and Rev. C. J. Parks, who 
has had charge of the parish since 1906. 

Just previous to the appointment of Fr. Dooley, September 28, 
1902, the late Archbishop Corrigan had arranged with the Countess 
de Laugier-Villars and her sister, Mrs. Geraldyn Redmond, for the 
erection and equipment of the present beautiful church edifice and 
rectory as a tribute to the memory of their mother, Mrs. Johnston 
Livingston. The church was consecrated June 28, 1903, by the Most 
Rev. John M. Farley, Archbishop of New York. 

A convent school adjoining the church was established in 1888, 
and is under the direction of Sister M. Geronimo, assisted by Sister 
Rose Monico and Sister Frances de Chantal. A thorough religious 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 647 

and secular education is imparted to an average attendance of thirty- 
five pupils. 

St. Joseph's Chuech, Millbuook, was at first a mission cared for 
by the parish at Amenia, but now has developed into a large and im- 
portant church, with two resident priests, and ministers to the spirit- 
ual needs of a large number of souls. This parish, St. Joseph's, con- 
ducts a mission at Clinton Corners, where a chapel has been erected. 
In MiUbrook there is a large church edifice, a house for the priest's 
home, and a hall in which can be held social gatherings of all kinds. 
Lately a large number of Italians have made homes for themselves in 
MiUbrook, and have become a part of this parish, which is prosper- 
ing under the care of Fr. Weir. 

The Roman Cathomc Chuech, Hyde Pakk. This church was 
built in 1863 and '64, at the expense of Mrs. Mortimer Livingston 
and her daughter, Mrs. Drayton, who married for her second husband 
Mr. Kirkpatrick. The name of the church is inscribed on the front 
of the building, Ecclesia Reg'vrm Cceli. It is a neat building of brick 
and brown stone on Harvey street, nearly opposite the termination of 
Park Place. In a vault under the nave of the church are buried mem- 
bers of the Livingston and Drayton families. A rectory adjoins the 
church edifice. The Rev. Tobias M. Fitzpatrick was the first resident 
priest. His successors have been: Rev. John Parker, 1883; Rev. 
Michael Murray, 1884; Rev. Fr. Leahy, 1888; Rev. Terence F. Kelly, 
1890 ; Rev. R. J. Burns, 1893-99. Since 1899 the Rev. John De La 
Peer Lonargan has officiated. 

Fr. Lonargan also serves St. Paul's Church, Staatsburgh, which 
was founded May 8, 1888, by Rev. Terence F. Kelly. The previous 
chapel was located on Clay Hill, on ground donated by William Em- 
met, cousin of the patriot Thomas. 

Chuech of Oue Lady of Mt. Caemel (Italian Catholic). The 
church of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel was incorporated by certificate 
of incorporation dated February 19, 1908, and recorded in the 
Dutchess County Clerk's office, February 24, 1908. The trustees 
named in the certificate being His Grace, Right Rev. John M. Farley, 
Archbishop of New York; Joseph F. Mooney, Vicar-General; Nicolas 
Pavone, Pastor; Pasquale Antonio Tesone and Nicola Manna, Lay 
Trustees. 



648 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

The congregation of this church, at present and for some time 
past, has held its services in St. Peter's Church. The corporation, 
June, 1909, purchased the John I. Piatt property on the west side of 
Cataract Place and it is intended to erect thereon, very shortly, a 
new church, rectory and school. 

Rev. Fr. Nicolas Pavone, pastor of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel 
Church, was born at Trivento, Province of Campobasso, Italy, Au- 
gust 18, 1878. In 1886 he went to the Seminary at Trivento and was 
ordained priest by Right Rev. Bishop Mgr. Carlo Pietropaoli, Decem- 
ber 23, 1901. In 1902 he studied in La Minerva University of the 
Dominican Fathers at Rome. In 1903 he returned to Trivento and 
was the secretary of the bishop and chaplain of the Holy Cross Church. 
In 1904 he was a teacher in the Seminary of Larino, and in 1905 he 
returned again to Trivento. At that time Bishop Pietropaoli, by 
request of Mgr. Proweduto of Rome, sent him to America. He 
arrived in New York December 20, 1905, and was received by Most 
Rev. Archbishop J. M. Farley and assigned to St. Peter's Church in 
Poughkeepsie, by request of Rev. Fr. Wm. Livingston, December 22, 
1905. 

The MAaisT Beothees. The institution of "The Little Brothers 
of Mary," generally known as "The Marist Brothers," is a teaching 
order, founded nearly a century ago in Lyons, France, by the Ven- 
erable Champagnat. The object of the order is the Christian educa- 
tion of young men. They take great care to develop the will as well 
as the intellect. They give their whole lives to the work of education. 
The Holy See gave many signal proofs of its satisfaction at the rapid 
development of this educational order and definitely recognized and 
approved of it by a decree January 9, 1863. This order has estab- 
lishments in many countries. In fact they are spread all over the 
world. They came to the United States in 1885 and a few years 
later opened a boarding school in New York City, with the approba- 
tion of His Grace, Archbishop Corrigan. 

On February 28, 1905, the Marist Brothers purchased the Mac- 
Pherson place on the Hyde Park Road, just above Poughkeepsie, and 
subsequently on August 29, 1908, they purchased that part of the 
"Beck" property lying on the west side of the Hyde Park Road. The 
house on the MacPherson property is known as "St. Ann's Hermitage" 
and has been chosen as the Mother House of the order for the United 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. 649 

States. These properties are to be used for a training school and a 
junior and senior novitiate. 

On Sunday, July 26, 1908, nine young men were admitted to the 
"Marist Brothers" order at St. Ann's Hermitage, this being the 
first reception of novices to their order in Dutchess County. 

Novitiate op St. Andrew-on-the-Hudson. The Novitiate of St. 
Andrew is one of the colleges erected by the Society of Jesus, more 
generally known as the Jesuit Society. The society purchased the 
Stuyvesant property on the Hyde Park Road, in the town of Hyde 
Park, on July 13, 1899. Since this time other farms adjoining have 
also been purchased. Since the purchase of the property the society 
has erected its college building upon the Stuyvesant property. On 
January 15, 1908, the Jesuit Novitiate, which had been at Frederick, 
Md., since 18S3, moved to St. Andrew. 

On November 19, 1907, the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament was 
consecrated by His Grace, Archbishop John M. Farley. This chapel 
is the gift of Mrs. Thomas F. Ryan to St. Andrew. The chapel was 
built by the late Thomas F. Brennan and cost $80,000. 

Since the Jesuits came to Dutchess County four chapels or churches 
have been built in this vicinity, viz: One at Pleasant Valley called 
*'St. Stanislaus," another called "The Chapel of Our Lady of the 
Wayside," the gift of the late Mr. P. J. Kennedy of New York City, 
to serve for the benefit of the Catholics living near the Novitiate, and 
two other churches, that of St. Joseph and of Our Lady, erected on 
the grounds of the Hudson River State Hospital. All the above 
named churches, together with the Marist Brothers' Chapel, are 
attended by priests from St. Andrew. 

The Novitiate of St. Andrew-on-the-Hudson occupies a charming 
site on the east bank of the river, some three miles north of Pough- 
keepsie. Here young men wishing to offer themselves to the ser- 
vice of God in the Society of Jesus, either as priests or coadjutor 
brothers, enter upon their long period of probation and training as 
novices. For two years they devote themselves exclusively to religious 
occupation such as the practice of mental prayer, obedience, humilia- 
tion and systematic spiritual exercises which may train them to solid 
and elevated virtue. After the two years of novitiate, the candidates 
are admitted to simple vows, and are professed members of the 
society; those who are to be priests pass to another wing of the 



650 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

building to spend from one to three years, according to their pre- 
vious proficiency in reviewing or extending their classical and other 
college studies. This is only the beginning of a long and arduous 
course of study, to be continued in institutions of still higher grade. 
In addition to the novices and junior scholastics above referred 
to, St. Andrew's also shelters the Tertian Fathers, or priests 
undergoing the third year of probation. These are the young 
priests who having finished their studies and received Holy Orders, 
return to the Novitiate for the space of another year, to temper their 
souls anew in the fire of spiritual exercises before entering finally upon 
their life battle in the cause of Christ. During this year they have 
also practice in giving missions in the city and country churches. 
Still another purpose aimed at in the Novitiate is to afford a place 
of retreat to persons, either priest or layman, desiring to spend some 
time in contemplation, and in the regular course of exercises devised 
by St. Ignatius Loyola for the reformation of life and the advancement 
of the soul. At all times during the year, particularly during the 
summer months, laymen and clergy, zealous for the better gifts, are 
seen in retirement at St. Andrew engaged in meditation, prayer and 
penance under the direction of some Father of the community. With- 
in the sacred walls of the chapel and in the presence of the Blessed 
Sacrament, the Novice or Tertian spends long periods of rapt con- 
templation. He attends the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and re- 
ceives in Holy Communion the Bread of Life, which is to sustain him 
in his mortification, labors and entire conflict. 

The whole purpose of this community is the promotion and develop- 
ment of the higher life. It is to be a center of spiritual energy which 
may moderate or diminish, in Catholics at least, the danger of absorp- 
tion in the fierce struggle of the material forces that are focussed so 
intensely in this part of the country. It is an attempt to teach men 
to emulate, in their fight for heaven, the sacrifices which men make who 
are fighting for wealth and power. It is a school for training young" 
Jesuits to imitate, and if possible surpass, the exploits of their prede- 
cessors , who achieved so much amid difficulties and hardships and 
trials, which in these easy-going days are hard to fully realize. 



FRIENDS' MEETINGS. 



651 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

FRIENDS' MEETINGS IN DUTCHESS COUNTY. 

By John Cox, Jr., Custodian of Feiends' Recoeds, 
New York. 

THIS county has had more Friends' meetings in it than any 
other in the State. The first settlement of* Friends was on 
the ridge of Quaker Hill, and the first to settle there were 
probably Benjamin Ferriss and Nathan Birdsall, in 1728. Others soon 
followed, and by 1742 the first meeting was well established. 

The "Enrollment of the People Called Quakers Persuant an act of 
General Assembly of this province passed the 19th of February, 1755, 
Entitled an Act for Regulating the Militia of the Colony of New 
York," gives a list of forty-nine heads of families for Dutchess County 
with their locations and occupations. 

This list appears in Chapter V, page 63, and it is interesting to 
compare it with the following "List of the Heads of FamiKes" in Ob- 
long Monthly Meeting in 1761. 



1st at ITEW MUfOBD. 

Dobson Wheeler & his Wife 

Aaron Benedick & his Wife 

Joseph Ferriss 

Gains Talcott 

James McKenney 

Lydia Norton 

Anna Philips 

3in> AT cBLoiro. 
John Bull & his Wife 
Wing Kelley & his Wife 
Oliver Tryon & his Wife 
John Wing & his Wife 
John Hoag ye 2d & Wife 
Benjam Hoag & his Wife 



Abner Hoag & Wife 
Benjam Hoag Senr & Wife 
Philip Allen & Wife 
Moses Hoag & Wife 
George Soule & Wife 
Wm. Russell & Wife 
David Hoag & Wife 
Ebenezer Peaslee & Wife 
tfehemiah Merritt & Wife 
Nehemiah Merritt Jnr & Wife 
Elijah Doty & Wife 
Henry Chase & Wife 
Abraham Chase & Wife 
Benjamin Ferriss & Wife 
Timothy Dakin & Wife 
Elisha Akin's Children 



652 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



Reed Ferriss & Wife 
Zebulon Ferriss & Wife 
John Hoag Senr & Wife 
John Hoag Jur & Wife 
Jedidiah Wing & Wife 
Josiah Akin & Wife 
Stephen Hoag & Wife 
James Hunt & Wife 
Prince Howland & Wife 
Isaac Haviland & Wife 
Nathn BirdsaU & Wife 
Nathn Birdsall Jnr & Wife 
Daniel Chase & Wife 
Edward Wing & Wife 
Abraham Wing & Wife 
Israel Howland & Wife 
David Atkin & Wife 
Jonathan Akin & Wife 
Joseph Jinnins & Wife 
Robert Whitely & Wife 
Nathanael Stevenson 
Joseph Hoag 
Abraham Thomas 
Isaac Bull 
Patience AMn 
Desire Chase 
Mary Allen Widdow 
Mersey Fish 
Margaret Akin 
Margery Woolman 
Dinah Gifford Widdow 
Elizab Hunt Widdow 
Abigail Gifford 
Phebe Boudy 
Ann Hepbern 
Sarah Davis 
Ann Corban 
Hannah BirdsaU 

SdLT at mXE PABTKEBS. 

Peter Hallock & Wife 
Moses Haight & Wife 
Aaron Haight & Wife 
Joshua Haight & Wife 
George Soule & Wife 
William Palmer & Wife 



Reuben Palmer & Wife 
Nehemiah Reynolds & Wife 
Peter Palmer & Wife 
Aaron Vail & Wife 
Joseph Haight & Wife 
John Lapham & Wife 
Jonathan Holmes & Wife 
Jonathan Hoag & Wife 
Israel Devil & his Wife 
John Kees & Wife 
Nathaniel Brown & Wife 
Anthony Arnold & Wife 
Caleb Norton & Wife 
Micah GrifBn & Wife 
Jacob Haight & Wife 
John Haight & Wife 
Stephen Haight & Wife 
Micah Palmer & Wife 
Andrew White & Wife 
Stephen Hicks & Wife 
Daniel Tobias & Wife 
Ezekiel Hoag & Wife 
William Haight 
Joseph Reynolds 
Obadiah Griflin 
Solomon Haight 
Ben jam White 
John Hallock 
David Arnold 
Nathan Bull 
Hannah Thorn 
Hannah Tripp 
Margaret AUen 
Rose Barton 
Sarah Collins 
Bersheba Southerlin 
Sarah Jacocks 
Ruth Mabbit 
Patience Green 

4thlt at osweoo. 
Samuel Dorland & Wife 
Richard Smith & Wife 
Joseph Smith & Wife 
Samuel Hall & Wife 
Allen Moore & Wife 



FRIENDS' MEETINGS. 



653 



John Thomas & Wife 
Lot Tripp & Wife 
Ebenezer Shearman & Wife 
Joshua Sherman & Wife 
Daniel Shepherd & Wife 
John Thomas & Wife 
Josiah Bull 
Zebulon Hoxsie 
Ichabod Bowerman 
David Irish 
Andrew Moore 
Joseph Waters 
Eliab Youmans 
Othniel Allen 
John Carman 
Jesse Irish 



Deborah Reed 
Martha Gifford 
Abigail Adams 
Mary Moore 
Catharine Leaven 
Maiy Youman 
Mehetable Devil 

Sthlt ax peach ponds. 
Samuel Field & Wife 
Elias Palmer & Wife 
David Pahner & Wife 
Samuel Coe & Wife 
Stephen Field & Wife 
Solomon Field & Wife 



These Friends were partly from Westchester County and Long 
Island, but largely from the New England meetings. 

The Documentary history of the meetings in this county is found 
in the records of these meetings and of earher meetings to the south- 
ward. These records, and those of all meetings throughout the State, 
have been brought together at Fifteenth Street meeting house. New 
York City, by a joint committee of the two New York Yearly Meet- 
ings, of which the writer is chairman. Over a thousand volumes are 
already collected, and many additional volumes are coming in every 
year. The writer earnestly requests all having such records in their 
possession to communicate with him. 

Purchase Monthly Meeting in the lower part of Westchester 
County, was the first one on the main land of this province, and its 
jurisdiction extended over Friends to the northward till 1744. The 
receipt of certificates from Dartmouth, Mass., shows the movement 
from the east, ' but the earliest mention of a meeting in Dutchess 
County appears First Month, 1, 1742, when a certificate from Dart- 
mouth in New England was received for George Soul and wife, "being 
settled at the nine partners." At the same meeting Benjamin Ferriss, 
WilHam Russell, Jam^s Clement and Thomas Franklin were appointed 
"to Conclude the dementions of a meeting house to be build on the 
Oblong" and to build it. In Fourth Month Overseers were appointed 
for the meetings at Oblong and at New Milford, Conn., where a meet- 
ing had been established as early as 1739, and where Friends had been 



654 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

settled as early as 17S3, as proved by the Purchase minutes. Sixth 
Month 12, 1742, "The request of Sundry friends living at Crumelbow 
or the Nine Partners to have a meeting Settled Amongst them was 
read at this meeting and Approved." Seventh Month 9, 1742, the 
Monthly Meeting decided "that theire be a preparative meeting held 
at the Oblong the week before each monthly Meeting, for themselves 
and the adjacent meetings." 

Fourth Month 14, 1744, the Yearly Meeting having approved. Ob- 
long Monthly Meeting was set up "at the Oblong and the nine part- 
ners to be held at each place by turns on the 3d fifth day of every 
month ;" and no further reference to Dutchess County Friends appears 
in the Purchase minutes, except, — and this is important as showing 
the strength of the new Monthly Meeting — Oblong Monthly Meeting 
recommended to the consideration of Purchase Monthly Meeting the 
establishment of a Quarterly Meeting "on this side." The Yearly 
Meeting granted the request and Purchase Quarterly Meeting was 
established 6th Month 3, 1745, to be held at Oblong and Purchase. 

The men's minutes of Oblong Monthly Meeting from Fourth Month, 
1744, to Seventh Month, 1757, are missing. A note on the first page 
of the next volume states that "the Preceeding Minutes hereon depend- 
ing are in Manuscript. As also all ye former MSnutes from 1744: 
when first this Monthly Meeting was Settled." The inference is that 
the minutes were then on loose sheets. In 1760 the meeting directed 
Joshua Haight to record the minutes from 1744 to 1757 in a book. 
He may have done so, and if this volume can be found it will be of 
great historical value. The men's minutes are complete from 1757 to 
1828, and of the Hicksite branch to 1884, when the meeting was laid 
down, and of the Orthodox branch fairly complete from 1828. Sev- 
eral volumes of women's minutes are missing, but it is hoped they will 
yet be found. 

The Oblong meeting house, built in 1742 as above noted, was re- 
placed in 1764 by the present venerable building on Quaker Hill in the 
town of Pawling. It is very strongly built with unusual framing and 
bracing. While Washington's army was located in this region this 
was used as an hospital. Loopholes cut at that time through the 
plank siding of the gables can still be seen in the attic. The first 
house seems to have been on the south side of the road, nearly opposite 
the present one. At the Separation of 1828 the house was retained 



FRIENDS' MEETINGS. 655 

by the Hicksite branch and the Orthodox built the house still used 
on the Ridge road near the old house. Oswego meeting at Moore's 
Mills in the present town of LaGrange was allowed as early as 1750, 
and was made a Preparative Meeting in 1758. New Milford meeting, 
in the town of New Milford, Litchfield County, Connecticut, was not 
made a Preparative Meeting until 1777. It was laid down in 1828 
by the Hicksites, and later by the Orthodox. 

Poughquaig (sometimes called Appoughguague) meeting, in the 
town of Beekman, was allowed in 1771, and made a Preparative Meet- 
ing in 1773. Peach Pond meeting was allowed in 1760. The Pre- 
parative Meeting was established in 1779 and laid down in 1792. The 
meeting house is still standing at Peach Lake in the town of Salem, 
Westchester County, and one large meeting each ^nraier has been for 
a quarter of a century a local event of the year. Valley meeting, in 
the town of Patterson, was allowed in 1776, first at Elijah Doty's and 
then at Daniel Haviland's. It was made a Preparative Meeting in 
1785. The Orthodox branch laid this down in 1828, and the Hicks- 
ite branch in 1866. 

Cornwall meeting. There was a meeting of this name, allowed as 
a part of Valley Preparative Meeting. It was laid down in 1801. 
Oblong Monthly Meeting also allowed several other meetings outside 
of the County, one at Salisbury (probably in Rensselaer or Washing- 
ton County) in 1766, though they had held a "Visitation" Meeting 
there twice a year since 1746, one at Queensbury, near Glens Falls in 
1767, and one at West Hartford, Connecticut, in 1800, the latter 
becoming a Monthly Meeting in 1805. 

In 1769 the second Monthly Meeting in the county and the third 
on the mainland was established at Nine Partners. It comprised at 
first the Preparative Meeting of Nine Partners and Oswego, and the 
meetings at Salisbury and Queensbury. The old brick meeting house of 
Nine Partners, near Millbrook, still used by the Hicksite branch, is 
the second house built there. After the Separation the Orthodox 
built their house in Millbrook. Other meetings were soon allowed. 
In 1771 Friends "over the Creek" desired a meeting which was 
granted, at the house of Jonathan Hoag. In 1775 a committee was 
appointed to "pitch upon a place" for the meeting house, which was 
soon built in the present town of Clinton, and a Preparative meeting 
established the following year. Easton Meeting in Washington 
County and East Hoosack Meeting at Adams, Mass., were allowed in 



656 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1774, and both made Preparative Meetings in 1776. These two 
meetings, together with White Creek meeting, allowed in 1777 in 
Washington County, and the Queensbury Meeting above referred to, 
were set off in 1778 to form Easton Monthly Meeting. 

Meetings at New Cornwall, Orange County, and New Marlborough, 
Ulster County, were allowed in 1773 and 1776. These, with Creek 
Preparative Meeting and New Britain Meeting in Columbia County, 
the latter allowed in 1771, comprised Creek Monthly Meeting, set off 
from Nine Partners in 1782. 

By 1783 the journey to Quarterly Meeting, held at Purchase and 
Oblong, was too great for those to the northward, and Nine Partners 
Quarterly Meeting was estabhshed, comprising the Monthly Meet- 
ings of Nine Partners and Creek in this county, Easton Monthly 
Meeting in Washington County, and East Hoosack Monthly Meeting 
at Adams, Mass. Ten years later Easton Quarterly Meeting was 
established with the two last meetings, and Oblong Monthly Meeting 
was transferred to Nine Partners Quarterly Meeting. 

By 1798 the wave of Quaker immigration had reached up into 
Canada, and Adolphus Town Preparative Meeting was then estab- 
lished by a committee of the Yearly Meeting to be a part of Nine 
Partners Monthly Meeting. In 1801 it was set off as a Monthly 
Meeting, a part of Nine Partners Quarterly Meeting. 

Chestnut Ridge Meeting, in the town of Dover, was allowed in 
1790 at the house of Rachel Hustis, and a Preparative Meeting estab- 
lished in 1799. It was laid down in 1828 by the Orthodox and in 
1854< by the Hicksites. Canaan meeting, in the town of Canaan, 
Litchfield County, Conn., was allowed in 1807 and established as a 
Preparative Meeting in 1820. Laid down by the Orthodox in 1828 
and by the Hicksites in 1839. 

In 1788 Cornwall and Marlborough Preparative Meetings were set 
off from Creek Monthly Meeting to form Cornwall Monthly Meeting, 
in Orange and Ulster Counties, which was a part of Nine Partners 
Quarterly Meeting until Cornwall Quarterly Meeting was established 
in 1816. 

In 1793 Hudson Monthly Meeting was set off from Creek with the 
Preparative meetings of Hudson in the City of Hudson, Columbia 
County, Coeymans in the town of Coeymans, Albany County, and the 
meeting at Klinakill (now Ghent), Columbia County. The dates at 
which these meetings were allowed and established cannot be exactly 



FRIENDS' MEETINGS. 657 

determined, as the early minutes of Creek Monthly Meeting were pre- 
sumably burned, either in the house of Smith Upton or Shotwell 
Powell, clerks respectively of the Orthodox and Hicksite meetings. 
Crum Elbow Meeting in the town of Hyde Park was allowed in 1778 
by Nine Partners Monthly Meeting and the Preparative Meeting 
established in 1797 by Creek Monthly Meeting. 

Stanford Monthly Meeting was set off from Creek about 1800, with 
the Preparative Meetings of Stanford, in the present village of Stan- 
fordville, established in 1795, and Little Nine Partners established 
1800, in the town of Washington. Northeast Preparative Meeting, 
in the town of Northeast, was established by Stanford Monthly Meet- 
ing in 1810, having been a meeting for worship since 1803. 

Oswego Monthly Meeting was set off from Oblong in 1799 with the 
one Preparative Meeting of Oswego, above referred to. The Hicks- 
ite branch still maintains Oswego meeting near Moore's Mills, but the 
Orthodox laid down their meeting in 1861, and changed the name and 
place of their Monthly Meeting to Poughkeepsie. West Branch Pre- 
parative Meeting was established in 1800, a meeting for worship hav- 
ing been allowed in 1792 by Oblong Monthly Meeting, at Stephen 
Dean's in the Town of Freedom (now LaGrange). The Orthodox 
branch of this was laid down in 1828 and the Hicksite branch in 1849. 
Poughquaig Preparative Meeting, in the town of Beekman, was trans- 
ferred from Oblong to this Monthly Meeting in 1803. The Ortho- 
dox have had no meeting here since 1828, but the Hicksites main- 
tained one till 1874. Pleasant Valley Meeting, in the southeast 
corner of the town of that name, was allowed in 1802 and the Prepara- 
tive Meeting established in 1806. It was laid down by the Orthodox 
in 1828, and by the Hicksites in 1881. Poughkeepsie meeting was 
allowed in 1811 and the Preparative Meeting established in 1819. 
Meetings are still maintained by both branches. Beekman Meeting, 
in the town of that name, was allowed in 1803 at Samuel Dorland's, 
and the Preparative Meeting established in 1819. This was laid down 
in 1828 by the Hicksites, but the Orthodox, who retained the old 
ihouse still standing at Arthursburg, maintained a meeting until re- 
cently. Of these meetings, Stanford Preparative Meeting was laid 
down in 1871 by the Hicksites, but a meeting is still maintained there 
by the Orthodox. Little Nine Partners was laid down in 1855 by the 
Hicksites, and Northeast laid down in 1828. They have also been 
laid down by the Orthodox. 



658 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

A day school was maintained by Nine Partners Preparative Meet- 
ing from 1794< to 1809 or later. 

Nine Partners Boarding School was established by the Yearly 
Meeting in 1795, at the Separation was retained by the Orthodox 
branch, and was discontinued by the Yearly Meeting in 1852. It 
was thereafter leased for a school till 1863, and sold in 1865. Oak- 
wood Seminary at Union Springs, Cayuga County, is the successor 
of this Boarding School. 

In 1800 Stanford Quarterly Meeting was established, including the 
Monthly Meetings of Stanford and Creek in this county, and Hudson 
and Coeymans in Columbia and Albany Counties. 

In the list of members of the Yearly Meeting made in 1828 by the 
Orthodox branch, and containing about 20,000 names, the Friends in 
this county were divided among the Preparative Meetings as to the 
Separation as follows : 

ORTHODOX HICK3ITE TOTAL 

Oblong 25 95 120 

Branch IS 35 SO 

Valley 1 S8 59 

Nine Partners 105 201 306 

Ridge 9 42 51 

Canaan 1 33 24 

Oswego , 26 59 85 

Beekman 68 89 157 

Poughkeepsie 84 258 342 

Creek 88 168 256 

Little Nine Partners 40 45 gs 

Crum Elbow 204 204 

Stanford 63 186 349 

Northeast 34 15 49 

Totals 559 1478 2037 

West Branch and Pleasant Valley Preparative Meetings do not 
appear in the above list and may have been included as part of Pough- 
keepsie and Beekman Preparative Meetings. 

The Separation of 1828 was an unfortunate blunder, and of the 
meetings, which tiU then had been steadily increasing in number and 
members, few have recovered from the depressing effects of that bitter 
p^od. 

John Cox, Jb., 

156 Fifth Ave., New York. 



APPENDIX. 

THE MILTON FERRY. 

By Captain C. M. Woolsey. 

Editor's Note. — C. M. Woolsey, Esq., who has recently published an excellent 
town history of Marlborough, Ulster Cpunty, has kindly qpntributed the following 
article on the Ferries which in former times were operated between Milton, Ulster 
County, and what was once known as Milton Ferry, in Dutchess County, near the 
Gill Mill and Barnegat. 

The article is interesting, as well for the history of the old Ferries, as for its 
account of the one time importance of Barnegat, which at the present day has 
almost wholly ceased to exist, there being now but a, single old house at the place 
where once was a busy little manufacturing hamlet. 

The early history of this ferry is all tradition. About 1740, or a 
few years previous, there was a ferry established across the Hudson 
River from a point on the west side a quarter of a mile or more south 
of what is the present steamboat landing at Milton to some point at 
or near what is now the Gill place, or at what was Barnegat. 

What kind of vessel was then used can not now be determined, but 
it is supposed to have been a row, or sail, boat of some kind. It was 
adequate to carry wagons, teams, cattle, etc. 

The country that now comprises the towns of Marlborough and 
Plattekill, in Ulster County, and some lands on the south, was early 
settled by English people who had previously settled in what is now 
Westchester County and Long Island, and by children of such settlers. 

After 1730 and up to Revolutionary times, large numbers of settlers 
poured into this part of the county. They brought their families, 
teams, cattle and all their worldly goods with them. They crossed 
from the east side to the west side of the river by means of this ferry. 
They also kept up intercourse for many years with those they had 
left behind. This, I think, is the reason the ferry was established so 
early. A means of crossing was needed, so they provided some rude 
vessel that would answer the purpose. 



660 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

After this early means of crossing was in operation, people natur- 
ally came here to use the ferry for miles up and down the river on 
either side. My great-great-grandfather, Richard Woolsey, was 
among these early settlers. He was bom at Bedford, Westchester 
County, in 1697, came here when a young man and purchased an 
original patent of land, granted by Queen Anne, of many hundred 
acres lying adjoining this ferry on the south, parts of which lands are 
now owned by me. He and his descendants left numerous traditions 
about this ferry-boat. It was in use, and used by Richard Woolsey 
up to the time of his death in 1777 ; and at that time lime was burned 
at Bamegat and brought over by this ferry. 

Nicholas Hallock, the oldest man in the town of Marlborough, says 
he well remembers, when a child, hearing his great uncle, Edward 
Hallock, and his grandfather Hull tell about using this ferry, and 
how it was built, the way it was entered, etc. 

I can not find any charter for it, or who was the first owner. In 
our ancient records of road districts for the year 1779, I find as 
follows: "Nathaniel Harker's District No. 3. Beginning at Major 
DuBois's north Une runs to Zadock Lewis's house at the cross road 
leading to the ferry." And also, "William Woolsey's District No. 5. 
Beginning at Lattemores ferry at the river, south of Jeremiah Bea- 
gle's in Latting Town." Benoni Lattemore owned the ferry at this 
time and had been the owner for some years previous. Afterwards 
and some time prior to 1789 Elijah Lewis owned it. He had a dock 
and also carried on business there. It was claimed at one time that 
Theopolis Anthony owned it, and before him one VanKeuren. These 
last two owners resided on the east side of the river. 

On an ancient map dated 1797, made from the surveys and field book 
of Dr. Benjamin Eley by Henry Livingston, of Poughkeepsie, for 
Stephen Nottingham, Supervisor of the town of Marlborough, it is 
set down as Powell's dock and ferry. 

Jacob and Thomas Powell, who had a store and tavern, ran this 
ferry, and also a line of sloops to New York City that carried wood, 
produce, etc., for the farmers for a wide extent of country, and 
brought back their supplies. The Powells were here several years. 
Thomas Powell afterward, about 1800, moved to Newburgh, became 
very successful and acquired a large fortune. The steamers Thomas 
Powell and Mary Powell were named after him and his wife. It has 



APPENDIX. 661 

been claimed that his first money was made here by the ferry and his 
other enterprises. 

At a later date Benjamin Townsend ran this ferry and carried on 
business. I can find no mention of it after about 1810, and presume 
it was then discontinued, as none of the old inhabitants of this neigh- 
borhood can remember this original ferry, though they all have heard 
about it from their parents and grandparents. 

A ferry had been established at Poughkeepsie about 1800, and by 
1810 the Barnegat lime business commenced to decline and emigration 
from Westchester County and Long Island had ceased, so a great 
part of the usefulness of the ferry had ceased by 1810. 

People journeyed by means of this ferry from Massachusetts and 
Connecticut to New Jersey, Pennsylvania and the "West. During the 
Revolution Continental soldiers crossed here to and from the eastern 
States ; specie, currency and provisions for the army were also carried. 
Washington with his guard is supposed to have crossed on one or 
more occasions. 

All the description of the boat or vessel used as the ferry, that we 
have, is that it was a rude scow or barge of some kind with sails and 
oars which ran most of the time on signals. It could carry teams, 
cattle and passengers ; and it was said that at times horses were tied 
behind and swam over. It was said to have been the same kind of a 
boat as the boat then running at Troy. It must have been a strong 
boat, for it made trips in stormy weather, but not during the season 
when ice was in the river. The sides could be let down, and it was 
entered in this way. There is no tradition that there ever was an 
accident or loss of life by means of it. 

To be sure there must have been different boats at different times 
as the old ones wore out, but the description of all was about the 
same. Very little, if any, shelter was provided and it was only tem- 
porary when it was. In heavy storms the vessel lay at its dock. 

The landing on the east side of the river must have been in the 
vicinity of Barnegat, for the ferry carried quantities of lime and lime 
rock to this side. This was one of the supports of the ferry. The 
lime business at Barnegat was commenced soon after the close of the 
Revolution, and it is claimed lime was burned there during the war or 
even before, as people used lime from somewhere before that time all 
about here and the surrounding country. 



662 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

At least soon after the war we had lime kilns on the west side, and 
they must have been started soon after those at Bamegat, as there 
has never been lime rocks about here, and the rock was brought over 
and burned here. 

I find in our ancient records in the laying out of a road, as follows : 

"A Return of an Open Publick Road as Follow: We the Commissioners for the 
Town of Marlborough in the year 1790 in the Month of June. By a. Petition 
from the Freeholders and Inhabitants of Said Town for a Publick Road or High- 
way from Latting Town to Hudson River have laid it out as follows: » * • 
Said Road is to Extend four Rods Down the hill from the upper Side of the 
Road as it now Runs Down to Lewis Lime KUn: the Said Road to go Either Side 
of Said Elijah Lewis Dwelling house whereever it Shall be thought most Con- 
venient for the good of the Public Down to Low Water Mark to Extend four 
Rods up and four Rods down the River from the Lime Kiln * * *." 

The Powells also had hme kilns at Quimby and presumably others. 
The stones for these kilns came from Bamegat. By the map of Dr. 
Benjamin Eley and Henry Livingston above referred to, there are 
designated on the map twenty lime kilns at Barnegat. I can not find 
that a company owned them. 

Bamegat at one time had a store, a school house and a church, or 
else preaching was held in the school house. A Methodist exhorter 
from here held services there. 

In an ancient Gazetteer of the State, I find as follows: "Marl- 
borough, a small township in the southeast corner of Ulster County, 
on the west shore of the Hudson opposite Bamegat." There was 
maintained there at one time an efficient company of militia. There 
were some men from Marlborough belonging to it. 

It was said that during navigation there was hardly a time that 
one or more sloops were not there loading hme ; and at one time a line 
of sloops carried the lime rock from there to New Brunswick, New 
Jersey, to burn there. Tom Gill and his father burned lime there. 
One kiln was near their house. 

There is a tradition here about the Gills. It is that when Vaughn 
went up the river, a corporal and two of the men went ashore in a row 
boat to burn the mill on the site of the present mill. The then owner 
begged them to spare the miU, and said to the corporal, whose name 
turned out to be Gill, that if he would not burn the mill he could come 
and marry his daughter after the war, at the same time pointing out 



APPENDIX. 663 

a pretty girl. The mill was spared and the corporal afterward re- 
turned, married the girl and became the owner of the property. It 
is claimed to this day that he was the father of Tom GiU. 

There were two roads leading to Bamegat, one from a southerly 
direction and one from an easterly or northeasterly direction, which 
were used as such years before any roads about there were regularly 
laid out. When a child I heard old men about here telling of having 
worked at these kilns and crossing with the ferry when they were 
young. They received one dollar a day, which at that time was con- 
sidered princely pay, and such work was then sought for; farm labor- 
ers then receiving fifty cents or less a day. 

Lime carried by this ferry was drawn and used not only in the towns 
of Marlborough and PlattekiU, but in the towns of Paltz, Shawan- 
gunk and what is now Gardiner. Numerous houses all over these 
towns are still standing that were built with Barnegat lime. The 
tradition is that the lime was considered a very superior quality, but 
the rock was either worked out or a better article was found elsewhere, 
as for many years no lime has been produced there. 

The roads on both sides of the river were used as highways at least 
fifty years before they were laid out and recorded by the highway 
commissioners. There is a tradition about another ferry which I 
cannot reconcile. It is that in 1777, when Gen. Vaughn's expedition 
went up the river, Samuel HaUock, the old Quaker minister, went out 
in a row boat to meet the fleet, and when taken on the flagship said 
to Vaughn that he was a non-combatant, a Quaker, and was opposed 
to the war, and at the same time pointed out to the General his ferry- 
boat along the shore, and asked that it be not burned. Vaughn gave 
orders not to disturb the Quaker or his boat, and the vessel was saved. 
But HaUock may have had the ferry, as this was in 1777, and we have 
seen that Lattimer had the ferry in 1779. It is possible that it may 
have been a boat used for some other purpose, but was always spoken 
of as a ferry-boat in the traditions. HaUock at this time owned 
Brushe's Landing, afterward Sands' Dock, and he most likely carried 
on business from there. 

At the dock from which the ferry ran there was an ancient stone 
[house, almost a fort, as the walls were so thick and strong. It was 
used for a store, tavern, freight house, etc. It was being built in 
1777 when Vaughn went up, and was fired at. It was torn down when 



664 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

the West Shore Railroad took the land. There was quite a history 
and many traditions about this old house. There had previously been 
a house on the same site and other buildings about there. 

In March, 184!9, another Milton ferry was established by Captain 
Sears. It ran from just above the Powell dock at Milton to the Gill 
dock. Sears ran the ferry for three years and then sold out to Jacob 
Handley, who conducted it until about 1862, when it was discontinued. 
The boat used had for its motive power four mules, who turned a 
tread-mill for the power. It ran regularly and was a great convenience 
to the entire neighborhood, and for miles back in the country on this 
side. It was the regular route to Milton Ferry, the station on the 
Hudson River road, and to Poughkeepsie. It also carried the mails. 
At one time the Gills, through whose lands the road leading from the 
ferry and the railroad station to the post road lead, attempted to 
close it, claiming it was a private road, but it was afterward arranged 
by them or the town authorities, so that it was continued as a public 
road. 

After the horse-boat ferry was discontinued, Caleb Wood carried 
the mail and passengers to the Hudson River Railroad station by 
means of a large row boat that could carry a dozen or more passen- 
gers, and when he arrived on this side he carried the mails back and 
forth from the Milton postoffice. This continued up to the time when 
the West Shore Railroad was built, and during this time William 
Wood ran a large row boat from Milton to Poughkeepsie to carry 
passengers, freight, etc. This also ceased soon after the railroad was 
built. 

It would appear that the ancient precinct of New Marlborough had 
means of crossing the Hudson River for fifty and perhaps sixty years 
before there was an established ferry at Poughkeepsie, and people 
from there came this roundabout way across this ferry to get to Paltz 
and the surrounding country in case they wanted to cross with a 
horse, cattle, etc. — ^in fact, to have all necessary intercourse that could 
not be had with a row boat or sloop. 



APPENDIX. 665 

THE CLINTON HOUSE IN THE REVOLUTION. 

The Evidence as to Wheke Gov. Clinton Lived While Making 

POUGHKEEPSIE HiS OfFICLAI, RESIDENCE. 

I have been asked to summarize again the evidence as to the house 
or houses Gov. George Clinton occupied during the Revolution, when 
his official residence was in Poughkeepsie, then practically the capital 
of the State. He lived here from the, fall of 1777 until after the 
evacuation of New York. His wife was the sister of Dr. Peter Tap- 
pan, of Poughkeepsie, and he had other relatives and many friends 
here even before he came here to live. Gov. Clinton's home was in 
New Windsor, then in Ulster, now in Orange Coianty. His removal 
to Poughkeepsie was made after the burning of Kingston, before the 
first session of the Legislature here. A number of well-to-do resi- 
dents of Poughkeepsie had adhered to the cause of the King and their 
houses and property had been either confiscated or temporarily taken 
possession of by the Revolutionary committee. Among these houses 
was that belonging to Bartholoidew Crannell, located on the south 
side of Main street about opposite Smith. It is practically cer- 
tain that Gov. Clinton occupied this house during a part of 
his residence here because it is so marked on a little map (History 
of Poughkeepsie, p. 65) made in 1790, the authenticity of which is 
proved by deeds referring to it. The Clinton papers also show that 
the State spent money in repairing this house. It was destroyed, 
however, a long time ago, just when, nobody seems to know. It was 
probably a frame house and was very likely burned early in the 19th 
century. 

Another house, which has been purchased by the State and is now 
known as the Governor Clinton House, has been pointed out for many 
years as Gov. Clinton's residence and, I believe, justly, though the 
evidence as to his occupancy of it is not contemporaneous or docu- 
mentary. The evidence tending to show that Clinton lived in this 
house, the Everitt House, has been very ably stated in a letter by Mr. 
Tristram Coffin, published in the Poughkeepsie Eagle, February 22, 
1904!. Mr. Coffin cites in his letter the passage from Smith's History 
of Dutchess County, published in 1877, page 34.2, as follows: 



666 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

"Another historic building is the Clear Everitt house. Everitt was at one time 
sheriff of the county. He built the ancient stone house standing on Main street, 
a little east of Whitehouse's shoe factory, and now called the Washington Hotel. 
When the flying New York Legislature left Kingston and opened its sessions at 
the VanKleeck House, Gov. Clinton took up his residence in the Everitt man- 
sion from time to time during the war and afterwards. There Lafayette was 
entertained early in 1778 and there Gov. Clinton was visited by Gen. Washington, 
who attended a session of u. Masonic Lodge in Poughkeepsie." 

On page 345 of Smith's History is a quotation from the New York 
Gazette of July 4, 1781, referring to an alleged attempt to kidnap 
Gov. Clinton, in which this statement occurs: 

"Mr. Clinton, the titular Governor, has fortified his hut against a sudden sur- 
prise and the rebel slaves of Poughkeepsie guard it every night." 

Smith in this quotation inserted after the word "hut," in paren- 
theses, "the fine stone mansion of Clear Everitt." Mr. Coffin makes 
several other quotations from Smith and then proceeds to show that 
there was a strong tradition pointing to the occupancy of the Everitt 
mansion by Gov. Clinton before Smith's History was written. He 
shows, for instance, from letters that the Governor lived a little way 
out of town, that the house was sometimes called the "old fort," that 
the Governor was urged to keep a body guard because of its out-of- 
town location, which exposed him to possible attacks of kidnappers. 
Mr. Coffin traces the descent of the property from Clear Everitt to his 
son, Richard Everitt, and its sale by Peter Everitt, son of the latter, 
and James Emott, executors, to Edmund Morris in 1830. He quotes 
Mr. Morris's daughter, Mrs. Susan Bradley (eighty-eight years of 
age at the time Mr. Coffin published his letter), as saying that she 
recalled distinctly hearing the house spoken of when she first went to 
live there, at the age of fourteen, as having been Gov. Clinton's home 
at the time of the Revolution. Richard Everitt had then but recently 
died. 

"It was only forty-seven years after the dose of the war and people were still 
living all about who were grown men and women when it occurred. There can- 
not well be any more authentic tradition than that furnished by the memory of 
this venerable and highly respected woman." 

]\Jr. Coffin interviewed Mrs. Jones, a sister of Mrs. Bradley, then 
eighty-four years of age, who stated that she had heard the old house 



APPENDIX. 667 

called the Heardquarters House in her girlhood, and he quotes from 
a statement by Miss Jackson, great-granddaughter of Richard 
Everitt, to the effect that she had often been told that "Governor 
Clinton had been entertained there." Mr. Coffin says that his own 
interest 

"in this historic structure was first arrested by having it pointed out to him as 
the old Executive Mansion by a former member of the State Legislature, whose 
father had also been a member of that body early in the last century." 

He also refers to a tradition that the house was built for use as 
a prison and says that an inspection of it will quickly dispel that 
delusion. It is entirely likely, however, that it was used as a prison, 
as headquarters and also as Gov. Clinton's resideijce. 

Since Mr. Coffin's letter was written the only new evidence that 
has been discovered on the subject was definite evidence that Richard 
Everitt, who appears to have owned the house during the Revolution, 
was under indictment for giving aid and comfort to the enemy and 
was absent from the city. It does not seem to be quite so certain 
that Clear Everitt, Richard Everitt's father, was a Tory, though he 
was undoubtedly suspected of friendship for the British. It seems 
likely also that Richard Everitt and not Clear Everitt built the house, 
and it may be said to be certain that the house was seized by the 
Revolutionary committees and made use of as a residence for the lead- 
ing men who had to be housed in the little village, which during the 
sessions of the Legislature was overcrowded, and at times probably 
also was used as a prison. My own opinion that Gov. Clinton prob- 
ably occupied the house during some part of his residence' here has 
been somewhat strengthened by a re-examination of the evidence and 
by the discovery of the record of Richard Everitt's indictment as a 
Tory. 

Edmund Platt. 



668 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



PERSONS REGISTERING BRAND MARKS IN POUGH- 
KEEPSIE PRECINCT. 

By \drtue of an act of General Assembly, passed November, 1741, 
brand marks of cattle were to be entered in the respective precincts 
in the county. 

Tn Poughkeepsie precinct, as appears from the record book in the 
County Clerk's office, those who registered brand marks were as 
follows : 



Abraham Lasslng, April 4, 1749 
Heniy Livingston, July 1, 1749 
Johannes Palmantier 
Peter Van Bomell, Feb. IS, 1761 
Jacob Bunschoten, April 30, 17S2 
John Burnet, Oct. 2, 1752 
James J. Livingston, Feb. 23, 1754 
Cornelius Osbom, Nov. 19, 1754 
Gabriel Henry Ludlow, April 15, 1756 
James Lake, Dec. 8, 1756 
HisMa DuBoys, June 3, 1757 
Johannes Hoghtyling 
Nathan Freer, Dec. 26, 1758 
Richard Snedeker, April 1, 1761 
Cornelius Velie, Dec. 30, 1762 
Zephaniah Piatt, June 2, 1763 
Myndert Frans VanDenbogert, Dec. 8, 

1764 
Johannes Freer, May 20, 1765 
Jacob Low, Jr., March 4, 1770 
Peter Luyster, April 10, 1771 
John Davis, May 26, 1773 
Eli Emons, Oct. 6, 1773 
Peter DuBois, May 4, 1749 
Samuel Shearman 
Lowrence Lassing 
Clare Everitt, Sept. 7, 1751 
Elias VanBimschoten, May 12, 1752 
Petrus LeRoy, Feb. 18, 1754 
Teunis Tappan, April IS, 17S4 
Jacobus Palmetier, June 6, 1755 
Robert Matthews, Nov. 29, 1756 
Anthony Yelverton, May 26, 1757 
Abraham Freer, June 4, 1757 
Jacobus Freer, Dec. 6, 1758 



Jeremiah Duboys, Jan. 21, 17S9 
Cornelius Van Keuren, May IS, 1761 
Abraham Freer, Dec. 30, 1762 
Gale Yelverton, July 25, 1763 
Johannes Fort, March 25, 1766 
Matthew J. Dubooys, May 38, 1765 
Johannes Swartwout, June 2, 1770 
Peter R. VanKleeck, March 26, 1773 
William Forman, Sept. IS, 1773 
John Emons, Oct. 6, 1773 
Rev. John Beardsley, May 26, 177S 
Margerit, widow of William VanDe 

Burgh, Oct 24, 1778 
John Hunt, Feb. S, 1780 
Christian Newcomb, April 16, 1793 
Theophilus Anthony, May 13, 1794 
The Wido of James Rogers, May 6, 

1796 
Samuel Pinckney, July 11, 1797 
Meter Deremer, Nov. 16, 1797 
Thomas P. Gay, June 9, 1802 
Isaac Ketcham, May 29, 1806 
George W. Clinton, May 28, 1811 
William Davis, Oct. 24, 1825 
Francis Pells, Jan. 26, 1778 
John T. Vemont, June 17, 1791 
Abraham Fort 

Nathaniel Bosworth, April 14, 1796 
Richard Everitt, May 6, 1796 
Joseph Thorn, July 11, 1797 
Thomas Carr, March 25, 1799 
Barent Fraer, April 13, 1803 
John Brush, July 26, 1810 
Nicholas Anthony, May 27, 1820 



APPENDIX. 



669 



SUPERVISORS OF POUGHKEEPSIE. 

From the year 1788 to the incorporation of the city in 1854. 
See also pages 60 and 63, 



1788— '89 


Lewis Duboys 


1827— '39 


James Fort 


1790— '92 


Peter Tappen 


1830 


Henry A. Livingston 


1793 


Richard Davis 


1831— '33 


James Fort 


1794 


John Bailey 


1833 


Henry Tompkins 


1796 


Elias Van Benschoten 


1834 


Henry A. Livingston 


1796 


John Thomas 


1835 


Peter P. Hays 


1797— '98 


Isaac Balding 


1836 


Henry A. Livingston 


1799 


Richard Everitt 


1837 


Henry Conklin 


1800 


Thomas MitcheU 


1838 


GUbert Wilkinson 


1801— '04 


Henry Dodge 


1839— '40 


Isaac I. Balding 


1805 


David Carpenter 


1841— '43 


James*R. Gary 


1806— '09 


Richard Everitt 


1844 


Richard A. Varick 


1810 


George B. Evertson 


1845— '46 


Cornelius DuBois 


1811 


Richard Everitt 


1847 


Charles H. Swift 


1812— 'IS 


Henry A. Livingston 


1848— 'SO 


Edgar Thorn 


1816 


Abraham Adriance 


1851— '52 


Howland E. Sherman 


1817— '20 


Henry A. Livingston 


1853 


Cornelius DuBois 


1831- '23 


Jacobus Freer 


1854 


Morgan Carpenter 


1834— '26 


Heniy A. Livingston 







670 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

"A SURVEY OF THE ROADS OF THE UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA." 

By CHEisTOPHEa Colles,^ 1789. 

The reproductions of these plates were obtained through the cour- 
tesy of Mr. Stuyvesant Fish, of New York, who is in possession of 
the originals. 

Maps Nos. 11, 12, 13, 14., 21 and 22, show the Albany Post Road 
from a point below PeekskiU to the northern bounds of Dutchess 
County. 

Maps Nos. 17, 18, 19 and 20, show parts of the road from Strat- 
ford, Conn., to Poughkeepsie, N. Y., beginning at a point east of 
Danbury, and entering New York State near the Croton river, in 
what is now Putnam County. The road continues through the pres- 
ent towns of Pawling, Beekman, La Grange and Poughkeepsie. Its 
termination appears on Map No. 14. 

Colles evidently was in error in designating in his References the 
Dutch Churches as Presbyterian Churches. 



REFERENCES. 

Emsco^al Churc/i. .tl?avcm f 

Pfxst>^lcpieut Dd. %BlaeksnMh Me^ J\, 

'RlMtHtMSc ABtidqis nym 



vuTiHcusc ..jttiSm^w merkJd. Pif ^ 

^iii (firGtist) Except yR.ma cutting iht River. .^ 

jUlwrtdst nuctk'd 4&Gcu>l ** 



xfceitc q etu. •JUa.U. 

}.li«ii«lllllll«l(r|' fNII,liiiiiimii7irt 



1. Christopher Colles, an Irish engineer, was horn in 1738, and came to America In 
1765. He lectured In New Tork on pneumatics, gunnery and inland lock navigation. He 
was among the first to propose n. water supply system for New York. In 1784 he pre- 
sented a plan to the Legislature to connect Lake Ontario with the Hudson Elver by 
canals and the natural channels, and to that end made a survey of the Mohawk River. 

In ^789 he published In hook form a series of road maps, after a tour through New 
York and Pennsylvania. He died in New York in 1821. 



APPENDIX. 



671 



f^r4fm J^w Tbrh in) to 'Poug-hAc^e 



\rMeadt 




! 



672 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

FrQfrL^ewyhrk UtltaPou^hkeepste 







VaitH^refc* 



APPENDIX. 673 



^ttSjftri^ 




674 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 




APPENDIX. 675 

From Fput^^k€ej^re(^l} to tAlhnny, 




676 



THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

.*-^ *^ ■ - \\ g I J » ■ I 11 1 •*» LijMHt. nu <t u 1 < ■ 




APPENDIX. 



677 



■Mm 




678 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

FromSiratford A 18 ) torou^gftfcn*'pfre 




APPENDIX. 



679 







wM«ii«M(HMMii 



680 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 



\*«rtu,„utii^ ^'P'^M* f^ 




PART II. 

BIOGRAPHICAL AND 
GENEALOGICAL. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 683 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND 
GENEALOGICAL. 

JOHN P. ADRIANCE, founder of the widely known firm of Adriance, Piatt & 
Company, maniifacturers of ADRIANCE farm machinery, was bom in Pough- 
keepsie, N. Y., March 4th, 1825, and died June 18, 1891. 

Mr. Adriance was a direct descendant of Adriaen Reyersz, from whom the family 
name is derived, who came from Holland to America in 1646, settling at Flatbush, 
L. I. Of his more immediate ancestors, three brothers, Jqris, Abraham and Isaac 
Adriance were among the early settlers in Dutchess County, their names appearing 
on a contract dated 1743, with Madam Brett, for the building of the Frankfort 
Store House at Fishkill. Abraham Adriance married Femmetje Van Kleef ; their 
son Abraham, bom 1766, married Anna Storm; their son John, our subject's father, 
bom in 1795, married Sarah Ely Harris. 

Mr. Adriance was educated in the schools of his native city, and in 1845 Messrs. 
Walsh & Mallory, hardware merchants of New York, placed him in charge of their 
store in Manchester, N. H., to which business he eventually succeeded. In 1852 
he returned to New York and engaged in the wholesale hardware trade with Samuel 
P. Piatt, and Samuel W. Sears, tmder the firm name of Sears, Adriance & Piatt. 
About this time he became interested in some experiments which his father was 
making with the Forbush mower, and concluded to engage in this branch of manu- 
facturing. In 1854' the firm purchased the patents of the Manny mower for the 
New England States, and began making the machines at Worcester, Mass., the 
business there being conducted under the name of Mr. Adriance. In 1857, at a 
great field trial of mowers and reapers held at Syracuse, N. Y., tmder the auspices 
of the United States Agricultural Society, Mr. Adriance became impressed with the 
merits of a mower patented by Atdtman & Miller, of Canton, Ohio, which received 
the first premium. He eventually acquired the patent rights, and began the mau- 
ufactture of a new machine in Worcester, Mass., giving it the name "Buckeye" be- 
cause of its Ohio origin. In 1859 the factory was transferred to the old "Red Mills" 
at Poughkeepsie, but the business increased so rapidly as to necessitate the btiild- 
ing of more commodious quarters, in 1864, on the banks of the Hudson, extensive 
additions and improvements having since been made from time to time. In 1863 
the firm of Sears, Adriance & Piatt was dissolved, Mr. Sears retaining the hardware 
business, and a new firm for the manttfacture of mowers and reapers was formed, 
under the firm name of Adriance, Piatt & Co., incorporated in 1882 as a stock com- 
pany, with the following officers: John P. Adriance, president; S. R. Piatt, vice- 
president; and I. S. Piatt, treasurer. Mr. Adriance continued his connections with 
the business until his death. 



684 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ALBERT JOHN AKIN who died in his hundredth year, in January, 1903, was 
the eldest son of Albro and Pauline (Vander Burgh) Akin. He was bom at Quaker 
HiU, town of PawUng, Dutchess County, N. Y., August 14, 1803. At the age of 
nineteen years he went to New York City, where he remained several years and was 
successful in business ventures. Ill health caused him to return to his native home, 
and in 1849 when the Harlem Valley Railroad was projected Mr. Akin was one of 
the committee appointed to raise $100,000 for the enterprise. In 1849 he organ- 
ized the Pawling National Bank and was elected president of the institution. This 
position he held until January 1895, when he resigned on account of his advanced 
age. He was a director in various railroads, and his enterprise and foresight have 
done much for Quaker Hill. He built Akin Hall; endowed the Akin Hall Associa- 
tion with $160,000, and erected the "Mizzentop Hotel", and made himself a party 
to every pubUc interest. 

AKIN OR AIKEN FAMILY. The original settler, John Akin was bom in 1663 
in Scotland. He came to this country from Aberdeen in 1680 and settled in Dart- 
mouth, Bristol County, Mass. He married twice, first Hannah Briggs and had 
fifteen children. He died June 13, 1746. 

(2) David was the oldest son of John and Hannah Akin. He was bom in Dart- 
mouth, Mass., Sept. 12, 1687. He married Sarah Allen by whom he had ten chil- 
dren. He moved to Quaker Hill, Dutchess County, N. Y. between 1730 and 1740 
and settled south of the Birdsall Place. 

(3) Jonathan was the youngest son of David Akin and Sarah Allen. He was 
bom on Quaker Hill July 26, 1737. He married LiUian Ferris July 26, 1757. 
Jonathan was a man of aflfairs. (See Civil list) . Hfe was a member of New York 
State Assembly as representative of Dutchess County 1788-'91 and 1792. Also 
delegate from Dutchess County to State Constitutional Convention, 1801. 

(4) Benjamin Akin was a son of Jonathan and Lillian Akin; born at Quaker 
Hill, Sept. 19, 1762; married Martha Pahner, 1783. She was bom Jan. 11, 1768, 
and was a daughter of John Palmer and Hope Thomas. He moved to Greenbush, 
N. Y. in i8lb and until his home was ready for occupancy lived at "Port Crailo" 
the famous old Van Rensselaer Manor. He represented Dutchess County in As- 
sembly 1800, '01, '02. He was drowned Dec. 13, 1831. 

(5) Aaron Burr Akin was a son of Benjamin and Martha Akin. He married 
Caroline Williamson March 6, 1830. 

(6) Richard Akin married Carohne, daughter of Robert Thom. They had a 
daughter bom April 27, 1835. 

(7) Catherine T. Akin. 

WILLIAM CLARK ALBRO, attorney, was bom August 16, 1848. He attended 
Wesleyan Academy at Wilbraham. Mass., and Cornell University and Columbia 
College Law School, receiving at the latter institution the degree of LL. B. He 
was admitted to the New York Bar in 1874, and has since resided in Poughkeepsie 
engaged in the practice of his profession. He is deeply interested in the public 
schools and has served several years as a member of the Poughkeepsie Board of 
Education. 




WILLIAM C. ALBRO. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 685 

Mr. Albro is the eighth generation in descent from John Albro, a native of Eng- 
land, who came to America in 1634, and became a Major in the Colonial Militia; 
he died at Portsmouth, R. I., December 14, 1712. 

THOMAS ALDRIDGE, brick manufacturer, Fishkill, N. Y. was born in Orange 
county in 1818, and died August 17, 1892. He settled in Dutchess county in 1851, 
and built up one of the most extensive brick industries in the Hudson valley, which 
is now continued by his son Aaron E., under the firm name of Aldridge Bros. & Co. 
The entire Aldridge yards have a capacity of 50,000,000 brick annually. Half of 
this property is leased to other brick makers. 

Mr. Aaron E. Aldridge was born in 1851 and has been engaged in the brick busi- 
ness since 1877. His brother Thomas, now cashier of the First National Bank of 
Fishkill Landing has been connected with this institution since his boyhood, serving 
twenty-five years as teller. 

JOHN P. AMBLER, was born at Stanford, Dutchess County, N. Y., June 26, 
1841, a son of the Rev. Silas and Eunice D. (Olmsted) Ambler. Mr. Ambler came 
to Poughkeepsie in 1860, and after a course at Eastman's Business College, entered 
the book store of J. H. Hickok as book-keeper, where he continued seven years. 
He was stricken with a severe illness and before fully recovering he secured the 
long established news business at 9 Market street, which was the. nucleus of the-; 
present extensive book and stationery house of J. P. Ambler Co. He made a spec- 
ialty of school books and held the bulk of the public school trade until the city de- 
cided to furnish the text books. 

Mr. Ambler married in 1870, Mary A., daughter of Hon. Guy Tracy of Shelbourne,. 
Vt. They had one child, Donna Louise. In political belief he was a Democrat, and 
in a public capacity had served on the Board of Health, the Civil Service Commis- 
sion, and the Public Library Board. 

Socially he was a member of the Amrita Club, serving one year as president. He 
was a member of the Royal Arcanum of Poughkeepsie and of the Reform Club of" 
New York City. He died suddenly February 6, 1901. 

Mr. Ambler's early ancestor was Richard Ambler who was bom in Somersetshire, 
England in 1609, and who was one of twenty-four men to organize the town of 
Waterbury, Conn, taking deed from the Indians. His grandfather, Peter Ambler, 
bom in Danbury, Conn, in 1759, was owner of a large parcel of the land on which 
Danbury now stands. During the Revolutionary War he served in the Colonial . 
army, and later took a prominent part in public afEairs. 

WILLIAM R. ANDERSON, the subject of this sketch was born and reared on a 
farm. Excepting the time when he was seeking an education elsewhere, he has 
spent his life in his home community. He is a classical graduate of the Oneonta 
Normal School and he has done summer school work at New York University. He 
taught the district school formerly located at South Millbrook for three years. He 
served as school commissioner for six years and in the second election he ran far- 
ahead of his ticket. For the past twelve years he has been principal of Millbrook-^ 



686 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Memorial School. In all of these positions he has been uniformly successful. He 
owes his present position of honor to close appUcation to work which has always 
characterized his life. He is exacting in his school requirements, but he demands 
nothing of others which he does not require of himself. 

He is recognized as an able school administrator, a strong teacher, and master 
of the details of school organization. His school programs articulate with clock- 
like precision. The Chief of Inspections Division of the Education Department 
recently wrote — "In conclusion let me s^y for your personal benefit that it is rare 
to find a case where the schedule of recitations shows such good evidence of intelli- 
gent supervision as the one which you have sent me". 

During his service at Millbrook, he has had several offers from other schools 
among which was the position of Superintendent of the Training Department in 
the Oneonta Normal School. He has steadfastly declined them all that he might 
continue his work in the place of his birth where he has the confidence of the com- 
munity to a remarkable degree. Of his work at Millbrook a Regents Inspector 
wrote — "Principal Anderson, quiet and gentlemanly, thorough in his scholarship 
and instruction, is doing a work here that deserves a cordial recognition and ap- 
preciation". 

Mr. Anderson is one of the original directors of the Bank of Millbrook and a 
member of the finance committee. He is also one of the original trustees of the 
Millbrook Free Library, and he is a member of the Consistory of the Reformed 
Chvirch. 

MINOT D. ANDREWS, Supervisor of the town of Washington, Dutchess County 
N. Y. is a native of the adjoining town of Amenia. His parents removed to 
Washin^on when he was a boy, and it was here he received his education. Mr. 
Andrews served twelve years as an employee of the New York Post Office depart- 
ment ; and was engaged in the commission business in New York City for a period 
of eight years. He is at present interested in the apple trade, his shipments exceed- 
ing 4,000 barrels annually. 

In political belief Mr. Andrews is a Democrat and in November 1907, was elected 
a member of the County Board of Supervisors. Socially he is affiliated with Hal- 
cyon Lodge No. 832, F. & A. M. 

ROBERT WESLEY ANDREWS, M. D., was born in the town of Poughkeepsie, 
N. Y., September 9. 1869. After graduating from the Northfield High School in 
1887, he entered the employ of A. M. Doty, druggist, Poughkeepsie. He pursued 
his medical studies at the Albany Medical College from which he was graduated in 
1898. He took up his residence in Brooklyn, N. Y. and shortly thereafter was ap- 
pointed acting assistant surgeon of the U. S. Army, and was stationed at Chicka- 
mauga Park, Ga., and then transferred to the San Juan Hospital, Porto Rico. He 
returned to Poughkeepsie in 1899, and in August of the same year was appointed 
first lieutenant and assistant surgeon U. S. V., and assigned to the 46th Infantry, 
which was ordered to the Philippines. Dr. Andrews remained there twenty months, 
participating in numerous engagements. He resumed practice in Poughkeepsie 
in 1901. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 687 

Dr. Andrews is a former president of the Medical Society of Dutchess County, 
being the second youngest physician to occupy this office in the 103 years of the 
society's existence. He is also a member of theN. Y. State Medical Society; the 
American Medical Association; Poughkeepsie Lodge No. 266, F. & A. M.; Pough- 
keepsie Chapter R. A. M. ; King Solomon's Council; a past grand Odd Fellow, and 
a member of the Elks. 

Politically he is a Democrat, and in 1906, was elected to the ofBce of Coroner. 
He is Bacteriologist for the Poughkeepsie Board of Health. 

In 1898 Dr. Andrews married Minnie M. daughter of Dr. Marill. They have 
two children, Robert Carlyle and Helen Germain. 

MILTON H. ANGELL, M. D., son of Stephen T. and Hannah E. (Ham) Angell, 
was born at Salt Point, N. Y., October 8, 1856. He obtained his preliminary edu- 
cation at the Military Academy, Poughkeepsie, and at the De Garmo Institute, 
Rhinebeck, N. Y. He graduated from the New York &)meopathic Medical Col- 
lege in 1882, and then began the practice of his profession in Dutchess county, first 
at Wappingers Falls, then at Stanfordville, and in 1890 succeeded his brother. Dr. 
Augustus Angell at Salt Point, where he enjoys a large and lucrative practice. 

October 13, 1886, Dr. Angell married Frances, daughter of Robert McKay, a 
native of Brooklyn, N. Y. Two children have been born to them, Evelyn and Mil- 
ton. 

CHARLES W. H. ARNOLD, was born in New York city, May 6, 1860, a son of 
Henry and Margaret (Hemstreet) Arnold, both of German families, his father 
having been born in Germany and his mother in this country. 

Mr. Arnold attended the common schools and for a brief period Claverack In- 
stitute. He studied law with the late J. Spencer Van Cleef, at Poughkeepsie; was 
admitted to the bar in Brooklyn, December 13, 1883, and since that time has prac- 
ticed his profession at Poughkeepsie and also in New York city. He was a member 
of the Constitutional Convention of 1894, and while active in politics has never held 
any other elective office. From 1902 to 1908 he served as a member of the Board 
of Public Works in the city of Poughkeepsie. He was one of the first referees in 
bankruptcy appointed under the United States Bankrupt Law of 1898, and has 
been referee continuously since that time. In addition to his duties as referee in 
bankruptcy he is frequently selected as referee to hear and determine causes. Mr. 
Arnold was one of the organizers of the Poughkeepsie Trust Company and has been 
its secretary and attorney since its organization. 

WILLIAM H. BADEAU, now a resident of Matteawan, N. Y. is of French 
Huguenot descent. His ancestors were among those who left La Rochelle, France, 
and founded New Rochelle, a suburb of New York City. Elie Badeau, on his ar- 
rival here in 1708, purchased a valuable estate, including 120 acres of land, still a 
family holding. 

Two generations later, John Badeau, (descendant of Elie), acquired a large tract 
of land in what is now Putnam County, N. Y., and in 1775 located at Mahopac 



688 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Falls. One of the sons of John Badeau was Isaac Badeau, Sr. His son, Isaac 
Badeau, Jr., married Elizabeth Hart, also of Mahopac Falls. Their children were: 
Gilbert H. (deceased), William H. (our subject), Matilda S., and Joseph N. They 
located in Dutchess County in 1846. 

W. H. Badeau when a young man was employed for seven years in the wholesale 
fancy dry-goods house of G. S. Ely of New York City. He then became connected 
with E. & H. T. Anthony & Co. of New York, manufacturers and wholesale dealers 
in photographic requisites. He was admitted to the firm and became the represen- 
tative of the house in Europe. He continued with this Company fifteen years, and 
having acquired a competency, retired from the firm. Mr. Badeau has many in- 
terests in the West. He is a member of the Board of directors, and Vice-President 
of the First National Bank of Glidden, Iowa. 

AMOS T. BAKER, M. D., first assistant physician of the Matteawan State Hos- 
pital, Matteawan, N. Y., was bom in Buffalo, N. Y., in 1874. After finishing his 
preliminary studies at the public and high schools of his native place he entered the 
medical department of the University of Buffalo, from which he was graduated with 
the degree of M. D. in 1897. His medical training was supplemented by one year's 
experience as house physician and surgeon at the Buffalo General Hospital. He 
then accepted an appointment on the medical staff at the Dannemora State insti- 
tution, and in October, 1906, accepted his present position at Matteawan. Dr. 
Baker is a member of the Dutchess County Medical Society, and the New York 
State Medical Society. 

W. H. BAKER, manufacturer of chocolate and cocoa, at Red Hook, N. Y., con- 
ducts one of the most important industries in the town of Red Hook. This factory 
was established at Annandale in 1896, and a new factory was erected in the village 
of Red Hook in 1904. The plant covers over two acres of ground, and gives em- 
ployment to upwards of one hundred persons. 

JOHN B. BALL, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom in Milton, Ulster County, 
N. Y., June 29, 1878. He was educated at Claverack College, Columbia county, 
and the New York Law School. He also read law in the office of Hon. Edward E. 
Perkins of Poughkeepsie, and was admitted to the Bar in 1902. He is a member of 
the Poughkeepsie Club, the Ulster County RepubUcan Club, and the Central Com- 
mittee. 

DR. JAMES LENOX BANKS was born in New York City on May 11, 1832. He 
was the son of William Banks, a shipping and commission merchant of that city and 
of Isabella H, Lenox, the daughter of Robert Lenox. He received his early education 
in his native city, was graduated from the College of Physicians and Surgeons in 
1857, and then studied abroad for two years. In 1859 he began the practice of his 
profession in New York City and continued it there until his death. 

Dr. Banks held many important offices in his life time and at the time of his death 
was a trustee of the College of Physicians & Surgeons; consulting physician of the 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 

Presbyterian Hospital; Trustee of the Lenox Library, and a manager of the Ameri- 
can Bible Society. 

On March 14, 1855, he was married in New York City to Isabella Mozier, the 
only child of Joseph Mozier, the American Sculptor, of Rome, Italy. Dr. Banks 
died June 3, 1883, leaving a widow and eight children: Isabella, wife of Dr. Thomas 
E. Satterthwaite, of New York City; William B., of Superior, Wisconsin; Joseph- 
ine Mozier, wife of Charles H. Marshall, of New York City; James Lenox, of New 
York City; Henry Lenox, of Buffalo, N. Y. ; Maria, wife of Walter C. Taylor, of 
New York City; John Fisher Sheaf e and Lenox, of New Hamburgh, N. Y. 

"The Cedars" situated two miles north of New Hamburgh on the River Road 
is on a high point overlooking the river and commands one of the finest views of the 
Hudson and neighboring mountains. It was purchased by Dr. James Lenox 
Banks, in May, 1869 from Mrs. Louisa Sheafe Freeman who had received the pro- 
perty under the will of her grandmother, Mrs. Sarah Sheafe. 

For many years "The Cedars" was the Summer residence of Dr. Banks and his 
family and is now the home of his widow and youngest son* 

HARRY C. BARKER, attorney, was born at Antrim, N. H., March 31, 1870, 
a son of Henry M. and Mary J. (Colbum) Barker. When a boy his parents removed 
to Dutchess county, and Harry C. was educated in the De Garmo Institute at 
Rhinebeck, N. Y. He pursued his law studies in the office of Frank B. Lown, Esq., 
and was admitted to the Bar in 1894. 

Mr. Barker resides at Staatsburgh, N. Y., and maintains an office in the city of 
Poughkeepsie. In January, 1909, he was appointed attorney for the Hudson 
River State Hospital. His father, Henry M. Barker, was also a native of Antrim, 
N. H. He came to Dutchess county in 1878, and for many years, and up to the 
time of his death, Decenber 7, 1908, he was superintendent of the estate now the 
property of Mr. Odgen Mills, at Staatsburgh, N. Y. Politically Mr. Barker was a 
RepubUcan, and in 1904 represented the town of Hyde Park in the Board of Super- 
visors, and was appointed Chairman of the Board. November, 1864, he married 
Mary J. Colbum of New Boston, N. H., and three sons were bom to them: Herbert. 
L., a practicing physician of Woodside, L. I.; Harry C, and Fred M. 

OLIVER WELDON BARNES, civil engineer, was a well known resident of the 
village of Fishkill, having settled there in 1867 while he was engaged in the con- 
stmction of the Dutchess & Columbia Railroad, of which he was the chief engineer. 
His ancestors came from England in the seventeenth century, settling in Boston, 
and later generations resided in Marlboro, Mass., where his father, Henry Barnes, 
was bom in 1790. His mother, Marilla (Weldon) was a native of Hartford County 
in 1796. In 1825 they moved to Philadelphia. 

Mr. Barnes was bom in the town of Berlin, Conn., May 15, 1823, and died in New 
York City November 14th, 1908. At sixteen years of age he was sent to Burlington 
(Allege, Burlington, N. J., and he subsequently went to Europe to complete his 
engineering studies. On his return in 1847 he was appointed an assistant engineer 
in the first corps sent out from Philadelphia to survey the Western Division of the. 



690 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Pennsylvania Railroad, extending from the summit of the Alleghany Mountains 
to Pittsbtirg. He became the principal engineer in charge of the field parties, and 
made the final location on the bold lines that distinguished that division as the first 
engineering work on this continent at that time, and remained in charge of his divi- 
sion until its construction was completed in 1854. He was then appointed chief 
engineer of the Pittsburg & Connellsville Railroad, and remained on that work imtil 
1857, when he took charge of the construction of the last eighty-four miles of the 
Pittsburg, Fort Wayne & Chicago Railroad and completed it to Chicago in Decem- 
ber, 1858. He then returned to Philadelphia and built some branch lines for the 
Pennsylvania Railroad. 

In 1866 he came to Dutchess County, surveyed, located, and constructed the 
Dutchess & Columbia Railroad. Subsequently he was chief engineer on the sur- 
'veys for the extension of the Boston, Hartford and Erie Railroad, from Waterbury. 
Conn, to Fishkill, superintending the construction of the work near the river termi- 
nal until the suspension of operations consequent upon the financial difficulties of 
that company in 1869. Leaving the service of the Boston, Hartford & Erie Rail- 
road Co. in 1870 he became the promoter and chief engineer of the Connecticut 
Western Railroad Company, the surveys and location of that line from Hartford to 
New York, near Millerton, being made under his personal supervision, and the work 
was subsequently constructed under his charge in 1870 and 1871. 

He then became the president and chief engineer of the New York Central Under- 
ground Railroad Company. In 1882 Mr. Barnes was appointed chief engineer of 
the proposed Southern Pennsylvania Railroad, the completion of which was finally 
.abandoned. In 1884 Mr. Barnes was appointed the chief engineer of the New York, 
Lake Erie & Western Railroad and Coal Company, and built a line of railroad from 
the Erie Railroad to the Company's lands in Elk and Jefferson Counties, Pa. It 
was a work of great engineering difficulty, for the most part in the Alleghany 
Mountain range; On it was constructed the celebrated Kinzua Viaduct, a steel 
structure 2, 240 feet in length and 301 feet high. On completion of this work Mr. 
Barnes became the chief engineer of several other lines in Maryland and Virginia, 
which he prepared for further construction. In 1885 he was appointed Commis- 
rsioner of the new Croton Aqueduct and chairman of the construction Committee. 
"This position he held until 1887. Mr. Barnes was chosen in the same year as chief 
•engineer of the New York & Long Island Railroad Company, a corporation charter- 
ed by the State with authority to construct a double-track tunnel railway from the 
West side of the city of New York to Long Island City and thence to Brooklyn. 

He was also chief engineer of the New York Connecting Railroad Company from 
Long Island City to the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad, and other 
lines in and near Port Morris. 

Mr. Barnes was a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, the Union 
League Club of New York, the New England Society, also the Engineers' Club 
■of Philadelphia, and his distinguished abilities and high character as a man won for 
him an enviable standard wherever he was known. 
« 

RICHARD H. BARNES, highway commissioner of the town of East Fishkill, 
N. Y. was bom at Gayhead, Dutchess county in 1871, a son of Oliver S. and Mary E. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 69i 

(Wilde) Barnes. He attended the district schools and Eastman Business College 
and then assisted his father for a time in the cultivation of the homestead farm near 
Gayhead, Later he moved to Hopewell Junction, where he has been continuously 
engaged in operating his farm of 165 acres, and in addition superintends an ad- 
joining farm. 

Mr. Barnes has served two terms as school trustee. Socially he is a member of 
the I. O. O. P. 

He was united in marriage with Jennie Townsend, and they are the' parents of 
one son, Preston T. 

E. P. BARRETT, a prominent agriculturist of the town of Northeast, was born 
in this township in 1858, a son of Oliver and Catherine (Hornfager) Barrett. Prev- 
ious to engaging in the cultivation of his farm, which comprises 200 acres in the 
Harlem Valley, Mr. Barrett was employed as station agent at Coleman's Station, 
on the Harlem Valley Railroad, for a period of twelve years* In political belief he 
is a Democrat, and takes an active interest in all matters pertaining to the welfare 
of that party. Socially he is a member of Webotuck Lodge, P. & A. M., Pough- 
keepsie Chapter and Poughkeepsie Commandery. 

He was united in marriage with Alice, daughter of Philo Clark, and they are the 
parents of eight children. 

R. R. BARRETT, a retired citizen of Glenham, N. Y., was bom in Kent, Putnam 
County, in 1838. His early life was spent on a farm, and in 1859 he engaged in the 
mercantile business in his native town, which he continued for a period of thirty- 
two years. . . 

Mr. Barrett took an active part in public affairs of Putnam County, serving as 
Supervisor and other offices for several terms. In 1892 he was elected to the office 
of Sheriff of Putnam County and at the expiration of his term bought a pleasant 
home at Glenham, Dutchess County whence he removed in 1896, retiring from 
business and public life. 

In 1863 Mr. Barrett was united in marriage with Miss Mary L. Drew of Hunt- 
ington, Conn. 

DAVID P. BARRY, manager of the Willson & Eaton Company, Amenia, N. Y., 
is a native of this town. He was educated in the public schools and Amenia Sem- 
inary, and was for a time employed as book-keeper to the Manhattan Mining Com- 
pany at Sharon Station. He then accepted a similar position with the Willson & 
Eaton Company in October, 1882. In 1903 he was made secretary and assistant 
manager. In 1909 he resigned as secretary, and the position is now held by his son 
Edward P. Mr. Barry is president and a director of the Acetylene Gas Company of 
Amenia; a director and vice-president of the Eaton & Kelly Company, with offices 
in eastern Dutchess and Westchester counties, and foreman of the local fire com- 
pany. He has held the office of town clerk for one year, town collector for a like 
period, and secretary of the school board for four years. He has also served four 
years as Grand Knight of the Knights of Columbus 



692 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Mr. Baxry was united in marriage with Miss Margaret Powers, and they are the 
parents of five children. 

WILLIAM H. BARTLETT, Postmaster, Amenia, N. Y., was born in the town 
of Amenia, February 14, 1839. He received his education in the schools of his 
native place, and in Amenia Seminary. After finishing his education he spent two 
years in Brooklyn as a clerk. In 1862 Mr. Bartlett enlisted in Co. A of the 150th 
N. Y. Volunteers, and was promoted from time to time until he became Adjutant. 
He was wounded at Peachtree Creek, in front of Atlanta. At the close of the war 
he returned to Amenia and engaged in general mercantile business, which he con- 
tinued until 1888, when he established a brick yard under the firm name of the 
Amenia Brick Company. 

Mr. Bartlett has served two terms as Supervisor of his native town, and from 
1892 to 1895 was Sherifi of Dutchess county. He is a member of the Masonic 
fraternity and the B. P. O. E. 

October 30, 1867 he was united in marriage with Miss Lavinia Culver of Amenia. 

ISAAC E. BINGHAM, was bom at Poughkeepsie, N. Y., January 22, 1865. He 
attended Riverview Academy, and graduated from Harvard University in 1889 
with the degree of A. B. He studied law in the office of Col. Henry E. Losey, with 
whom he began practice after his admission to the Bar in 1891. Mr. Bingham 
served as assistant district attorney under Horace D. Hufcut (1892-1895). He 
also served as counsel to the local Excise Board, and was elected a member of the 
Board of Alderman from the first ward, Poughkeepsie. He is a member of the Apo- 
keepsing Boat Club, Golf Club and the Dutchess Horticultural Society. 

A. H. BLACKBURN, secretary and treasurer of the Green Fuel Economizer Co., 
Matteawan, N. Y., is a native of England, and has been manager of this extensive 
industry since its establishment in 1891. 

The product of the Company consists of an apparatus for utilizing wasted gases 
passing from steam boilers, and for reheating water, thus affording a great saving 
in coal. The apparatus is now used almost universally in steam boiler plants in 
England, and very generally in Europe, the United States and other parts of the 
world. The Matteawan plant covers about twelve acres of ground and gives em- 
plojrment to four hundred persons. Fans, blowers, and heating systems for schools 
are also manufactiured by the Company. 

Mr. Blackburn is a vestryman of St. Luke's Church ; a member of the masonic 
fraternity, and of the Southern Dutchess Cotmtry Club. 

He was united in marriage with Miss Emily Bever, and they are the parents of 
two sons, Charles H., and Godfrey C. 

JAMES BLAIR was bom in Ireland, January 29, 1853. He came to America in 
1888, and three years later located at Staatsbtirgh, Dutchess cotmty, accepting a 
posftion of gardener at the country seat of Mr. Ogden Mills, which position he has 
held continuously. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 693 

Mr. Blair was united in marriage with Eliza Lloyd of Shropshire, England, and 
they are the parents of the following children: David, Agnes, William, Hilda, Rob- 
ert and Alice. 

JOHN GEORGE BODENSTEIN, manufacturer of ice tools, planers, etc., at 
Staatsburgh, N. Y., was born in Nesselreden, Germany, June 20, 1850, a son of 
John H. and Dorothea (Doerner) Bodenstein, natives of the same place. By trade 
his father was a blacksmith, which occupation he followed after coming alone to 
America in 1858, the family following the next year. They located in Rockland 
county, N. Y., where they remained until 1862. In 1863 Mr. Bodenstein, St., went 
to Staatsburgh, where he was employed by the Eagle Ice Company. He subse- 
quently opened a shop for the manufacture of ice tools and general blacksmith, 
continuing in this business until his death in 1875. He made many improvements 
in ice tools, but did not take out any patents. He was the father of the following 
children: Eliza Catherine; John George; Henry; Frederick; Sophia; AmeUa and 
Charles. The mother died November 25, 1891. * 

The subject of this sketch followed his father's trade, and from 1866 to 1868 
worked as journeyman at Marlborough and other places. He started a shop for 
his father at Staatsburgh, on the site that his brother Henry now carries on the 
grocery business, and had charge of the business until two years after his father's 
death. Forming a partnership with his brother Henry tmder the firm name of J. 
G. & H. Bodenstein they engaged in the manufacture of ice tools until March 22, 
1890, when this partnership was dissolved. Mr. J. G. Bodenstein then established 
his present shop, which has been enlarged from time to time to supply the demand 
of his improved ice tools, several of which are patented. 

In 1873 Mr. Bodenstein was united in marriage with Louisa, daughter of John G. 
Hess of Staatsburgh, and two children have been bom to them: Fred and John G. 

In political belief Mr. Bodenstein is a Republican. He is a member of Rhinebeck 
Lodge, F. &. A. .M., and is aflSliated with the Episcopal Church at Staatsburgh, of 
which he has been a vestryman and warden since its incorporation. 

THEODORE BRINCKERHOFF, president of the Matteawan Nationa,! Bank, 
Matteawan, N. Y., was born in 1833 on the homestead farm three miles south of 
Fishkill Village, where three generations of his maternal ancestors had preceded 
him. So highly did our subject appreciate the healthfulness and scenic beauty of 
this place that he has continuously resided there. Mr. Brinckerhoff has been en- 
gaged in farming, milUng, manufacture of brick, and in financial aflEairs of his 
native town, and in each enterprise has performed his duties faithfully and assid- 
uously. 

He was united in marriage with Sarah O. La Fourette, and to them have been 
born three children: Adeline, Ralph and Emma. This family they have reared 
in habits of industry and honesty, and now as the shadows lengthen, and the cords 
of life are loosening, Mr. Brinckerhoff has no regret that the prayer of the sage of 
old has been meted out to him: "Give me neither riches nor poverty: the former is 
vanity; the latter humiliation and vexation of spirit and body." 



694 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

JOHN W. BROWN, Supervisor of the Seventh Ward, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., 
was bom in this city March 20, 1877. After finishing his studies at Eastman's 
Business College he served an apprenticeship as carpenter under C. L. Cannon, and 
in the spring of 1906 he engaged in business as a contractor and builder. January, 
1907, he was appointed Supervisor to fill a vacancy, and in November, 1908, was 
elected to the same office. He is a member of the Masonic fraternity, Knights of 
Pythias, Rondout Valley Lodge, and the Trade and Labor Council. 

WILLIAM D. BUDD, deceased, a prominent brick manufacturer of Dutchess 
Junction, Dutchess county, was born in Putnam county. During his childhood bis 
parents removed to Matteawan, and his education was acquired in the schools of 
that village. Mr. Budd as a young man was engaged in the real estate business, 
and in 1868 formed a partnership with Charles Griggs and began the manufacture 
of brick. Four years later he purchased Mr. Griggs' interest, and continued the 
brick business alone, enlarging his yard from time to time. 

He was for many years a trustee of the Fishkill Savings Bank. 

Mr. Budd was married to Miss Anne Rogers, and two daughters were bom to 
them: Elizabeth K. and Ella, who since their father's death have successfully con- 
tinued the business established by him. 

ALLISON BUTTS, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom in the town of Stanford, 
Dutchess county, October 2, 1852. After acquiring his preliminary education he 
taught school for a time, and in 1874 came to Poughkeepsie to accept a clerkship 
with Andrew C. Warren, then County Clerk of Dutchess county. He was later 
appointed Deputy Clerk, which office he held until 1889, when he resigned. Mean- 
time he had been admitted to the Bar, and has since been continuously engaged in 
the practice of his profession. 

Mr. Butts has served two terms as Police Commissioner in the city of Poughkeep- 
sie, and from 1887 to 1890 was a member of the Board of Education. In July, 
1900 he was appointed by the Board of Managers of the Hudson River State Hos- 
pital to the office of treasurer of that institution. In 1906 he was the Democratic 
nominee for Justice of the Supreme Cotirt of the Ninth Judicial District. 

Mr. Butts was united in marriage with Phebe D. Mosher, of the town of Stanford, 
Dutchess county. She died December 16, 1882, leaving one son, Ralph, now one 
of Poughkeepsie's prominent young attorneys, and associated with his father in 
the practice of his profession. Mr. Butts was again married, September 16, 1885, 
to Arrie E. Mosher, and three children have been bom to this tmion: Norman C, 
Allison, Jr., and Wilbur K. 

ISAAC P. CARMAN was bora in the town of Pine Plains, N. Y., in 1853. As a 
young man he was for a time employed by the Newburgh, Dutchess & Columbia 
Railroad, and later purchased a farm in Pine Plains. 

Politically Mr. Carman is a Republican, and in 1884 was elected Supervisor of his 
native town; he was re-elected in 1894, and served two terms. In 1897 he was 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 695 

elected County Superintendent of the Poor, which office he holds to the present 
time. 

Mr. Carman was united in marriage with Miss Violet McLellan of Pine Plains, 
and they are the parents of two children : Belle and William. 

OTIS JAMESON CASE, M. D., was born at Salt Point, Dutchess county, August 
15, 1882. His education at Riverview Military Academy was supplemented by a 
course at Brown University. He then entered the New York Homeopathic Medi- 
cal College, from which he was graduated in 1907 with the degree of M. D., and was 
appointed a member of the staff of Flower Hospital. He was later appointed 
physician and surgeon of the National Home Hospital at Washington, D. C, and 
April 3, 1909 received an appointment from President Taft as surgeon on the U. S. 
Ship "Gedney," of the geodetic survey of the Pacific Coast. 

WALTER R. CASE, M. D., was born near Clinton Corners, Dutchess county, 
February 19, 1864. He was the son of Dr. Ephraim Case* one of the best known 
physicians of his day. He attended the Amenia Seminary, and studied medicine 
under both systems, taking the allopathic course at the University of Vermont, 
and finishing his medical studies in the New York Homeopathic College. He began 
the practice of his profession at Millbrook, and in 1870 removed to Salt Point to 
take his father's practice. He came to Poughkeepsie in 1884 and entered into 
partnership with his brother-in-law, Dr. John C. Otis, with whom he was associated 
several years. 

Politically he was a Democrat, and served as Commissioner of the first Board of 
Public Works of the city of Poughkeepsie. He was also a member of the Board of 
Police Commissioners for several years, and took a deep interest in public improve- 
ments. 

September 20, 1865 Dr. Case was tinited in marriage to Mary Ann Otis, and she, 
with one son, Otis Jameson, survive. 

ROBERT CASS, a leading resident of eastern Dutchess was born April 23, 1848 
at Danville, Illinois, and became a resident of Pawling, N. Y. in 1868, where he was 
telegraph operator for a time and also at Dover Plains; he lived in Pawling until 
his death April 28, 1902. 

He received his education at Danville and at the High School at Homer, 111, 
The professional work of Mr. Cass as an educator covered a period of over a quarter of 
a century. He was a man of culture and literary ability, and used his pen very 
effectively. He was for several years principal of the Pawling School, and at one 
time held the Teacher's Examinations for eastern Dutchess in Pawling. He al- 
ways took an active interest in political and public affairs and contributed fre- 
quently to the columns of The American Agriculturist and New Milford Gazette. 
He was active in Church work, and was Sunday School Superintendent for over 
20 years. In politics Mr. Cass always supported the Republican party. 

Although he was reared in the faith of the Methodist Church, after removing to 
Pawling he joined with his wife and two daughters the Congregational Church of 



696 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Sherman, Conn. His life was the career of one who quietly and conscientiously 
performed his duties to the best of his ability, and with fideUty discharged the 
trust reposed in him. 

JAMES STUART CHAFFEE, son of Jerome Sejrmour and Aritta (Stuart) 
Chaffee, was bom at Sharon, Conn., October 3, 1846. He was educated at Wesley- 
an Academy, Wilbraham, Mass. With the exception of four years in which he was 
engaged in the flour, feed and lumber trade at Wassaic, N. Y. Mr. Chaffee's entire 
business life has been devoted to agricultural pursuits, his dairy farm at South 
Amenia, N. Y. covering 250 acres. Mr. Chaffee is a director of the First National 
Bank of Amenia; and takes an active interest in public affairs of his adopted town 
in which he has resided fifty-four years. He was a member of the Board of Super- 
visors of Dutchess County in 1893, 1896-'97, and has served as Justice of the Peace 
twenty-two years. 

Mr. Chaffee, in 1872, married Lydia A. Judd, and they became the parents of five 
children. 

LEWIS STUYVESANT CHANLER was bom in Newport, R. I., on September 
24, 1869, and is the son of John Winthrop Chanler and Margaret Astor Ward Chan- 
ler, the latter a daughter of Samuel Ward and granddaughter of William B. Astor, 
Other prominent members of his family are his brothers William Astor Chanler and 
Robert Winthrop Chanler and his sister, Margaret Livingston Chanler Aldrich. 
His father, John Winthrop Chanler held the office of Sachem in Tammany Hall and 
represented a New York district in Congress for several terms, while his grand- 
father, Samuel Ward, was also a distinguished statesman of his time. 

Mr. Chanler's early life was passed on the family estate, Rokeby, situated at Bar- 
r3rtown, Dutchess County, N. Y. Being in delicate health he received his prelimi- 
nary education wholly from private tutors, and at the age of nineteen, entered 
Colimibia college to study law, having previously served an apprenticeship in the 
oflBce of J. W. Elseffer of Red Hook. After his graduation and admission to the 
Bar, Mr. Chanler went abroad and while there took a course in international law and 
jurisprudence at Cambridge University, England. He was also elected to the pres- 
idency of the Cambridge University Union, being the first American to receive this 
honor. 

Returning to this country, Mr. Chanler entered into the practice of criminal law. 
In 1896 Mr. Chanler retired from the practise in the criminal courts and while 
abroad in the winter of 1897, he became identified with the Pamellite Party in 
Ireland and participated for the next four years in the strenuous campaigns of 
that party. 

He was one of the founders of the Irish Independent League, which succeeded the 
Land League, and was for two years a director of the " Irish Independent " the 
organ of the League. In 1900 Mr. Chanler resumed the practise of law in New 
York City and retains an office there to the present day. 

In i.890, Mr. Chanler married Miss AUce Chamberlain of Red Hook, N. Y., and 
is now the father of three children, L. S. Chanler, Jr., W. A. Chanler, 2d, and AHda 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 697 

Chanler. He is a member of the leading clubs of New York, among the list being 
the Manhattan, Democratic, Knickerbocker, Brook, Union, Racquet and Tennis, 
Tuxedo, Church, New York Yacht, Bar Association, St. Nicholas Society and 
Dutchess County Society. He is also prominent in Masonic circles, being Master 
of Holland Lodge No. 8, F. & A. M., and a committeeman of the Grand Lodge of 
the State of New York. 

In 1891 he made his debut in politics and organized the Chanler Democratic 
Club in his home town of Red Hook and in the same year he was chosen a member of 
the County Committee. In 1896 he was a delegate to the Democratic State Con- 
vention and a member of the sub-committee on platform. 

At the November election of 1903, he was elected to the Board of Supervisors of 
Dutchess county, from Red Hook, and has been continuously reelected a 
member of the Board. 

In the fall of 1906, Mr. Chanler was elected Lieutenant-Governor for the State of 
New York and assumed that office on January 1, 1907. 

In 1908 Mr. Chanler was the unanimous choice of the Democratic Party for Gov- 
ernor, and conducted a gallant but unsuccessful fight against Gov. Charles E. 
Hughes. 

CLINTON W. CLAPP, a retired citizen of Wappingers Falls, N. Y., was bom in 
that village May 28, 1831. He is a descendant of Thomas Clapp, who was bom 
in Weymouth, England, in 1597, and a son of Benjamin and Ruth (Houghton) 
Clapp, who located at Wappingers Palls in 1828. Benjamin Clapp acqtdred exten- 
sive real estate holdings in his adopted village, and erected a large stone factory 
which was used for the manufacture of combs and for calico printing. He effected 
many improvements in the village, and became one of Dutchess county's represen- 
tative citizens. Clinton W. Clapp supplemented his preliminary education with a 
course at the New York Mechanical Institute. He has been interested in various 
enterprises of his native place, and conforming to his mechanical taste constructed 
a steam yacht and a pipe organ. 

May 23, 1854 Mr. Clapp married Catherine J. Samons, and they became the par- 
ents of the following children : Benjamin F., deceased; GeorgeM.; Warren H., de- 
ceased; Charles L.; Walter C, and Jason E. Mrs. Clapp died January 13, 1871. 
For his second wife Mr. Clapp chose Nettie Ecroyd; she died April 17, 1889. July 
1, 1890, Mr. Clapp married Charlotte Crosier, and two children were born to them: 
Irving, and Rhoda May. Mrs. Clapp, 3rd, died August 4, 1897. 

Mr. Clapp has taken an active interest in public affairs and was twice elected a 
member of the Board of Supervisors. He was also elected Justice of the Peace, 
and served two terms as Chief of the Fire Department. For four years he was 
president of the Wappingers Falls Cemetery Association, and is now treasurer of 
the same. He is a charter member and trastee of the Grinnell Library Association. 
In religious belief Mr. Clapp is a Baptist, and has always been active in the affairs 
of this church. He has been a student of local history, and the Town of Wappinger 
of this publication is from his pen. 



698 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

HENRY D. CLARK, a leading citizen of the town of Northeast, Dutchess coun- 
ty, was bom June 28, 1850, a son of Hiram and Mary (Richter) Clark, and a great 
grandson of Ezra Clark a native of Plainfield, Conn., who purchased 200 acres in 
the north east part of Dutchess county in 1795. The family for four generations 
have been prominent in business, political and social affairs of that locality. 

Hiram Clark, a son of Douglas and Elizabeth (Wiggins) Clark, was bom in 1824. 
He was engaged for some years in the breeding of fine horses. Among other enter- 
prises in which he was interested was the fotonding of the Millerton National Bank> 

His eldest son, Henry D. was educated at Amenia Seminary and at Marlboro, 
Mass. Politically he is a Democrat and for many years has been a leader in the 
afiairs of that party in his native town. With his brother John W. he inherited the 
homestead farm of 400 acres, and conducts an extensive dairy business. 

COL. HENRY F. CLARK, the recognized dean of the dental profession of 
Dutchess County, and widely famous for his many inventions, for his expert mark- 
manship with the rifle, and for his long and useful career as a National Guardsman, 
was bom in the town of Hyde Park in 1839. As a boy his favorite studies were 
natural philosophy and mathematics. 

In a spirit of adventure he went to New York at the age of seventeen, and became 
an apprentice in a drug store. In 1859 he began the study of dentistry in Pough- 
keepsie, and in 1863 Dr. Clark opened an ofHce in this city for the practice of his 
chosen profession. His career may be easily traced by the medals and diplomas 
awardied to him for the splendid specimens of his dental handiwork sent to various 
national exhibitions. 

To-day Dr. Clark takes the same pride in pursuing his private practice in this, 
city as he ever did, and continues foremost in devising further improvement and 
development. 

In 1862 he became a member of Company A, 21st Regiment, was soon elected a 
Lieutenant, and steadily arose through the intermediate grades to the rank of 
Lieutenant Colonel in 1876. He resigned in 1878 in order that he might devote 
more time to long range rifle practice. He became an expert and an authority on 
the rifle, and was selected by the National Rifle Association of America in 1880 to 
represent it at Dollymount, Ireland, in the great international rifle match, in which 
bis success made him famous as a rifle shot throughout the world. 

In 1886 he was appointed Assistant Quartermaster General with the rank of 
Colonel, by Governor Hill. During the same year he went to Europe to represent 
the company which had been named to exploit his inventions. 

He resumed the practice of his profession in Poughkeepsie in 1896. 

Dr. Clark's success is easily attributable to his indomitable perseverance, to his- 
piasterly knowledge of his profession, together with a genius for improving upon 
everything that comes under hjs hand. 

GEORGE H. CODDINGTGN, M. D., of Amenia, N. Y., was born at Egremont, 
Mass. in 1854. After graduating from Egremont Academy he taught school for 
two years, and then took up the study of medicine with Dr. Henry M. Knight, in 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 699 

lipu with Dr. John C. Shaw. He graduated from the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of New York in 1881. After spending some months in the King's County 
Hospital at Platbush as assistant physician, and also at the King's County Insane 
Asylum, he took up his residence at Amenia in 1882, where he has since been ac- 
tively engaged in the practice of his profession. 

March 23, 1883 Dr. Coddington-Vas united in marriage with Miss Irene H. Warn- 
er of Southbury, Conn., and to them have been born two children; Joel H. and De- 
sault Guernsey. 

EDWARD A. CONGER, Assistant District Attorney of Dutchess county, was 
born at Poughkeepsie, N. Y., and educated in St. Mary's School and the Poughkeep- 
sie High School. After completing his legal studies at the New York Law School 
he was admitted to the Bar, June, 1904. Mr. Conger was appointed to his present 
office, January 1, 1907. He is a member of the Knights of Columbus, the Pough- 
keepsie Club, and treasurer of the Poughkeepsie High School Alumni Association 
which was formed for the ptirpose of assisting graduates throtigh college. 

FREDERICK L. CONKLIN, attorney, of Millerton, N. Y., was born at Copaac 
Lake, January 12, 1879. He was educated in the public schools of his native place 
and at Claverack College, graduating from the New York University in 1902. The 
same year he was admitted to the Bar, and took up his residence at Millerton April' 
1, 1903. 

Politically Mr. Conklin is a Democrat and the leader of that party in a Republican 
stronghold of the town of Northeast. Socially he is affiliated with the Masonic 
fraternity. 

WILLIAM JAMES CONKLIN, M. D. was born at Cornwall, N. Y., January 28, 
1846. His father was Dr. Peter Elting Conklin, who practiced medicine in Corn- 
wall for more than a quarter of a century. His mother was Sarah M. Slater, bom 
in Poughkeepsie, N. Y. in 1808, the daughter of James Slater, Sr., who was bom at 
Lynn, England in 1764 and Elizabeth Perkins, bom at Spalding, Lincolnshire, Eng-- 
land. 

They lived in Poughkeepsie for many years, were prominent members of the 
Baptist Church and died there in 1828. His grandfather, David Conklin was a 
leading resident of Cornwall. He married Ann Roe, whose ancestor John Roe 
settled in Long Island in 1655. The Roe family were prominently associated with 
the history of Cornwall for many years. 

Dr. William James Conklin's early education was obtained in the public schools 
of Comwall and at the Cornwall Collegiate Institute and for two years at Madison 
now Colgate University at Hamilton, N. Y. He took a course in Eastman's Busi- 
ness College, Poughkeepsie, and followed mercantile pursuits for a time but in 1867 
began the study of medicine and in 1870 graduated from the Medical department 
of the University of the City of New York. Since March 17, 1870 he has practiced 
medicine in Fishkill, N. Y. He has been a permanent member of the New York 
State Medical Society for twenty years and is President of the Medical Society of 



700 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Dutchess Cotinty of which he has been a member for thirty-seven years. He has 
held various oflBces in Fishkill, outside of his profession, viz., president of the Board 
of Education, of which he was a member for eighteen years, director of the First 
National Bank of Fishkill Landing for fifteen years, Health Officer of the Town of 
Fishkill, and for six years one of the Coronors of the County. He is a member of 
Beacon Lodge No. 283, F. and A. M. 

His sympathies and influence have always been on the side of progress. He was 
■one of the incorporators of the Fishkill Electric R. R. ; is a director and is Vice- 
President of the company. He is also largely interested in the Citizens Railroad 
Light and Power Co., and the Southern Dutchess Gas and Electric Co., of which he 
is a director. 

For many years he has been and is now, one of the Examiners for the Board of 
Pensions of Dutchess County and Health Officer for the Village of Fishkill. 

In 1875, he married Barbara Etta Walcott, whose father, Halsey Foster Walcott 
has been prominently associated with the interests of Fishkill since 1845. He is 
ninety- two years of age and is still deeply interested, not only in the affairs of his 
own township, but in the current events of the world as recorded in the daily papers 
which he always reads. He is the oldest member of Beacon Lodge F. & A. M. which 
he joined in 1853; he was Justice of the Peace in Fishkill for twenty years and has 
held many public offices in Fishkill. Her mother, Jane H., was the daughter of 
Joseph Bogardus and both were well known residents of Fishkill from 1833 until 
their death in that place; — the former in 1894-^the latter in 1859. 

The three sons of Doctor and Barbara E. W. Conklin are Foster Walcott, who died 
in early childhood; William Elting, a Civil Engineer, graduated from Cornell Uni- 
versity, who has spent the past five years as assistant Engineer in the construction 
of street railways and other public works in the Philippine Islands, and Clarence 
Joseph, who is Chief Clerk in the Overcharge division of the New York Central 
R. R. Freight Claim department. 

ELIAS COOKINGHAM, a prominent agriculturist residing in Staatsburgh, N. Y. 
was bom July 28, 1869, and was educated in the public schools of the town of Hyde 
Park, which was supplemented by a course in an educational institution at Hacketts- 
town. In public affairs Mr. Cookingham has held the office of Road Commissioner 
two terms, and has served as a member of the Staatsburgh Board of Education for 
a period of five years. 

JACOB CORLIES, for fifteen years president of the First National Bank of 
Poughkeepsie, is the only son of the late George Corlies, who was very active in the 
development of what is now the leading residential section of Poughkeepsie. 

Jacob Corlies was bom April 4, 1830, and received his education at the Friends' 
Boarding School, kept by Samuel Smith on Mansion Square. He then went to 
New York, and was for a time engaged in the hosiery business. Mr. Corlies returned 
to Poughkeepsie in 1854, and was associated with his father in the development and 
management of his extensive real estate interests. At the sale of the Worral 
property in 1869 he and Andrew King purchased a tract of forty-two acres on the 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 701 

north side of Main street, and George Innis purchased a similar tract adjoining to 
the eastward. Innis Avenue was laid out between the two, and Corlies Avenue 
Maple Street and King Street on the first tract mentioned. This property is now 
being rapidly built up. 

In 1867 Mr. Corlies became a director of the First National Bank, and in 1894 
succeeded Robert Slee as president of this institution. He has been a trustee of 
the Savings Bank since 1887. 

In public life Mr. Corlies has served the city in the capacity of Alderman, and al- 
so as a member of the Alms House Board and the Board of Education. 

September 6, 1855, Mr. Corlies married Edith W. Haines of New York, and four 
children were born to them; Franklin H., Eliza, George and Walter. 

ISAAC MARTENSE CORNELL, physician and surgeon; was born at Defreest- 
ville, Rensselaer Co. N. Y., April 26, 1851, a son of Rev. William Augustus and Helen 
Maria (Wyckoff) Cornell. His mother was a daughter of Jacob and EKzabeth 
(Van Deventer) WyckoflE of New Brunswick, N. J. His father was a son of Isaac 
Cornell and his wife Elizabeth Hoffman, who was a daughter of William and De- 
borah (Le Roy) Hoffman and a grandson of Pieter Cornel, who married Maria 
(Meserole) Martense, widow of Isaac Martense, and a daughter of Jacob and 
Jannetije (Stryker) Meserole, and a granddaughter of Pieter and Jannetije (Mar- 
tense) Stryker. Shortly after the American Revolution Pieter Cornel and his wife- 
came from Long Island to Dutchess County, N. Y., and settled in the Town of La- 
grange, where he bought a farm of 400 acres. The Cornell family has been long 
resident in America and connected with many of the foremost families of the Col- 
onial period. Dr. Cornell was educated at Carey and Pelham Institutes, Pough- 
keepsie, and then began the study of medicine with Dr. Stephen S. Green of La- 
grangeville, Dutchess Cotmty (who later moved to Buffalo, N. Y.). In 1873 he 
entered the Medical Department of New York University, being graduated as M. D., 
in 1877. After his graduation he went to Buffalo, N. Y., and for sometime practiced 
with his preceptor Dr. Green; then resided at New Hamburg, N. Y., and in the 
spring of 1878 settled at Wappingers Falls. He was health officer of the Town of 
Poughkeepsie, 1878; and health officer of the Town of Wappingers, 1883-86. Dr.. 
Cornell is a member of the Dutchess County Medical Society, the Medical Society 
of the State of New York, the American Medical Association, the General Alumni 
Society of New York University, and of Wappingers Masonic Lodge, and is also a 
trustee of the Wappinger Savings Bank. He is a RepubKcan in politics and a 
Presbyterian in his religious affiliation. Dr. Cornell has been twice married, first 
October 30, 1878, to Kate E. Dorland daughter of Hon. Peter Dorland and his wife 
Catharine E. Miller of Poughkeepsie, who died July 29, 1880, and second June 6, 
1883, to Elizabeth Woolsey Harcourt daughter of Joseph D. Harcourt and his wife- 
Mary Ellen Woolsey of Wappingers Falls, by whom he has one son, Martense. 
Harcourt Cornell (bom December 26, 1884). 

J. M. CRONK, M. D., was born in Suydam, Columbia county, August 8, 1867 
After finishing his studies at Claverack College he took up the study of medicine at 



702 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Columbia University, graduating in the year 1888, and has since been engaged in 
practice at Hyde Park, N. Y. 

In 1893 Dr. Cronk was united in marriage with Miss Nellie Palmer of Matteawan, 
N. Y. 

He is a member of the American Medical Association; the New York State Medi- 
cal Society; the Dutchess County Medical Society and the Dutchess Club. He is 
also a member of the Board of Health of Hyde Park, and Health OflBcer of the town. 

MILTON E. CURTISS was born in the village of Kendall, Orleans County, N. Y., 
November 15, 1837, but the greater part of his Ufe was spent in Dutchess County. 
He was educated in the schools of western New York, and after a course in a Pough- 
keepsie business college, he became teller in the Poughkeepsie National Bank (now 
the Poughkeepsie Trust Co.) and from there in 1869, he came, with the highest 
recommendations, to the First National Bank of Fishkill Landing. 

Early and late he continued for thirty-nine years his duties at this institution, 
respected by every one with whom he came in contact. His services as Cashier 
proved what a vast stock of knowledge and good common sense he possessed. He 
was well versed in the banking business and the present high standard of the local 
institution is in a great measure due to his good judgment. 

In the fall of 1889 Mr. Curtiss was stricken with nervous prostration. He was 
benefited by a trip abroad, and upon his return continued his work at the bank tm- 
til his recent death. Only those who had the privilege of knowing Mr. Ctui;iss in- 
timately could fully appreciate his finer qualities. He was a man of the greatest 
conscientiousness. Never robust in health, he did not allow physical weakness to 
hinder him from doing his duty. In his hours of relaxation he greatly enjoyed 
reading the best and noblest books. He was in sympathy with whatever tended to 
uplift humanity. 

Mr. Curtiss was an officer in the Dutch Reformed Chtirch for over thirty years, 
and a teacher in its Sunday-school for much of that time. For thirty-six years he 
was a member of Beacon Lodge, No. 283, P. & A. M. 

We quote, in part, an appreciation of Mr. Curtiss from the pen of his friend, Joel 
Benton: "The death of Mr. Curtiss would have been startling from the deep sense 
of loss that it awakened, even if it had not been so sudden and unlooked for. For 
he had filled for nearly forty years in Fishkill a large position, and one of uncommon 
responsibility, with rare success and discretion. He had come, in factj to know its 
needs and difiiculties in a way, and with a thoroughness that was remarkable and 
almost unexampled. Its duties were to him, indeed, paramount; not to be care- 
les,sly disposed of, or in the slightest way neglected : but to be conscientiously weigh- 
ed and enlarged rather than lightened. He held his place to be a holy trust, and 
gave his entire strength and high purpose to see that the institution that he so well 
served should have no detriment, but should reward its promoters and founders 
while giving a liberal and proper accommodation to those who had business to trans- 
act with it." 

JOSEPH A. DAUGHTON, attorney, was born in the city of Poughkeepsie, 
February 5, 1872. After graduating from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1888 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 703 

he began the study of law in. the office of Judge Henry M. Taylor, completing his 
studies in the law offices of Hackett & Williams. He was admitted to the Bar in 
1894, and is still associated with the latter firm. 

Politically Mr. Daughton is a Democrat, and has represented the fourth ward of 
his native city in the Board of Aldermen. 

Mr. Daughton was for two terms Exalted Ruler of the Benevolent Protective 
Order of Elks, and is now a life member of this organization. He is also a member 
of the Dutchess Club and the Poughkeepsie Fire Department. September 6, 1903 
he was united in marriage with Lillian Cavanaugh of Poughkeepsie. 

ANNA G. WINSLOW DAYLEY, was born in the city of Poughkeepsie, Dutchess 
County, N. Y. She was educated at St. Mary's private school on South Hamilton 
St. and the Poughkeepsie High School (where she took the first Cornell Scholarship) 
and Eastman National Business College, from which institutions she was graduated. 
She afterward took a State University Extension Course in History and Literature. 
After leaving Eastman College Miss Dayley entered the law^pffice of Colonel Robert 
F. Wilkinson where she became managing clerk of the office. While serving as 
clerk in Mr. Wilkinson's office Miss Dayley was appointed reporter of the Special 
Terms of the Supreme Court, being the first woman in the County to hold that posi- 
tion. After the new Ninth District was formed she was assigned to the terms of 
the County Court under Judge Samuel K. Phillips and Judge Frank Hasbrouck. 

Miss Dayley was for three terms President of the Alumni Association of the 
Poughkeepsie High School and is now a Trustee of the Association. She is a mem- 
ber of the Women's Bar Association, Portia Club, The New Yorkers and the Wm. 
Lloyd Garrison Association, all of New York City and of the Daughters of Isabella 
of Poughkeepsie. 

She was admitted to the Bar May 9, 1905, being the only woman at that time 
sworn in in the Second Judicial District, and is at present the only woman practic- 
ing law in Dutchess County, and the first woman native of the City of Poughkeepsie 
to be admitted to the Bar. 

ROBERT E. DEAN builder of granite, marble and bronze cemetery memorials, 
at Fishkill, N. Y. was bom April 3, 1873, a son of James E. and Jerusha P. (Hilliker) 
Dean. He attended the schools of his native town; is a graduate of the New York 
Nautical School and spent two years at sea. Mr. Dean was engaged with the New 
York Water Supply Co., for a year, and was interested in the same work in Fishkill. 
In August 1903, Mr. Dean purchased his present monument business, which is one 
of the most extensive in the county. 

Mr. Dean is a trustee and treasurer of the Fishkill Rural Cemetery; and has 
served as Chief of the local fire department four years. Socially he is a member of 
Beacon Lodge No. 283, F. & A. M. 

In 1897 Mr. Dean married Mary E., daughter of James and Sarah Adriance, and 
they are the parents of two children, Helena Adriance, and James E. Dean, 2d. 

THE DELAVAL SEPARATOR COMPANY of which Mr. Oscar Bemstrom is 
the efficient manager, was established at Bloomfield, N. J. in 1891, but soon remov- 



704 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ed to Poughkeepsie, N. Y., where the works were started in June 1892, with a force 
of fifty employees. The separator is a mechanical device constructed for the pur- 
pose of separating the cream from the milk when still warm and as it leaves the 
cow. It is the invention of Dr. DeLaval of Stockholm, — the same master genius 
who has produced the turbine. 

The business of the company has increased rapidly, and the plant has been en- 
larged from time to time. Over five hundred men are now employed in producing 
these separators, which have found a ready market in all parts of the country. 

ALEXANDER DE LA VERGNE was born at Poughkeepsie, November 25, 
1854. When he was three years of age his parents removed to Salt Point, where 
Alexander was educated in the public schools and worked on the farm with his 
father many years. In 1900 he removed to Pleasant Plains, and in 1907 returned 
to Salt Point, and engaged in the butcher business. In September, 1908, he piu'- 
chased a general mercantile business of Calvin Coons, which he conducts at the 
present time. 

Mr. de la Vergne was united in marriage with Abigail Coons in 1877, and two 
children have been bom to them: Charles T., born May 10, 1881, who is now asso- 
ciated with his father in business, and Paul E., bom in August, 1887, who married 
in 1907 Winifred Horsfield of Brooklyn, N. Y., and one son has been bom to them, 
Paul Mason 

Mr. de la Vergne has held the office of Justice of the Peace since 1906. Socially 
he is affiliated with the Masonic fraternity. 

COL. JOHNSTON LIVINGSTON DE PEYSTER, youngest son of Gen. John 
Watts de Peyster was bom at Tivoli, N. Y., Jime 14, 1846; a descendant in the 
eighth generation from Johannes de Peyster who emigrated to New Amsterdam, 
bringing with him family plate and pictures, with the intention of founding a fam- 
ily in America; and on his mother's side, a descendant in the seventh generation 
from Robert Livingston, first Lord of the Manor of Livingston. 

At the age of sixteen in 1862 he recruited over fifty men for Company C, 128th 
N. Y. v., afterwards not mustered in, owing to his youth. He joined the 7th N. 
Y. Regiment and served during the draft riots in New York. In May 1864 he was 
mustered into the United States Service as Lieutenant in 13th Art. N. Y. V. and 
served with his Regiment at Base Cliff. He was subsequently appointed aid-de- 
camp on the StafiE of Brigadier-General George F. Shepley, was transferred with 
his General to the Staff of Major General G. Godfrey Weitzel, and entered Rich- 
mond April 3rd, 1865 

He raised the first American flag over Richmond. Col. de Peyster was elected 
to the New York State Assembly of 1889 and 1890 from the 2nd District of Dutchess 
County. He succeeded his grandfather Frederic de Peyster on 1883 as Trastee of 
the New York Society Library and in 1898 became its president. 

Col. de Peyster belonged to many social clubs, including the Union, Knickerbock- 
er, %tropolitan of New York, also the St. Nicholas, Holland, Historical, and Hu- 
guenot Societies. He was one of the oldest members of the military order of the 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 705 

Royal Legion, having been elected in April, 1866. He was a member of Societies of 
the War of 1812 and Colonial Wars. He joined the Grand Army of the Republic 
in 1870 and held many prominent positions in the order. For many years he was 
a member of the Executive Committee of the Republican League of the State of 
New York from Dutchess County. He died May 27, 1903 at Tivoli. 

WRIGHT DEVINE, merchant and representative citizen of the village of Pleas- 
ant Valley, N. Y., was born in that locality December 13, 1838; a son of Jonathan 
and Catherine (Van Vlack) Devine, and a grandson of Abram Devine who was 
born in New Jersey and died at the Pleasant Valley homestead in 1850. 

Wright Devine finished his studies at the Nine Partners School, and for a time 
was engaged in teaching. In 1867 in connection with his brother Albert he pur- 
chased his present store, and after a partnership of two years became sole proprietor. 

Mr. Devine is a member of the Masonic fraternity, and in 1893-94, was master 
of Shekomeko Lodge No. 458; he has also served as treasurer of that Lodge. 

Mr. Devine was married in 1866 to Julia M., daughter of James Way. Two chil- 
dren were bom to them, Grace E. and Seward W. 

JOHN PETER DEWINT, for many years prominently identified with the develop- 
ment of Fishldll Landing, N. Y., was a son of John DeWint, who came from Holland 
and settled on the island of St. Thomas in the West Indies, and there married Eliza- 
beth Groebe. In 1874 he and his wife came to New York, where Mr. DeWint was 
engaged in trade with the West Indies. He bought a tract of land near Tappan, N. Y., 
where he lived with his wife and one son, John Peter, the subject of this review, who 
was bom in 1787. The DeWint homestead at Tappan has been purchased by the 
State of New York as it was one of Washington's headquarters during the Revolution. 
Later John DeWint bought, further up the river, on the opposite east shore, a tract 
of about 2000 acres of land and gave it to his son, John Peter. On this land the vil- 
lage of FishkiU-on-Hudson was built. September 11, 1814 John Peter DeWint mar- 
ried, at Quincy, Mass., Caroline Amelia Smith, grand-daughter of John Adams, the 
second president of the United States. To them were bom the following children: 
Caroline Elizabeth (Mrs. J. J. Monell) ; Julia (Mrs. W. A. Van Wagenen) ; Elizabeth 
(Mrs. C. P. Cranch); Anna Maria; John; William Stephens Smith; Isabella Adams 
(Mrs. Gabriel Furman) ; Emily Augusta (Mrs. Frederick Withers) ; Arthur; Francis 
Adams; Mary Catherine (Mrs. George Seaman). The homestead of Mr. DeWint 
stood on the bank of the river, a short distance north of the village of FishkiU-on-Hud- 
son. It was totally destroyed by fire in 1862, and was never rebuilt. Besides the 
management of over a thousand acres of land Mr. DeWint had the care and mainte- 
nance of the ferry at Newburgh, and other business on the river and in New York. 
His life was very active and hospitable. He gave the land on which the Dutch par- 
sonage and burial ground stands; also to the Methodist church he gave a tract of 
land on Main street, on the site now occupied by Sherman Brothers. He also gave 
the land for a public school on the site now occupied by the Dutchess Tool Works. 

Mr. DeWint died November 18, 1870. His wife perished in the disaster which re- 
sulted from the burning of the steamer "Henry Clay," while racing with the steamboat 
"Armenia." 



706 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

JOHN J. DONNELLY, attorney, Fishkill-on-Hudson, was bom at Matteawan, N. 
Y., August 19, 1876. After graduating from the Matteawan High School in 1900. he 
pursued the studies for the legal profession at the Columbia University Law School, 
and in the office of former Cotmty Judge Samuel K. Phillips. He was admitted to 
the Bar in 1905. Mr. Donnelly holds the office of Justice of the Peace of the town of 
Fishldll, and is Corporation Counsel for the village of Matteawan. 

CYRENUS P. DORLAND, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom February 28, 
1848, at Matteawan, N. Y. After finishing his studies in the schools of his native 
town and the Dutchess County Academy he entered the law office of his father, 
Peter Dorland, who was then Surrogate of Dutchess county. He was admitted 
to the Bar in 1875. In 1879 Mr. Dorland was elected one of the Justices of the 
Peace of the city of Poughkeepsie, and re-elected to that office, serving, in all, seven 
years. In 1886 he was elected City Recorder, and at the expiration of his term was 
elected to the office of Surrogate of Dutchess county, to which he was re-elected in 
1896. 

In 1872 Mr. Dorland was united in marriage with Catherine S. Cary of Pough- 
keepsie, and to them have been bom three children: Leslie C, Clarence, and Mary 
W. 

JOSEPH H. DOUGHTY was born at Salt Point, Dutchess county, April 18, 1854. 
After finishing his education in the public schools, he learned the carpenter tradie 
with his father, and was for a time employed in Brooklyn, N. Y. In 1903 he re- 
turned to his native county and engaged in farming, on the old Perkins' homestead 
in the town of Poughkeepsie. 

Mr. Doughty was married September 13, 1882 to Amelia E. Perkins. They are 
the parents of one daughter — Esther. 

ROBERT W. DOUGHTY, attorney, at FishkiU-on-the-Hudson, was bom at 
Matteawan, N. Y., December 13, 1869. He received his preliminary education in 
the schools of Matteawan, and was graduated from the University of Michigan in 
1892 with the degree of B. A. He then entered the law office of his brother, Edward 
M. Doughty of Fishkill Landing, and was admitted to the Bar in 1901. He is trus- 
tee of the Fishkill Savings Institution; vice-president of the Citizens' Land Improve- 
ment Company of Fishkill Landing; trustee and deacon of the Pilgrim Baptist 
Church of Matteawan, and president of the Hudson River Central Sunday School 
Convention. 

In 1896 Mr. Doughty was married to Grace Gobel of Kalamazoo, Michigan, and 
the following children were born to them: EUzabeth G., Edna R., Grace R., and 
Thomas J. 

CLARENCE J. DRAKE, was born at the town of Pleasant Valley, Dutchess 
•County, New York, on the 24th day of June, 1874, a;nd is the son of Edward C. and 
Anilie E. Drake. He was educated at the Poughkeepsie Military Institute and the 
De Garmo Institute, of Fishkill-on-Hudson, N. Y., and in 1898 entered the law 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 707 

offices of JHon. Martin Heermance and Hon. C. W. H. Arnold, and later studied in 
the office of Charles F. Cossum, Esq., from whose office he was admitted to practice 
in the year 1902. He is still engaged in the practice of his profession in the city of 
Poughkeepsie, N. Y. Mr. Drake is active in Republican politics and has held 
several offices in his town and county. He belongs to the Masonic and other fra- 
ternal orders and clubs. 

JOHN C. DUBOIS, a merchant at Wappingers Palls, was born in this village 
in 1857. He obtained his education in the public schools. He began life as a 
clerk in his father's store, and has been engaged in business for himself since 1878. 
Mr. DuBois is president of the National Bank of Wappingers Falls, which was or- 
ganized and opened for business February 1, 1909. He has served as trustee of 
the village of Wappingers Falls, and also as village president. 

DR. THEODORE WELD DUBOIS, the oldest practitioner of dentistry in the 
city of Poughkeepsie is the only surviving son of the late P#ter P. duBois and Caro- 
line Dean duBois of Pleasant Valley; Mrs. duBois having been a sister of the late 
Judge Dean of Poughkeepsie. 

Dr. duBois' father was a direct descendant of Jacques duBois, who with his 
brother Louis duBois of New Paltz first brought the ancient name of "duBois" to 
the new world in 1660 and they wrote their name as it was invariably written six 
himdred years previously, with a small "d" and a capital "B" thus "duBois". 

In constdting the oldest genealogical authors and books of heraldry in the Bib- 
liothique National at Paris, only one name is now extant of equal antiquity — ^that 
is the name of Pierrepont — which like that of "duBois" has come down for many 
centuries unaltered in a single letter. 

In the heraldic records preserved in the "Royal Library" of Paris, under the head 
of "duBois" it is expressly said "that this name is one of the oldest of the noble 
families of contention in Normandy; that genealogy beginning with the name of 
Geoffroi duBois, a knight under William the Conqueror, whom he accompanied to 
the Conquest of England in 1066. 

Dr. duBois' great, great, great grandfather, Peter duBois was the first elder 
of the 1st Reformed Church of Poughkeepsie, while his brother Louis duBois was 
the 1st Elder of the Reformed Church of New Paltz in Ulster County. 

Dr. duBois has in his possession an heirloom which has come down to him from 
his forefathers (in fact was brought with them when they fled to America to escape 
Popish bigotry, tyranny, and persecution) in the shape of an old Dutch Bible 
printed in 1690, nearly a foot in thickness and perhaps eighteen inches square. 
This sacred volume is still well preserved, with heavy brass clasps and bindings, and 
is a daily reminder of his Huguenot ancestors — ^bold and fearless upholders of civil 
and religious liberty — Louis duBois of Ulster County and Jacques duBois of Dutch- 
ess County. 

Dr. duBois was a student at the old Dutchess County Academy, under the late 
Wm. McGeorge, a noted instructor. He studied his profession with Dr. Clarke of 
Albany, N. Y. and began his practice in Poughkeepsie in 1860. Dental Colleges 



708 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

were comparatively unknown at that time, but Dr. duBois soon attained such pro- 
ficiency as an operator, that he was unanimously chosen by President Ra3rmond 
and the Board of Trustees of Vassar College to act as dentist to that institution, 
retaining that position for a decade or more. 

Dr. duBois was married in 1861 to Mary C. Perkins of Philadelphia, Pa. One 
daughter, Mrs. P. S. Swain of New York City being their only surviving child. In 
1889 Dr. duBois was again married to Cornelia M. Baldwin of Patterson, Putnam 
Co., N. Y., she being a lineal descendant of Elder Wm. Brewster who came over in 
the Mayflower. Theodore Weld duBois, Jr. is the only child of this marriage. 

DANIEL A. DUGAN was born at Brinckerhoff, Dutchess County, N. Y., on 
August 31, 1880. He is the son of Mary and the late Charles Dugan, who was bom 
near Bantry, County Cork, Ireland where his ancestors had resided for over two 
hundred years, and which is still the family home. They were engaged in agricul- 
tural ptirsuits and took active interest in local affairs. John Dugan, the grand- 
father of our sketch, had ten children of whom Charles was the oldest. He came 
to this country in 1855 and located on Staten Island where he resided for two years. 
He then came to Fishkill, N. Y., and engaged in farming in which occupation he 
continued until his death 1901. Three other brothers, Timothy, Stephen and Dan- 
iel came to this country ; Daniel served as a volunteer in the Civil War and Stephen 
who had just graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, came to this country to enlist 
but the war was over when he arrived. Timothy still resides on Staten Island 

Charles Dugan was the father of ten children — ^Annie, John, Charles (who died in 
infancy) Stephen, Francis, May, Charles, Daniel, Edward and William. 

Daniel A. Dugan attended the district school at Swartwoutville, and then entered 
the Fishkill Union School at Fishkill Village, from which he graduated after two 
years. He taught school for two years in Dutchess County and for four years 
near Carmel, Putnam County, N. Y., after which he entered the Albany Law 
School and graduated with the degree of L. L. B. after a two years' course. He was 
admitted to the Bar and opened a law o£Bce at Fishkill-on- Hudson where he is now 
practicing. He is a member of the Roman Catholic Church. In politics Mr. Dugan 
is a Democrat taking active interest in local affairs and in the advancement of the 
success of his party. He is a member of Trinity Council, Knights of Columbus, 
Brotherhood of Elks, Poughkeepsie Lodge, Fishkill Eyrie of Eagles, Protection 
Engine Company No. 1 of Fishkill, and an honorary member of Tompkins Hose 
Company of Fishkill Landing. 

JOHN PETER DUGAN, president of Fishkill Village, N. Y., bom at Brinck- 
erhoff, Dutchess county, July 20, 1862. He was educated in the public schools of 
his native town, and in 1880 began his apprenticeship as a blacksmith and horse- 
shoer with Peattie Bros, of Fishkill Landing. After learning his trade he followed 
this calling throughout the Eastern and Middle States for several years, finally em- 
barking in business for himself in Newark, N. J. In the spring of 1890 he built a 
shop at Brinckerhoff, N. Y., which he conducted for nine years, and in 1898 purchas- 
ed the property and blacksmith business of Jeremiah Wilbur at Fishkill, in which 
he is at present engaged. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 709 

For several years Mr. Dugan has taken an active interest in local public affairs, 
and in 1905 was elected a member of the Board of Trustees of Pishkill Village, and 
was re-elected in 1907. In March, 1909, Mr. Dugan was elected to the office of 
president of the village. Socially he is a member of Trinity Council No. 445, 
Knights of Columbus, and is also affiliated with the Order of Eagles. 

June 20, 1884 Mr. Dugan was united in marriage with Miss Josephine Purcell of 
Wappingers Falls, N. Y. 

IRVING DUTCHER, Supervisor of the town of Beekman, was born in the town 
of La Grange June 7, 1860, where he obtained his education in the district- schools. 
At the age of twenty he engaged in the mercantile business at Billings. From 1887 
to 1895 Mr. Dutcher resided in the State of Texas, and upon his return to Dutchess 
county in 1895 he opened a general store at Green Haven, N. Y. 

Politically Mr. Dutcher is a Republican, and from 1898 to 1906 held the office of 
town cleris of the town of Beekman, and in 1906 was elected,p, member of the Board 
of County Supervisors. He is a charter member of Acme Lodge No. 219, Knights 
of Pythias, of which he is also Past Master. 

JOHN BOWDISH DUTCHER has been long and successfully associated with 
finance, agriculture, stock raising and the railroad industry. 

His ancestors were among the staunch band of French Huguenots who fled to 
Holland after the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, many of whom came later to 
this country. The Dutcher family was founded here early in the seventeenth century 
by Ruloff Dutcher and his wife Jannette Brussy. Gabrial Dutcher, their son, 
married Elizabeth Knickerbocker, granddaughter of Horman Janse van Wye 
Knickerbocker, of Dutchess County, New York. Their grandson Parcefor Carr 
Dutcher, married Johanna Low Frinck, daughter of Stephen Princk and Anna Low 
both of whom were of distinguished Holland stock. Among Mrs. P. C. Dutcher's 
ancestors was Conrad Ten Eyck, who, coming from Holland in 1650, became the 
owner of what is now known as Coenties Slip in New York. Her maternal grand- 
father was the Revolutionary officer. Captain Peter Low. 

John B. Dutcher was horn at Dover, N. Y., on the 13th of February, 1830, the 
son of David and Amy Bowdish Dutcher. He early followed his father's pursuit 
of farming, at first in his native place and later in the adjoining town of Pawling. 
He has, indeed, never entirely relinquished his farming operations, despite the ex- 
tent of his financial and railroad interests. 

Politically he is a Republican, and was a member of the State Assembly in 1861 
and 1862, and of the State Senate in 1864 and 1865. In 1864, he was a delegate to 
the National Convention which renominated Lincoln, and in 1880 he was sent to 
the Convention that placed Garfield's name at the head of the ticket. 

Mr. Dutcher's long association with railways commenced in 1864 when he became 
a director of the New York & Harlem, a position he still retains. In the following 
year he became the General Live Stock Agent of the New York and Hudson River 
Raih-oad. He has occupied that position ever since, holding the same relations also 
with the New York and Harlem, the West Shore, the Fall Brook and all of the New 



710 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

York Central System East of Btiffalo. Of the New York and Harlem, and the 
Spuyten Duyvil & Port Morris Railroad he is a director. 

On the 22d of May, 1860, he married Christina Dodge, of Pawling. Their son, 
John Gerow Dutcher, was born on the 18th of September, 1865, married Helen 
Willets in St. Thomas's Church. He is also a member of the Union League Club, 
is a graduate of Yale in the class of 1885, and has a New York residence at 504 
Fifth Avenue. The home of Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Dutcher, "Maplecroft," is at Pawl- 
ing and has been occupied ever since the year following their marriage. 

Mr. Dutcher has been a member of the Union League Club since 1868. His 
name is on the rolls of the Saint Nicholas and Dutchess County Societies the 
New York Produce Exchange and the New York Chamber of Commerce; 

DUTCHESS FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY. Among the earUest of the 
mutual fire insurance companies organized in the State of New York, few bore a 
more excellent reputation in the insiu-ance world than the Dutchess County Mutual 
Insurance Co., of Poughkeepsie, N. Y., which was incorporated May 14, 1836. For, 
more than sixty-f ovir years, it operated without interruption and with a satisfactory 
measvire of success as a mutual company. To conform to the changed conditions 
under which the modem insurance business is conducted, it was reorganized July 
1, 1900, as a stock company, and under the efficient administration of president 
Lewis H. Vail, it has become a prosperous and growing corporation. The other 
oflScers of the Company are: M. A. Fowler, vice-president; J. J. Graham, Secre- 
tary; F. L. Vail, assistant secretary. 

DUTCHESS MANUFACTURING COMPANY, manufacturers of "Dutchess 
Trousers" in the city of Poughkeepsie. The business of this company, which is 
national in scope, has been built up through more than a quarter of a centtiry of in- 
telligent and progressive management. It was founded by the late Hon. J. Frank 
Hull, and was conducted by him until his death in July, 1907. "Dutchess Trous- 
ers" have always been distinctively a Poughkeepsie product, carrying the name ex- 
tensively to every city in the United States. The present officers are : W. J. Leahey 
president; Mrs. J. Frank Hull, first vice-president; C. Vail, second vice-president, 
and C. B. Palmer, secretary and treasurer. The policies incorporated by Mr. Hull 
for the management of the business have been successfully continued by the 
present officers. 

DUTCHESS TOOL COMPANY ,THE, Fishkill, N. Y. began business in April, 
1886, in a very small way; in the following October, the Rothery Factory in Mattea- 
wan, in which they were located, was entirely destroyed by fire. They secured oth- 
er quarters, however, and again began the business, which was the manufacture of 
a Baker's Oven Illuminator. After the re-building of the Rothery Factory, they 
again moved into it and continued the business there tmtil the Fall of 1891, when 
they^oved into the old Public School building at Fishkill Landing, which had been 
abandoned for school purposes and which the Company purchased and refitted for 
their factory. They have continued business at this location ever since, having 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 711 

enlarged the premises very much. Their business is devoted to the manufacture 
of Bakers' Machinery, which is sold in all parts of the United States. 

JACOB W. ELSEPFER, for over half a century a prominent lawyer of Dutchess 
county, was bom at Red Hook, N. Y. September 6, 1822, and died November 15, 
1907. He was a son of former Assemblyman John Elseffer. His mother's maiden 
name was Katharine Whiteman. His ancestors were among the early settlers in 
this county, and for a hundred and fifty years prominent in local history. 

Mr. ElseflEer's preliminary education was obtained at Claverack Institute. He 
then entered Williams College, but instead of pursuing a college course, he took up 
the study of law in the oflSce of Judge Rowley at Upper Red Hook. He was ad- 
mitted to the bar in 1845 and at once began the practice of his profession. The 
fact that his earliest clients as well as their descendants adhered to him throughout 
his long and successful career, is proof sufficient of his ability and integrity. 

In 1865, Mr. Elseffer was largely instrumental in the organization of the First 
National Bank of Red Hook, of which he was elected its fS:st President. He con- 
tinued as a director and attorney for this institution for many years, and much 
credit was awarded to him for the favorable condition of its affairs. 

Mr. Elseffer was united in marriage October 17, 1847, with Miss Delia Eliza 
Bonesteel of Clermont, N. Y., by whom survive their son John H. Elseffer of San 
Diego, Cal., and a daughter Katharine, wife of William P. Adams of Cohoes, N. Y., 
and two grand-daughters, Elizabeth Piatt Adams and Katharine Elseffer Adams. 

Mrs. Elseffer died October 20, 1888, and November 11, 1890, Mr, Elseffer mar- 
ried Harriet E., daughter of the late Frederick Mesick of Claverack, who died in 
April, 1907. 

While he never held public office, Mr. Elseffer was nevertheless a representative 
man in the affairs of the Democratic party. 

Socially, Mr. Elseffer was a Senior Past Master of Monumental Lodge No. 374 P. 
& A. M., and at the time of his death its oldest member. When this Lodge was at 
low ebb during the Civil War, it was through his timely advice and action that its 
charter was not surrendered, but instead removed to Tivoli where it has since 
prospered. 

Mr. Elseffer was a man of intellectual power, brilliant in conversation, courteous 
in manner, and one who made friends and kept them. 

THOMAS EMERSON was bom at Thorn Hill, Scotland, December 25, 1842. 
He received his education in the public schools of his native place, and then gave his 
attention to floriculture and landscape gardening, being employed on several 
large estates of his native land. In 1870 he came to America and accepted a posi- 
tion of gardener on the country estate of WilUam B. Dinsmore, Staatsburgh, N. Y. 
He has held the position of head gardener with Mr. Dinsmore since 1871. 

FRANK ENO, attorney, at Pine Plains, N. Y., was bora November 4, 1845. He 
finished his academic schooling at the College Hill institution, Poughkeepsie, and 
then began the study of law in the office of his father, the late William Eno; he 



712 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

was admitted to the Bar in 1868. Mr. Eno is a member of the Masonic fraternity, 
and was Master of Stissing Lodge for sixteen years. He has one son, Frank, who 
after finishing his preliminary studies at the Poughkeepsie High School, took up 
the study of law in the law department of Syracuse University and at the New York 
Law School. He was admitted to practice in 1908. 

WALTER FARRINGTON, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom in the town of La 
Grange, Dutchess county, in 1829. He obtained his education in the public schools 
and by private tutor, and began the study of law in the office of Judge Homer A. 
Nelson. He was admitted to practice at the general term of the Second Judicial 
Department held in Brooklyn December, 1867, and with the exception of his first 
four years as an attorney, during which time he was .located at Milton, Ulster coun- 
ty, he has practiced continually in the city of Poughkeepsie, and at the present time 
is the oldest member of the Dutchess County Bar. During Judge Nelson's term in 
Congress, 1863-'64, Mr. Farrington had charge of his law business, and occupied 
offices with him until 1866, when he formed a partnership with the late John P. H. 
TaUman, which existed until 1893. Mr. Farrington has since continued alone in 
private practice. 

In 1865-'66 he was one of the representatives of the city of Poughkeepsie in the 
Board of County Supervisors. 

In 1858 Mr. Farrington was united in marriage with Sarah E. Kay of Pleasant 
Valley, N. Y., and to them have been born two daughters, Cora E., now the wife 
of Thaddeus N. Benjamin, a druggist of Riverhead, L. I., and Jennie H., who re- 
sides with her father in Poughkeepsie. 

GEORGE R. FINTON, steward of the Hudson River State Hospital, Poughkeep- 
sie, was bom at Ovid, Seneca County, N. Y., December 23, 1867. He received a 
high school and business college education and graduated from Fairfield Military 
Academy in 1887. He served two years as telegrapher for the Lehigh Valley Rail- 
road Company, and from 1889 to 1903 was in the service of New York State at 
Willard State Hospital, Willard, N. Y. as stenographer and telegrapher. From 
1903 to August 6, 1906, he held the position of head book-keeper at the Hudson 
River State Hospital, when he received the appointment of steward. 

Mr. Finton is a member of the Dutchess Club; Dutchess County Society; Dutch- 
ess County Horticultural Society; and the Knights of the Maccabees. 

FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF AMENIA: This institution was organized in 
1864 with five directors; namely: Thomas L. Harris, Gail Borden, Desault Guern- 
sey, James A. Requa and Charles B. Gallegher. The following were the officers: 
Thomas L. Harris, president; Gail Borden, vice president ; James A. Requa, cash- 
ier. The Board of Directors, July 1, 1909, was composed of the following gentle- 
men: George G. Stevenson, Newton Hebard Roland S. Pahner, James S. Chaflfee. 
Lewis Jf. Eaton, Frank B. Stevenson, Charles H. Davis of Amenia, N. Y., and Gil 
bert L. Smith, of Sharon, Conn. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 713 

The following are the officers for 1909: George G. Stevenson, president; Newton 
Hebard, vice president; Charles H. Davis, Jr., cs.shier. 

The capital of the bank is $100,000; the undivided profits and surplus, $35,000. 
The conservative management of this institution has gained for it an enviable re- 
putation. 

THE FISHKILL LANDING MACHINE COMPANY was organized February 
1853 by Mr. Milo Sage and others, with a capital of $25,000, increased to $35,000 
in January 1858, and again increased to $100,000 in 1902. 

Mr. Sage continued as President until his death in 1880, and he was succeeded by 
Mr. Robert Halgin, The concern under the management of Messrs. Sage and Hal- 
gin has been very successful. They manufacture largely the Corlis Steam Engine, 
employ 75 to 100 men, and the work they turn out is known throughout the 
United States for its excellency. 

JOHN B. FLEMING, who is engaged in the woolen busAess at New Hamburgh, 
N. Y., was bom October 20, 1850, and received his education in the public schools 
of Yonkers, N. Y. He then became associated with Mr. Alexander Smith in the 
woolen business. In 1897 he came to New Hamburgh, and has since been suc- 
cessfully engaged in his present establishment. 

In religious belief Mr. Fleming is a member and an elder of the Presbyterian 
church of New Hamburgh. 

BENJAMIN MALTBY FOWLER, attorney, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born at 
Durham, Conn., April 27, 1854. After graduating from the Poughkeepsie High 
School he took a special course at Riverview Military Academy, and then entered the 
law office of Thompson & Weeks, Poughkeepsie, finishing his clerkship in the ofiBces 
of Anthony & Losee and Robert E. Taylor. He was admitted to the Bar May 13, 
1875, and has since been engaged in the practice of his profession. 

December 15, 1851, Mr. Fowler married Ada M., daughter of the late M. S. Doug- 
lass of New York City. Mrs. Fowler died October 4, 1906, and is survived by her 
husband and three sons: Douglass P., Maltby S., and Benjamin M., Jr. 

JACOB Z. FROST, manufacturer, was bom at Pleasant Plains, town of Clinton, 
Dutchess county, February 28, 1843, and was educated in the schools of his native 
place, and in a seminary conducted by Rev. Sherman Hoyt at Pleasant Plains. 
Until 1871 he was engaged in farming, when he purchased at auction the old mill 
property which was established by John C. DeWitt and which he has operated con- 
tinuously, the product consisting of flour, feed and grain. 

January 4, 1845 Mr. Frost was united in marriage with Marietta Cookingham, 
and they are the parents of the following children: Lillian, now the wife of Dr. 
Hawley of Pleasant Plains; R. Nita, now the wife of Robert Knox, Jr., of Pough- 
keepsie. 

SAMUEL H. GARDENIER, attorney, was bom at Matteawan, N. Y. in 1870. 
After graduating from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1888 he entered the law 



714 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

pflSce of Edward Cnimmey of Poughkeepsie, where he remained one year. He 
then accepted a clerkship in the Poughkeepsie postofEce under Postmaster Ketch- 
am. In 1891 Mr. Gardenier resumed the study of law with Stephen G. Guernsey, 
and was admitted to the Bar in 1893. He is at present engaged in general practice 
in Poughkeepsie. 

GARRISON geneahgy. Captain Joost Garrison, son of Jonas and ComeUa (De 
Grott) Garrison, settled, between 1750 and 1760, on the North end of the 700 acre 
lot on the road leading from Pleasant Plains to LeRoy's miUs, where Fred M. 
Barker now resides. His wife was Magdalena Van Dyke. Their children were: 
Mary, bom 1737, married Philip Kane; Margaret, born 1740, married Joseph Ford; 
Jemimah, bom 1742, married Charles Traver; Ehzabeth, bom 1744, married Ed- 
ward Talbot; Amy, born 1748, married Jonathan Alger; Jonas, bom 1752; Corne- 
lius, bom 1752; Rachel, born 1754, married Cornelius Ostrom; Helena, born 1757, 
married Comelius Van Vhet; Levi, born 1759; Nemah, bora 1763, married Jesse 
Smith. This family is now extinct. 

CONRAD C. GINDRA, a leading florist in the city of Poughkeepsie, was bom in 
Boston in 1863. The same year his parents removed to Dutchess coimty. After 
acquiring his education in the public schools of Poughkeepsie he engaged with his 
father, who had charge of the Beach property on the Hyde Park road, and it was 
here Mr. Gindra received his training in gardening and floriculture. May 23, 1908, 
Mr. Gindra purchased the old floral property, on upper Main street, from Isaac 
Fricker, which he has greatly enlarged and remodeled. 

May 8, 1906, Mr. Gindra was united in marriage with Margaret P. Ryan of Pough- 
keepsie. 

EDWARD MORRIS GORING was bom in Manchester, England, April 20, 1828. 
He was the eldest son of John M. Goring and Martha Heald. At the age of eight 
years he came to the United States of America with his parents, completing his 
education, begun in England, in the schools of Wappingers Falls, N. Y. 

In 1845 he was apprenticed to the trade of engraving in calico printing, serving 
under his father. This he followed until 1860. During the following nine years 
Mr. Goring was engaged in the coal business. In 1869 he became a member of the 
firm of Disbrow & Goring, iron founders. 

In 1872 he went into the insurance and real estate business; built Goring Hall, 
and opened a drug store in that building. He sold much property of the Mesier 
Estate which resulted in the opening of a number of important streets in Wap- 
pingers Falls, and in the erection of business places and houses. He carried on his 
real estate and drug business until 1890, when he retired. 

In 1850 Mr. Goring married Miss Jane Eliza Thomson, daughter of Alexander 
Thomson of Pleasant Valley. Four children were bom to them — Thomson Ed- 
ward, General Manufacturing Manager of Sweet, Orr & Co. ; Maria Jane, deceased, 
wife di Ashley S. Worsley, Electrical Engineer at Washington in the Government 
employ; Prescott Crosier, a printer: Adah Mary, ■Bjho died in childhood. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 715 

It was as a staunch Republican in politics and as a public man that Mr. Goring 
became so well and widely known. He was a member of the old Whig Party and 
came over to the RepubUcan ranks when that party was formed ; in fact, he can be 
called one of the organizers of the party. He has held a number of important poli- 
tical offices in this county, among them being Collector of the town of Pishkill, 
1862; Deputy Collector of internal revenue, 1865-1867; Assistant U. S. Assessor 
of internal revenue, 1867-1871. He was the first Republican supervisor elected in 
the township of Pishkill in ten years, and was re-elected by a large majority. Mr,' 
Goring was a member of the New York Assembly in 1871, and a colleague of Hon. 
Hamilton Fish and the late Hon. Harvey G. Eastman, rendering the latter valuable 
assistance in bringing through the bill authorizing the building of the Poughkeepsie 
Bridge. He was Sergeant-at-Arras in the Assembly in 1872. He was President 
of the village of Wappingers Falls in 1879, and afterwards police justice, — the only 
man in Wappingers Palls ever occupying that office. 

In 1883 he was appointed Postmaster by President Arthur, holding office four 
years, and he lived long enough to have the satisfaction of ^eing his grandson hold 
the same position under President Roosevelt. 

Prom 1902-1908 Mr. Goring held his last political office, that of Coroner of South- 
ern Dutchess. As Coroner he accomplished some of his best work for the people at 
large and for the safety of railroad employees, and saved the county much expense. 
In this office Mr. Goring had an opportunity to show some of his judicial powers and 
lawyer-like qualities, as were proven by some very important verdicts in reference 
to murder and railroad accidents. 

Mr. Goring had always at heart the best interest of the community and was active 
in bringing about many changes and improvements. He was the initiator and pro- 
moter in creating the town of Wappinger from the town of Pishkill; in the incor- 
poration of the Wappingers Falls Savings Bank and the Bank of Wappingers; in 
the incorporation of Wappingers Falls as a village; in the laying out of the road to 
New Hamburg along the lower creek as a pubUc instead of a toll road, as chartered 
by the legislature; in the law authorizing the erection of the public school building 
and in other like enterprises. Mr. Goring was a trustee of the Wappingers ceme- 
tery, and for 40 years was an active member of the Grinnell Library Association. 

Mr. Goring died at the age of nearly 81, — a great-grandfather. His death was 
due to general weakness, after some months illness, and occurred at his home in 
Wappingers Falls, January 8, 1909. 

Mr. Goring was a remarkably versatile man, a writer of ability, and a good 
speaker and conversationalist. He was a familiar figure at the Republican con 
ventions. 

?: THOMSON EDWARD GORING, eldest son of Hon. E. M. Goring, was born 
in Wappingers Falls, September 27, 1852. 

He was educated in the public schools of that place, and later became associated 
with his father in the drug and stationery business. 

In 1878 Mr. Goring became associated with Sweet, Orr & Co., entering the employ 
of that firm when it was yet in its infancy. After attaining his majority of twenty- 



716 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

one years service with the Company, he was presented with a testimonial of good 
faith by the employees of the Wappingers plant in consideration of his efiEorts to 
promote and keep the agreeable relations between employee and employer, and in 
appreciation of his great activity in increasing the business of the home factory, 
and of Sweet, Orr & Co. as a whole. 

In 1901 Mr. Goring was appointed manager of the manufacturing department of 
Sweet, Orr & Co. ; a very great advance having been made in the business there was 
necessity for such an office. He was also made a member of the board of direc- 
tors. 

In 1905 Mr. Goring was elected vice president of the Garment Manufacturers 
Association of America, and has since been reelected, holding that office at the 
present time. 

In 1877 Mr. Goring married Miss Mary Jane Myatt, daughter of Mr. James Myatt, 
of Bridgeport, Ct. Of this union three children were bom, Myatt Edward, — now 
postmaster at Wappingers Falls, — Maud Adah, who died in childhood, and Ethel 
Mary. Mrs. Goring died March, 1885. Mr. Goring's second wife was Miss Martha 
Nelson, daughter of Reuben Nelson and Mary PhilUps. This marriage took place 
in 1894. 

Although a very busy man, Mr. Goring has always been prominently identified 
with the RepubUcan party, and is an active member of the County committee. 

Mr. Goring is also connected with a number of clubs and orders, — among them 
are the following: the Amrita, Dutchess County Golf Club, and Lincoln Club, of 
Poughkeepsie, and the Aldine Association, of New York City. He is a thirty-sec- 
ond degree Mason, and belongs to the following lodges: Past Master of Wappingers 
Lodge No. 671, F. & A. M., Past Warden of Poughkeepsie Commandery No. 43, 
Poughkeepsie Chapter No. 170, R. A. M., and King Solomon's Council No. 31, R. & 
S. M., also to the Mystic Shrine, Mecca Temple, Lodge of Perfection, New York 
City, Council of the Princess of Jerusalem, New York City, Chapter of Rose Croix, 
New York City, and New York Consistory. He is a member of Lafayette Lodge, 
I. O. O. F.,and Lafayette Encampment; Evening Star Lodge, K. of P. ; Masonic 
Veteran's Association, of Newburgh, N. Y. ; W. H. Weston Shrine Association, of 
Newburgh, the Newburgh City Club, and B. P. O. E., of Poughkeepsie. He is a 
member of the Dutchess Co. Horticultural Society and of the Wappingers Falls 
and New England Dahlia Societies. 

Mr. Goring is interested in charitable and church work, and is a vestryman of 
Zion P. E. Church. He is an active and prominent citizen of his county, and a 
member of the Dutchess County Society of New York City. He has succeeded in 
making Sweet, Orr and Go's factory an attractive spot in the center of the business 
section of Wappingers Palls. It has rather the appearance of a municipal bidlding, 
or large school, with its creeping vines and window boxes with flowers and ferns, 
than an overall factory. 

MYATT E. GORING, P. D., pharmacist at Wappingers Palls, N. Y., was born in 
that tggm on April 7, 1878, He received his preliminary education in the district 
school of his birth place, supplemented by a course in the High Schools of Providence, 
R. I. and Washington, D. C. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 717 

It was while at school in the latter city that the war with Spain was declared and 
being a member of the Morton Cadets (so named in honor of Ex- Vice-President Levi 
P. Morton) a drill company in the National Guard of the District of Columbia, he was 
mustered into the service of Co. G. 1st D. C. Vols., and participated in the siege, 
bombardment and surrender of Santiago under Gen. Shafter. 

Mr. Goring entered the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy 1899, graduated in 1900 
and took up the duties of a pharmacist in Pittsburg, Pa. 

In 1904 Mr. Goring purchased the drug business originally established by his grand- 
father, Hon. E. M. Goring. Mr. Goring is a fraternity man and is a member of the 
following lo(}ges: Wappingers Lodge P. & A. M., Poughkeepsie Chapter R. A. M„ 
King Solomon's Council, Poughkeepsie Commandery, Poughkeepsie Lodge B. P. O. E„ 
Victory Council Jr. O. U. A. M., The Society of the Army of Santiago de Cuba and 
Camp Sague U. S. W. V. 

In 1908 Mr. Goring was appointed Postmaster at Wappingers Falls by President 
Roosevelt. 

Mr. Goring was united in marriage February 3, 1904 with«Miss Edith J. Smith of 
Shippensburg, Pa. They have two children, Marian T. and Edward M. 

LE GRAND GRAHAM of Clinton Hollow, was born in the town of Ghent, Colum- 
bia county. May 14, 1847. He received his education in the schools of his native 
place, and also at Clinton, Dutchess county. For some time he taught school, and 
for a year and a half was engaged in mercantile business at Clinton Hollow. In 
1864 he enlisted in the First New York Mounted Rifles, and at the close of the war 
was mustered out of service at Richmond, Va. In the spring of 1867 he engaged 
in farming and merchandising in Dutchess county, and in 1871 began operating a 
saw-mill in a building which has stood over a century and a half. In 1873 he pur- 
chased the property, and has continuously conducted this business. 

In 1872 Mr. Graham became a member of Warren Lodge, F, & A. M., and has 
held the office of secretary of that lodge for over fifteen years; and is also Past Mas- 
ter of this organization. Mr. Graham has taken an active interest in the public 
affairs of his adopted town, occup3ring various elective offices. 

June 26, 1873 he was united in marriage with Jane M. Lattin of Clinton. She 
died January 19, 1878, leaving one daughter, Bertha. December 24, 1879 Mr. 
Graham chose for his second wife Ella Smith of Clinton, and two children are the 
result of this union : Prank and Florence. 

ROBERT GRANT GRAHAM was bom in Poughkeepsie, September 27, 1875. 
He received his early education in the public schools here, graduating from the 
High School in 1894. He then took up a course at Eastman's Business College from 
which he was graduated in 1895. In 1896 he was appointed Dutchess County 
Court Stemographer, by Judge Samuel K. Phillips, and served in that capacity until 
1907, when he was appointed Supreme Court Stenographer, by Justice Joseph 
Morschauser, which office he now fills. 

Mr. Graham enlisted as a private in Co. K. 1st N. Y. Vol. Inf., and served during 
the Spanish-American war. He is a member of Triune Lodge 782 F. & A .M.; 



718 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Fallkill Lodge I. O. O. F., and of the Poughkeepsie, Euterpe Glee and Apokeepsing 
Boat Clubs. Mr. Graham has been a baritone singer in Christ Church choir since 
1904. 

THERON M. GREEN, of Pawling, N. Y., was bom in that town October 29, 
1829. His education was obtained in the public schools of his native place, and at 
Amenia Seminary, Amenia, N. Y. After completing his studies he taught school 
for a time, and then engaged in farming, which he has since successfully continued. 

Mr. Green has held the office of Justice of the Peace in Pawling for over twenty 
years, and was a member of the Board of Supervisors in 1858. He is vice-president 
■of the Pawling National Bank, and his son, Merrick D., is one of its trustees. 

JOHN B. GRUBB, attorney, was bom March 8, 1879, at Clay Center, Kansas. 
At the age of three years his parents removed to Poughkeepsie, where our subject 
acquired his education, graduating from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1898. 
He piu:sued his professional studies in the law office of Frank B. Lown, which was 
supplemented by a course in the New York Law School. He was admitted to the 
Bar in January, 1907. 

EGBERT GUERNSEY, M. D. L. L. D., was bom at Litchfield, Conn., July 8. 
1823, a son of Noah and Amanda (Crosby) Guernsey, and died at his country seat, 
Fishkill-on- Hudson, N. Y., September 19, 1903. His remote ancestors were Eng- 
lish, the more prominent of which were strongly imbued with the spirit of civil and 
religious liberty. 

The first of the name that came to this country was John Guernsey, a native of 
the Isle of Guernsey. Our subject was the twelfth generation from him. This John 
Guernsey came to America in 1638, and was one of the one hundred and eighty 
sturdy Puritans that removed from Boston to found the colony of New Haven. 
His descendants took an active part in the settlement of New England and the sub- 
sequent struggle for Independence, no less than thirteen of them having served in 
.the Revolutionary Army. 

John Guernsey's great grand-son, by the same name, was born at Woodbiuy, 
Conn., and removed to Amenia, Dutchess County, N. Y. 

Young Egbert was prepared for college at Phillip's Academy, Andover, Mass., 
whence he entered the scientific department at Yale. Before completing his col- 
lege course, however, he determined to devote himself to medicine, and accordingly 
entered the office of the celebrated Dr. Valentine Mott, as a student. Soon after 
he became a student in the Medical College of New York University, of which Dr. 
Mott was one of the Professors, and in 1846, was graduated with the degree of M. D. 
He received the degree of Doctor of Laws, from the College of St. Francis Xavier. 

Dr. Guernsey began the practice of medicine in Williamsburg, 1846, and soon af- 
-ter was appointed city physician. In 1850, he removed to Fishkill-on-Hudson 
for a year or two, and then returned to New York City, where he built up a large 
,an5 lucrative practice and acquired a strong and influential following. 

At about this time Dr. Guernsey became acquainted with Dr. John F. Gray and 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 719 

other physicians who were infected with the medical heresies of Hahnemann and 
was quick to imbibe some of the doctrines of that sage, who was then in his zenith, 
and the methods of Homeopathy. He also became a teacher of the new faith, 
being for six years Professor of Materia Medica and Theory and Practice in the 
New York Homeopathic Medical College, of which he was one of the founders. He 
was also one of the founders and the first president of the Western Dispensary, 
afterward united with the Hahnemann Hospital, with which he was associated. He 
was instrumental in having the Inebriates' Asylum on Ward's Island converted 
into a general hospital under the direction of the Department of Charities, and plac- 
ed in the hands of the Homeopathic school of practice. From 1877 to the time of 
his death, he was President of the Medical StaflE of the Metropolitan Hospital. Dr. 
Guernsey was one of the founders of the State Hospital for the Insane at Middle- 
town, N. Y., and was for nineteen years a trustee and four years Vice-President of 
it. Prom this position he was dropped by the late Governor Flower, the good 
governor being misled by the devices of envious wire-pulling rivals. He was the 
founder also of the Training School for Nurses at the Hahn%mann and Metropolitan 
Hospitals. He has been President of the New York State and County Medical 
Societies, and from 1864 to 1868 was Surgeon of the Sixth Regiment of the National 
Guard of the State of New York. 

Dr. Guernsey, before his graduation from the University Medical College was 
City Editor of The Evening Mirror, being thus associated with Nathaniel Parker 
Willis and George P. Morris. He founded The Brooklyn Daily Times in 1848, and 
for two years was its editor. In 1852 he was one of the editors of Jahr's Manual, 
and in 1872 he founded The Medical Union, which was ultimately merged into the 
New York Medical Times, of which he was for many years the senior editor. Early 
in his professional career he wrote a school history of the United States, which long 
ranked as a standard text book. His Domestic Practice, published in 1855, has 
passed through many editions and been translated into several languages. His 
miscellaneous contributions to medical literature have been voluminous. 

Dr. Guernsey was one of the founders of the Union Leagfue Club of New York, of 
which he was a member at his death. He was a life member of the New York 
Geographical and Historical Societies, and the Academy of Science, and belonged 
to various other scientific and literary organizations. 

Dr. Guernsey was married in 1848 to Sarah Lefferts Schenck, a descendant of 
Edgar de Schenken. Five children were the fruits of this union, of whom but one, 
Florence, survives. Dr. Egbert Guernsey, Jr., dying in early manhood, the other 
three, in infancy. 

HOMER W. GUERNSEY, the subject of this sketch was bom in Poughkeepsie 
in the year 1880. He attended the pubUc schools of Poughkeepsie and Riverview 
Military Academy and was graduated from there latter in 1899. He was with 
Daniel Birdsall & Company, real estate brokers of New York City, for a year; he 
then entered Brown University at Providence, Rhode Island. During his college 
days he was a well known athlete being a leading base ball and tennis player. He 
accepted a position with the Poughkeepsie Trust Company in 1903 where he re- 



720 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

mained for three years, resigning in December 1906 to accept the appointment of 
. City Treasurer of Poughkeepsie under Mayor John K. Sague. When he took office 
Mr. Guernsey was the youngest City Treasurer that had ever held office in the city. 
He was reappointed City Treasurer upon the re-election of the Mayor. Mr. Guern- 
sey besides being City Treasurer is a real estate broker with offices in the Pough- 
keepsie Trust Company Building. He is a son of Stephen G. Guernsey, the we 
known lawyer and President of the Poughkeepsie Trust Company. He is a brother 
of Raymond G. Guernsey a lawyer of New York City and Louis G. Guernsey who 
is on the reportorial staff of the Los Angeles Record of Los Angeles, California. 
Mr. Guernsey belongs to several clubs. Among them are the Alpha Delta Phi Club, 
Brown University Club and the Dutchess County Society of New York City; also 
several prominent orders and social clubs in the city of Poughkeepsie. In politics 
he is a Democrat. 

STEPHEN GANG GUERNSEY, lawyer, was bom in Stanford, Dutchess Coun- 
ty, April 22, 1848, son of Stephen Gano Guernsey and Elenor (Rogers) Guernsey, 
of that place. He was educated in the common schools and at Fort Edward In- 
stitute. In 1870 he came to Poughkeepsie and read law in the offices of Judge 
Charles Wheaton, and also with his brother. Judge Daniel W. Guernsey, being ad- 
mitted to the bar in 1872. In 1872 he commenced the practice of law in Poughkeep- 
sie and has so continued up to the present time. In politics he is a Democrat. He 
was elected president of the Poughkeepsie National Bank in 1892, and of the 
Poughkeepsie Trust Company in 1901, which position he now holds. 

Mr. Guernsey was married April 18, 1877, to Miss Marianna Hicks, of Pough- 
keepsie, and has four children, Raymond G., Homer W., Louis G. and Emeline. 

JOHN HACKETT was born in Ireland June 8, 1845, and came to America with 
his parents in 1852, settling at Hyde Park, N. Y. His early education was such as 
he could obtain in the district school of his town, and he also attended Eastman 
Business College from which he was graduated in 1863. He then read law in the 
office of Charles Brundage at Poughkeepsie and was admitted to the bar in 1866, 
and at once began the practice of his profession. He served as assistant District 
Attorney in 1873 under the late James L. Williams; in 1884 he was elected District 
Attorney of Dutchess County and was reelected to that office in 1887. In 1876 the 
firm of Hackett & Williams was formed and was continued imtil the death of Mr. 
Williams in 1908. 

Mr. Hackett married Harriet V., daughter of the Hon. David H. Mulford, April 
10, 1880. He has two children; John M. Hackett, a graduate of the Albany Law 
School, now practicing his profession in his father's office at Poughkeepsie, and 
Henry T. Hackett, who was graduated from Harvard University in June 1909. 

Mr. Hackett's ability as a lawyer is only exceeded by his modesty as a man, and 
therefore the editor of this work desires to add to the foregoing brief information, 
furnished by Mr. Hackett, a few words of his own. 

Tlfe career of John Hackett offers to young lawyers an example worthy of their 
emulation. With absolutely no advantages of birth, position, wealth or education 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 721 

to start with, he is a self made, better still a self educated man, and is a living exam- 
ple of the opportunities presented in this country to all youths possessed of charac- 
ter and intelligence, who are willing to work, to study and to persevere. 

Those of us who remember Mr. Hackett in the days of his active practice in ligitat- 
ed cases and recall his pleas before Juries cannot forget the absolute devotion that 
he always showed to the interests of his client, and the bulldog tenacity with which 
he stuck to every point which he thought he could justify by either reason or pre- 
cedent. 

As District Attorney he was an unrelenting prosecutor of crime and did his full 
duty always, conscientiously, without regard to any consideration of policy or of 
popularity. 

Through many years of hard fighting, during all of which time he was handi- 
capped by physical weakness, which would have overcome many of less resolute 
character, but which he overcame by the force of his will, Mr. Hackett has estab- 
lished himself in the community as the safe counsellor and trusted adviser of clients 
who seldom require his participation in the fierce strugglfes of the Court room. 
While still in active practice he has won that secure place of a leader at the bar 
where he can choose such legal business as shall be congenial to him, and escape the 
annoyance and turmoil of vexatious litigation; but on the rare occasions that he 
does appear in Court it is seen that his old time fires of advocacy are not yet quench- 
ed. 

Mr. Hackett lives in the summer time at his home in Hyde Park, he passes his 
winters at his residence in Poughkeepsie. 

May he live long to enjoy the respect of the whole community and the afifection 
of all of his friends which he has so worthily won, and so well deserves. 

ADELBERT HAIGHT, attorney of Poughkeepsie and Pine Plains, was born 
in the town of Stanford in 1869, a son of Isaac D. and Elvira (Preston) Haight. 
After finishing his preUminary education he accepted a position as operator with 
the N. D. & C. R. R. Co., and agent for the C. N. E. Railroad Co. at Pine Plains, 
where he remained several years, and while thus employed pursued a course in high 
school studies, passing the Regent's Examination. He was later employed as 
Railroad agent at Bangall. He then took up the study of law in the office of Mor- 
schauser & Wood, and was admitted to the Bar in 1903. He supplemented his law 
studies with a correspondence course in the Chicago School of Law. 

Mr. Haight is a member of the Knights of Pythias, Triumph Lodge ; Triune Lodge 
Poughkeepsie, F. & A. M. He is also identified with the Pine Plains Grange and 
the I. O. O. F., No. 21, of Poughkeepsie. In religious belief he is affiliated with 
the Methodist Episcopal church, and a member of the official board. He is also a 
member of the Y. M. C. A. 

He was united in marriage with Anna, daughter of Samuel T. Hoag, editor of 
the Pine. Plains Herald. They are the parents of two children, Revilla Harold 
and Adelbert, Jr. 

ALBERT HAIGHT, who is engaged in farming in the town of Washington, N. Y.,^ 
was born in Putnam county in 1847. In 1897 he removed to Fishkill Village and 



722 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ptirchased the fann formerly occupied by the Southards. September 25 of the same 
year Mr. Haight was united in marriage with Miss Nancy Cook, and they are the 
parents of one daughter and one son, deceased. 

Mr. A. V. HAIGHT is a native New Yorker, bom at Ellenville, Ulster County, 
February 4, 1842. At an early age he entered the printing oflSce of the Ellenville 
Journal, and later the Rondout Courier office. In 1860 and 1861, up to the break- 
ing out of the war, he was employed in New York, where he enlisted in the Ninth 
Regiment, N. Y. S. M. : subsequently was transferred to the Twentieth Regiment 
and at the expiration of his three months' service he re-enlisted in the Fourth New 
York Cavalry, being honorably discharged from service in 1863. Afterward he 
went to California, where he worked in the CcM office, San Francisco, and subse- 
quently, in 1865-6, had charge of the job printing department in the State printing 
office at Sacramento. In 1868 he formed a co-partnership for the publication of 
the Ellenville Jottmal, and in 1874 he took the position of superintendent of the 
Rondout Freeman, and became a stockholder, with control of the business manage- 
ment as secretary and treasurer. In 1878 Mr. Haight severed his connection with 
the Freeman office and started in business on his own accoimt, at Poughkeepsie, on 
the Hudson, where he purchased the job printing establishment of the Poughkeep- 
sie Daily Eagle and made many improvements to the plant. 

On the first of January, 1903, a corporation was formed under the name of the 
A. V. Haight Company, for the purpose of carrying on the printing and bookbind- 
ing business, capitalized at $50,000 with the following officers: A. V. Haight, Presi- 
dent; Wm. T. Ward, Treasurer; Wm. D. Haight, Secretary; and L. L. Slater, 
Superintendent. 

The company's plant now occupies the entire building at 10 and 12 Liberty 
Street, consisting of three stories and basement. They have all the latest and most 
improved machinery and appliances throughout the various branches of the busi- 
ness, and are prepared to undertake large contracts and execute them promptly. 

In 1886 Mr. Haight was officially called to Washington by the Public Printer to 
give expert opinion on matters relating to the Government Printing office. 

Mr. Haight has always been strongly Republican in politics, and served several 
years as Alderman and Supervisor of the City of Poughkeepsie. He is a Past Mas- 
ter of Triune Lodge, 782, Free and Accepted Masons; Past High Priest of Pough- 
keepsie Chapter, 172, Royal Arch Masons; and Past Eminent Commander of 
Poughkeepsie Commandery Knights Templar. He is also Past Commander of 
David B. Sleight Post, No. 331 G. A. R. 

J. CORNELIUS HAIGHT was born in the town of Fishkill, N. Y., July 16, 1835. 
He acquired his education at Phillipstown and the academy at Fishkill Village, 
which was supplemented by a course at the English Classical School, conducted by 
the Rev. Dr. Pingree, at Roseville, N. J. He taught school for a time at Davenport 
Comers, Putnam county, and has been engaged for many years in both mercantile 
and agricultural pursuits. In 1895 he purchased a tract of land at Fishkill-on-the- 
Hudson, and erected his present home, where he resides with his family. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 723 

DR. ASAHEL HALL was born at Wallingford, Connecticut, April 6, 1792. He 
was the son of Aaron Hall and Elizabeth Cook. 

Aaron Hall served in the War of the Revolution, engaging throughout the New 
Jersey campaign with Washington's Army; wintering at Valley Forge, and parti- 
cipating in the storming of Stony Point. He was mustered out of service when 
Washington's Army was disbanded at Newburgh, receiving his commission as 
Captain. Leaving Newburgh he walked across the hills to this native place, 
Wallingford. 

Dr. Hall's grandfather, Asahel Hall, served in the French and Indian Wars, and 
received a commission as Ensign, and later as Captain of a Company or Train-band 
in the Town of Wallingford. 

Dr. Hall began the study of medicine about 1810, and received his diploma from 
the Litchfield County Medical Society at the age of twenty-one years. 

He seems to have inherited the true patriotic spirit from his father and grand- 
father as he served in the War of 1812. On the 20th day*bf April 1815, he received 
a commission as Surgeon's Mate in the Thirty-seventh Regiment of Infantry; this 
reads "To rank as such from the 19, day of September 1813". He was stationed 
for some time at Fort Griswold, near New London, Connecticut, and subsequently 
transferred to the Seventh Regiment of Infantry. 

Later on Dr. Hall retired from the Army and came to Beekman, this County, and 
entered upon the practice of his profession. There he met Catherine Rutzen Van- 
derBurgh Toffey, the widow of George Tofiey, whom he married in 1818, and by 
whom he had four children. His wife was a daughter of William VanderBurgh and 
Sarah Van Wyck, and a granddaughter of Col. James VanderBurgh and of Captain 
Cornelius Van Wyck, both officers in the Revolutionary Army. 

After a few years Dr. Hall returned to his native State, Connectiuct, where two 
of his children were bom. Returning to this County about the year 1827, he pur- 
chased a farm near to Hart's Village; he moved thence to Fishkill Village, where 
his youngest son was bom in 1831. After living in Fishkill Village about twelve 
years he moved to Rhinebeck, and bought a farm adjoining that of Mrs. Miller, the 
latter now being owned and occupied by her nephew. Dr. George N. Miller. 

While in Rhinebeck he had opportunity to meet more frequently Dr. Federal 
VanderBurgh, his wife's uncle, and it was while living in Rhinebeck that he opened 
an office in Poughkeepsie soon after 1840, moving permanently to Poughkeepsie in 
1846. 

From Dr. Vander Burgh he acquired his first knowledge and description of the 
action of homeopathic remedies, as Dr. VanderBurgh was then practicing medicine 
in New York City, but had a summer place at Rhinebeck. After investigation 
and trial he tinreservedly gave his adherence to the new practice, and from that 
time he became one of its recognized exponents. 

Dr. Hall loved the profession of medicine for the means it provided for contri- 
buting to the happiness and comfort of others. Devotion to the welfare of his 
patients was one of his strongest characteristics, many personal sacrifices in their 
behalf often being made by him. 

He was a type of the courtly gentlemen; by nature and birth a man of great re- 
finement. He died at the advanced age of eighty-five years, on the 25th day of 



724 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

July 1877, leaving him surviving four children. His eldest son, Henry Clay Hall, 
was for more than twenty-five years in the Consular and Diplomatic Services. 
His daughter, Anna Hall, married Silas Wodell of Poughkeepsie, former District 
Attorney of Dutchess County, who died in the early sixties, and two of their 
children are still residents of the city of Poughkeepsie. 

EUGENE HAM, a prominent agriculturist in the town of Washington, Dutchess 
county, was bom here 1850. He is a descendant of Conradt Ham mentioned below. 
Mr. Ham was educated in the public schools of his native place and Riverview 
Academy, Poughkeepsie, and has since been engaged in the supervision of his farm 
at Verbank Station, N. Y. 

Mr. Ham married Mary K. Sleight of La Grange, N. Y., and to them have been 
bom one daughter and two sons: Mary Irene, Edward S., and Eugene W. 

JOHN M. HAM, County Clerk was bom in the town of Washington, Dutchess 
county, N. Y., April 14, 1861 at "Lynfeld" which has been the homestead of the 
Ham family since 1746 when the larger part of the present estate was ptu-chased by 
Frederick Ham, the great-grandfather of the present owner. 

In 1885 he married Rhoda, daughter of James Edwin and Fran^ (Titus) Sleight, 
and has four children, Mildred, Alice Titus, Mijton C6nrad and John Frederick.- 

His first American ancestor was Conradt Ham, who came to America in 1710, 
with two of his brothers with the Second ''Palatine Colony, settling in Columbia 
county; and his son Frederick bom in 1720 married Catherine Straight. Conradt 
son of Frederick, bom in 1767 married Elizabeth Haight. Milton son of Conradt 
and father of the subject of this sketch was bom in 1802, and married Phebe Ferriss 
a descendant in the seventh generation from John Ferriss who came from Reding, 
England in 1650. The original family name was "de Ferriers" descended from 
Henry de Ferriers, a Norman who in the latter part of the eleventh century received 
from William the Conqueror large grants of land in the counties of Staffordshire, 
Derbyshire and Leicestershire, on account of the services rendered by his father 
Gaulchelm de Ferriers who served as Master of Horse at the Battle of Hastings for 
the Duke of Normandy. 

Mr. Ham received his early education at home in the common schools, at the 
Poughkeepsie Military Institute and later pursued a special course in engineering 
at Lafayette College. 

As a breeder and handler of live stock his experience has been, it might be said, 
life long. When only eighteen years old he was entrusted with the selection and 
purchase of stock cattle and sheep, the business at that time being the feeding of cat- 
tle and sheep for the New York markets, which in later years was succeeded by the 
dairy business, and for over twenty years he has maintained at "Lynfeld" a herd 
of pure bred Holstein Friesian cattle. As a breeder of horses Mr. Ham established 
the first breeding stud of registered Percheron horses in the eastern part of the State. 
As a Ijreeder of Berkshire swine he has a wide reputation, and was one of the early 
breeders in America of Dorest Horn sheep, and one of the organizers of the registry 
association for that breed. In addition to the local business in pure bred live stock. 



■mill ■ • , •• II n ■ •■■.•/ ■, •.•//,ff SUB, 

'■/,./ - '/.V'.-, J-. •s^mi^^ 



•'• I ■ • •! , 'UliA' 

¥•'■/."'■ mk 

■■■■ • . / ' ' 'I'll l!ll'.''i 



'■//. 



If/, 
r^-''--' /;■■. 




BENJAMIN HAMMOND 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 725 

shipments have been made from "Lynfeld" in the last few years into every eastern 
and middle State, Canada, South America and the West Indies. 

He is a member of the Dutchess, Millbrook and Poughkeepsie Clubs; is Master 
of Washington Grange, and Master of the Dutchess County Pomona Grange; a 
member of Shekemeko Lodge F. & A. Masons, and The Poughkeepsie Lodge of 
Elks, and a member of the Dutchess County Society of New York City; the Ameri- 
can Percheron Horse Breeder Association; the Holstein Friesian Association of 
America, and American Dorset Horn Sheep Breeders Association. 

In politics he has always been a liberal and active member of the Democratic 
party, serving his town as Supervisor for several years, and in 1906 he was elected 
to the office of County Clerk, being the first Democrat elected to that office in fif- 
teen years. 

BENJAMIN HAMMOND, manufacturer and wholesale dealer in paints, oils and 
chemicals, Pishkill Landing, N. Y., was born in Kidderminster, Worcestershire, 
England, July 12, 1849 ; a son of Benjamin and Mar)* (Twemlow) Hammond. In 
1855 his parents came to America, locating in New York. 

From 1873 to 1884 Mr. Hammond was engaged in the drug business with Charles 
S. Ware at Mt. Kisco. He then removed to Fishkill and founded his present estab- 
lishment. His products are exported to Great Britain and Canada. 

In public Ufe Mr. Hammond has ably filled the following offices: Member of the 
Fishkill Board of Education, 1889; president of the village 1891, '92, '93 and 1898; 
town auditor 1891 and 1904 to 1909; town Excise Commissioner 1894-'95. He is 
a trustee of the Mechanics Savings Bank, the Highland Hospital and the Fishkill 
Rural Cemetery. 

Mr. Hammond was married in Brooklyn, in 1875, by Rev. Charles W. Baird of 
Rye, N. Y. to Isabella, daughter of the late Rev. George Monilaws of Somers, N. Y. 
from which union three daughters were bom, Marion Isabella, Grace Twemlow and 
Elsie. Mrs. Hammond died May 28, 1892, and is buried in the Fishkill Rural 
Cemetery. In 1897 Mr. Hammond was united in marriage with Miss Laura Antho- 
ny, of Rye, N. Y. by the Rev. Charles W. Fritts, D. D. of Pishkill Landing, N. Y. 

JOHN A. HANNA, merchant, of Dover Plains, N. Y., was born in New York 
City in October, 1859. He was educated in the public schools and at a private 
seminary at Dover Plains. In 1875, in connection with Mr. W. H. Preston, he 
established a general mercantile business at Dover Plains. In public life Mr. 
Hanna has been elected to a number of important offices on the Democratic ticket. 
In the years 1891-'94-'95 he represented the town of Dover in the Board of Super- 
visors, and in 1896-'97-'98 he was elected a Member of Assembly. He was ap- 
pointed Postmaster at Dover Plains by President Harrison, and re-appointed by 
President McKinley and President Roosevelt. 

Mr. Hanna married Miss Ada Preston, and they have one daughter, Julia E. 

HARRY C. HARRIS, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom in this city April 4, 
1872. He was educated in the pubUc schools, and at Riverview Military Academy. 



726 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

He read law in the office of Allison Butts, and was admitted to the Bar in 1897. 
He was appointed by Surrogate Hopkins, Transfer Tax Clerk, in January, 1908. 

Mr. Harris is a member of the Masonic fraternity, and represented Lady Washing- 
ton Hose Company No. 3 in Poughkeepsie at the Associated Firemen's Convention. 

ISHAM G. HARRIS, M. D. was bom February 23, 1867, in Lamar county, Texas, 
and received his prelipiinary education in the public schools of Texas and Tennes- 
see. He pursued his studies at the University of Virginia, and also spent two years 
in the medical department of that university. He was graduated with the degree 
of M. D., in 1890, from the medical department of the University of the city of New 
York. Dr. Harris was appointed resident physician of the New York Infant Hos- 
pital at Mount Vernon, in December 1889, and a year later received the appoint- 
ment of Junior resident physician in the New York City Asylum for the Insane at 
Blackwells Island. He resigned in November 1891 to accept the position of resi- 
dent physician at the Hudson River State Hospital, Poughkeepsie, and in 1904 was 
promoted to the position of First Assistant Physician of that institution. In May 
1906 Dr. Harris was appointed Acting Superintendent of the Hudson River State 
Hospital, and ably filled that oflBce during the year that Dr. Pilgrim, the Superin- 
tendent, served as president of the State Commission in Lunacy. 

Dr. Harris is a member of the County and State Medical Societies; the American 
Medical Association; the American Me<iico-Psychological Association; the Amrita 
and Dutchess clubs; Dutchess County Society, and a Mystic Shriner in the Masonic 
fraternity. 

ALMON M. HARRISON, who is engaged in general mercantile business at Stan- 
fordville, Dutchess county, was born at Cornwall Hollow, Litchfield county. Conn. 
He came to Dutchess county in 1861, where he taught school at BangaU and in ad- 
joining towns for six years. Mr. Harrison was appointed postmaster by President 
Cleveland in 1894, and also received the same appointment from President Roose- 
velt in 1908. He has served twelve years as Justice of the Peace of the town of 
Stanford. 

He was united in marriage with Ida B. Robinson of Stanfordville, and they are 
the parents of one son, Stanley F. 

DR. ALFRED HASBROUCK was bom on the 17th day of July, 1820, on the 
banks of the Wallkill in the town of Gardiner, Ulster County, New York, on lands 
of the Guilford Patent that had been in his family since about the year 1700. 

He sprang from that sterling Huguenot stock which sought asylum in this coun- 
try from religious intolerance and persecution in France. His father was the great- 
grandson of Abraham Hasbrouck, and his mother was the great-great-grand- 
daughter of Jean Hasbrouck, two brothers who came to America, the latter in 1672, 
and the former in 1675, and who were two of the twelve patentees and original set- 
tlers of New Paltz, in 1677. 

His father and all his ancestors were men of wealth, prominence and position, 
and held many offices of public trust, both civil and military, in colonial times, and 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 727 

during and after the Revolutionary War. He was the fourth of a family of eight 
children, seven boys and one girl, of which family five boys attained manhood. 

After the usual introductory studies he was sent away from home to finish his 
preparatory studies at the Kingston Academy, at the time a noted classical school. 
Here he fitted for college. He entered Yale and was graduated a Bachelor of Arts 
with the class of 1844. After graduation he came to Poughkeepsie to study his 
chosen profession of medicine with Dr. John Barnes. He also attended the course 
of medical lectures of the college of Physicians and Surgeons, of New York, from 
which institution he was graduated a Doctor of Medicine in 1848. He then settled 
at Poughkeepsie and engaged in the practice of his profession, which he actively 
pursued for over fifty years, with skill and fidelity. 

Beginning his professional career with a thorough preparation of the best educa- 
tion, both general and technical of his time, he was always a student and kept in 
step with the progress of the day. 

He had an exalted idea of the honor and dignity, as well as of the duties and obli- 
gations of the medical profession; and while he sacredly observed these obligations 
on his part, he exactingly required the respect due the noble art of healing on the 
part of others — as well fellow physicians, as patients. 

He felt strongly and clung to his convictions with tenacity, and was firm in up- 
holding what he believed was right. 

He was quiet and unassuming in his ways and possessed a generous nature which 
was ever open to the appeals of the needy and distressed. 

His was a well rounded character which exemplified itself in a life without blem- 
ish or reproach, and he was worthy, in every respect, of the regard and esteem in 
which he was held. 

He was a man of fine figure and commanding presence, tall and erect. 

Dr. Hasbrouck was one of the original members of the Republican party, having 
voted for John C. Fremont. He remained loyal to his party afiiliation all his life, 
having always been a strong partisan, although he never sought or held political 
office. For many years in his younger days he was Alms House Physician and for 
several terms Health OflScer of the city and for a long time after the War of the Re- 
bellion he was Medical Examiner for this District under the United States Pension 
Bureau. During the whole of his useful career he was one of the medical staff of 
St. Barnabas' Hospital, and for a number of years he was Vice-President of the 
Medical Board of Vassar Hospital, and in 1883-84 President of the Dutchess Coun- 
ty Medical Society. 

In 1848, he married Margaret Ann Manning, a descendant of Hugo Freer, one of 
the twelve New Paltz patentees, and of Baltus VanKleeck the original settler of 
Poughkeepsie. After more than forty years of married life she died in 1889. 

There were eight children the issue of this marriage— four sons and four daugh- 
ters: County Judge Frank Hasbrouck, Major Alfred Hasbrouck, U. S. A., Manning 
Hasbrouck, Louis P. Hasbrouck, Jane Hasbrouck, widow of John K. MandeviUe, 
Sarah Louise Hasbrouck, widow of Peter Hulme, Alice Hasbrouck, wife of David 
K. Jackman, and Laura Hasbrouck. 

Dr. Hasbrouck died May 9th, 1903, aged eighty-three years. 



728 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

He was survived by all of his children, except Laura, who died a few years before 
him. 

FRANK HASBROUCK was bom at Poughkeepsie, N. Y. January 4th, 1852. 
His ancestry is French Huguenot, he being a descendant, through his paternal 
grandfather of Abraham Hasbrouck, one of the twelve New Paltz patentees, and, 
through his paternal grandmother, of Jaen Hasbrouck, brother of Abraham, another 
of the New Paltz patentees. 

He is a son of the late Dr. Alfred Hasbrouck of Poughkeepsie and of Margaret 
Ann Manning, a descendant of Hugo Freer, one of the New Paltz Patentees, and of 
Baltus Van Kleeck an original settler of Poughkeepsie. His early education was 
obtained at the public schools of Poughkeepsie and at the old Dutchess County Aca- 
demy. He entered Harvard in 1868 and was graduated from there, a Bachelor of 
Arts, in 1872. In the fall of 1872, he began the study of law at the city of Pough- 
keepsie, in the office of the late Orlando D. M. Baker, and was admitted to practice 
at the May General Term of the Supreme Court, at Poughkeepsie, in 1875. For 
several years he remained with his former preceptor, Mr. Baker, as managing clerk 
of his office, and then set up for the practice of law by himself, and has continued to 
practice his profession at Poughkeepsie until the present time. 

He has always been an active and influential member of the Democratic party 
of his county, and has been the unsuccessful candidate of his party in overwhelm- 
ingly Republican years for the offices of Recorder of the city of Poughkeepsie, City 
Attorney, District Attorney, and County Treasurer. To the last named office his 
opponent was declared elected by one majority on the face of th'e returns. 

In the spring of 1875 he was appointed a member of the Board of Health of the 
city of Poughkeepsie, and by the Board elected its secretary. He was reappointed 
and reelected secretary in 1870 and served two years as a member and Secretary of 
the Board. In the fall of 1876 he was elected to the office of Justice of the Peace of 
the city of Poughkeepsie by a majority of about 120, all the rest of the city going 
Republican by majorities varying from 300 to 500. He served as Justice of the 
Peace from January 1, 1877 to December 31, 1880. He was treasurer of the city of 
Poughkeepsie by appointment of Mayor Elsworth for the two years 1887-1888. He 
was postmaster of the city of Poughkeepsie by appointment of President Cleveland 
for four years from April 1st, 1895 to March 31st, 1899. He was corporation Counsel 
of the city of Poughkeepsie by appointment of Mayor Sague during the year 1907. 
He was elected County Judge of Dutchess County in November 1907, and entered 
upon the duties of that office January 1, 1908. 

He has always been active and prominent in the social life of Poughkeepsie. He 
was one of the founders and for twenty-four years President of the Apokeepsing 
Boat Club; was one of the founders and first secretary of the Amrita Club; was one 
of the charter members of the Dutchess Club; is a member of the Poughkeepsie 
Club; and is a member and President of the Euterpe Glee Club. 

He has for a long time been a member and trustee of the Holland Society of New 
York,^nd was its President during the year 1907-1908; is a member of the Sons of 
the Revolution of New York; and is a member of the University Club of New York. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 729 

He was married to Esther, daughter of David K. and Serephina Ross Jackman at 
Bath, N. K. October 10, 1876. He has four children: Ross Hasbrouck, graduate 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a civil engineer at present en- 
gaged with the Pennsylvania Railroad in the construction of its new terminal at 
Long Island City; Alfred Hasbrouck, who left Harvard College at the end of his 
sophomore year and went as a volunteer officer in the Spanish War to the Phillip- 
pines, and was afterwards appointed to the regular army, and is now Captain in the 
Coast Artillery, U. S. A. ; Olga Hasbrouck, who was graduated from Vassar College 
in 1905: and Elsa Hasbrouck who was graduated from Vassar College in 1909. 

OSCAR HASBROUCK who is engaged in a general mercantile business at Wing- 
dale, town of Dover, N. Y. is a son of Oscar and Rachel (Hait) Hasbrouck, residents 
of Modena, Ulster County, N. Y. He is a lineal descendant of Abraham Hasbrouck, 
one of the New Paltz patentees, who was conspicuous both in the civil and ecclesias- 
tical affairs of that early period. 

Mr. Hasbrouck married Margaret McKinsry, also a nStive of Ulster county, and 
they are the parents of four children; Don, Kathryn, Thadeus and Jacob H. 

CAPTAIN WILLIAM HASBROOK was bom at Cortlandville, Dutchess Coun- 
ty, November 12, 1822. He was engaged in mercantile business for some time after 
attaining manhood. In 1857 he became captain of the steamer "Wyoming" 
which he ran for twelve years. From 1869 to 1872 he followed the freighting busi- 
ness at New Hamburg, and then for five years was captain of the "Walter Brett", 
a steamboat running between New Hamburg and New York. He then resumed 
the freighting business which he continued until his death, December 18, 1893. 
He was a Republican in politics, served some time as clerk of the town of East Fish- 
kill, and held the office of postmaster. August 17, 1843 he.married Maria Storm, 
daughter of Gory and Anna (Boice) Storm. She died June 28, 1876, leaving three 
children, Charles F., Emily who died April 9, 1852 and George A. 

At the death of Captain Hasbrook his two sons Charles F. and George A. con- 
tinued the freighting business under the firm name of Captain William Hasbrook's 
Sons until the consolidation of the Central Hudson Steamboat Co., on April 26, 
1899, when the old firm merged into the new one, and the sons of Captain Hasbrook 
have since acted as agents for the Central Hudson Steamboat Company. 

F. REED HAWLEY, M. D., of Frost's Mills, town of Clinton, Dutchess county, 
was bom in Nevada in 1868. He acquired his education in New York City, where 
he also studied medicine in the New York Homeopathic Medical College, from which 
he was graduated in 1892. He practiced his profession in the cities of Brooklyn 
and Washington, and also in the village of Staatsburgh, from 1896 to 1901, when ill 
health caused him to retire from active practice, and he purchased his present farm 
at Frost's Mills. 

NEWTON HEBARD, vice-president of the First National Bank of Amenia, N. 
Y., was bom in the city of Poughkeepsie, October 14, 1837. He acquired his edu- 



730 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

cation in the public schools of Brookl)^, N. Y., and also the Brooklyn Academy, 
after which he returned to Dutchess county, and in 1862 located in Amenia. ^ Jan- 
uary 15, 1868, he was made book-keeper of the First National Bank of Amenia, and 
in 1872 was promoted to the office of cashier. He was further promoted to his 
present position November 20, 1908. 

JOHN W. HEDGES was bom at Gallatinville, Columbia county, N. Y., Decem- 
ber 20, 1864. He acquired his education in the public schools of his native place 
and at Seymour Smith Academy at Pine Plains, N. Y. Up to the year 1894 he was 
engaged in farm work, when he purchased the general mercantile business of C. M. 
Patrie. In 1901 he bought the adjoining property, in which is located the post- 
office. Mr. Hedges has served one term as assessor, and January 22, 1909, he re- 
ceived the appointment of postmaster of Pine Plains village. 

In 1888 he married Minnie Hapenin of Columbia county, and they are the parents 
of two children: Phebe and Charles. 

TIMOTHY HERRICK was born October 19th, 1836, at Antrim, Hillsboro 
cotmty. New Hampshire, and acqiured his education at the public schools of his 
native place. 

For over half a century Mr. Herrick has been a citizen of Dutchess coimty, ar- 
riving at Staatsburgh, April 2nd, 1857, to accept the position of Superintendent of 
the magnificent country estate of Mr. William B. Dinsmore, which position he has 
held continuously. 

For many years Mr. Herrick has taken an active interest in the public aSairs of 
the town of Hyde Park, and in 1873 — 74 held the office of Supervisor, to which he 
was re-elected in 1886. 

October 2nd, 1858 Mr. Herrick was united in marriage with Miss Elizabeth Mul- 
doon of New York City and to them have been bom four sons and two daughters, 
namely: George A. bom July 20th, 1859; Mary Elizabeth born July 16th, 1861; 
William Elmer born February 10th, 1863, died July 26th, 1863; Luella Jane bom 
August 26th, 1864; John James bom April 5th, 1866; Albert Elmer bom January 
19th, 1869. 

Socially Mr. Herrick is a member of Rhinebeck Lodge No. 432 F. and A. M., 
Mount Horeb Chapter No. 75, Kingston, and Knights Templar of Poughkeepsie. 

His father, Nathaniel B. was bom in Beverly, Mass., April 23, 1813, and died 
September 1, 1877. He married November 6, 1835, Elvira Simonds who was born 
in Antrim, N. H., October 19, 1816, and died April 1, 1904. 

WILLET HICKS was born in the town of Stanford, Dutchess county, January 4, 
1853, and obtained his preliminary education in the district schools of his native 
place. He began life as a school teacher in Dutchess county, which profession he 
followed for a period of ten years, and was subsequently engaged in farming. 

In political belief Mr. Hicks is a staunch Democrat and has rendered faithful 
service*to his county. For two decades he has served as Justice of the Peace, and 
in 1908 was elected to the office of town Supervisor. 

Mr. Hicks was united in marriage with Miss Alice Welch of Rhinebeck, N. Y. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 731 

GEORGE M. HINE, shoe mantifacturer and representative citizen of the city of 
Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born at Appleton, Wis., in 1850. During his infancy his 
parents removed to New Haven, Conn., and it was there he received his education, 
and acquired his preliminary knowledge in the manufacture of boots and shoes. 

In 1877 Mr. Hine came to Poughkeepsie to accept a position in the shoe factory 
of the late Hon. J. O. Whitehouse. Following the death of Mr. Whitehouse in 
1881, Mr. Hine became superintendent of the plant, and continued in that capacity 
tmtil 1889, when the firm of Hine & Lynch, which still exists, succeeded to the own- 
ership of the business. 

Politically Mr. Hine is a staunch Republican, and it is as a painstaking public 
official that he is most widely known. As president of the Alms House Board; 
Alderman of the sixth ward, and thrice Mayor of Poughkeepsie, — 1900 to 1906 — 
he has rendered faithful and efficient service to his adopted city. 

Mr. Hine is a member of the Board of Governors of the Hudson River State 
Hospital for the Insane. In 1909, by order of the Supreme Court, he was appointed 
president of the Orange County Board of Water Commisaoners for the Catskill 
Aqueduct, New York Water Supply. He is first vice-president of the League of 
American Municipalities, of which ex-Mayor Dunne of Chicago is president. 

In financial affairs Mr. Hine has served eight years as a director of the First 
National Bank of Poughkeepsie, and he is now vice-president of the Poughkeepsie 
Trust Company. 

Mr. Hine has taken the various chairs in Masonry, including the Mecca Mystic 
Shrine. He is also identified with the Order of Elks, Odd Fellows and other fra- 
ternal organizations and social clubs. In 1871 he was united in marriage with 
Nellie Hazell of Brooklyn, N. Y., and the following children were born; Lewis C, 
Emily H., and George M. Jr., deceased. ^ 

JACOB S. HINSDALE, a representative citizen of the town of Pine Plains, and 
a leader in Democratic circles in Dutchess county, was bom January 8, 1859, at 
Gallatin, Columbia county, and died at his home in 1909. After finishing his studies 
at the Hudson Academy, Hudson, N. Y., he located in Dutchess county in 1880 and 
engaged in farming, contintiing this occupation until the time of his death. He 
held the office of Supervisor of the town of Pine Plains in 1893, and was re-elected 
to this office in 1897, serving continuously until 1909, and holding the position of 
chairman of the Board during the last year of his service. 

Mr. Hinsdale was united in marriage with Emily Smith, and to them have been 
born three children: Egbert, John W., and Grace. 

NICHOLAS HOFFMAN, deceased, was bom in Germany February 28, 1832. He 
learned the shoemaker's trade, and in 1851 came to America. For several years he 
was engaged in business at Whiteport, Ulster county, N. Y. and in 1868 came to 
Poughkeepsie. He purchased the building at the comer of Main and Hamilton 
street in 1872, where he conducted the Hoffman House up to the time of his death, 
and which has since been continued by his son Frank. 

Mr. Hoffman was a Democrat in politics, and in religious beUef a member of the 
German Catholic Church. 



732 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

CHARLES A. HOPKINS, Surrogate of Dutchess county, was born at Stormville, 
N. Y., October 20, 1864, the son of Benjamin and Margeret (Lasher) Hopkins. He 
attended the district schools of his native place, and, in 1882, graduated from East- 
man's Business College. Mr. Hopkins pursued his legal studies in the law oflBce of 
Hackett & Williams, and was admitted to the bar, at the general term at Brooklyn, 
in September, 1885. He continued in the office of his preceptors, as managing clerk 
■until 1889, and has since been engaged in the active practice of law at Poughkeepsie 
for himself. 

Politically Mr. Hopkins is a Democrat, and has served one term as Justice of the 
Peace for the city of Poughkeepsie. In 1907 he was elected to the office of Surro- 
■gate. 

October 18, 1888, Mr. Hopkins was united in marriage with Mary Eno, daughter 
of Walter Stewart of the town of Clinton, Dutchess county. By this union there 
■are two children, Frank Stewart and Ralph Adriance. 

JOSEPH F. HORAN, attorney, was born in the city of Poughkeepsie, July 4, 
1868, where he attended the public schools, graduating from the Poughkeepsie 
High School in 1886. He studied law in the office of Hackett & Williams, and was 
admitted to the Bar in 1890. Mr. Horan practiced his profession in the city of New 
York from 1892 to 1901, when he resumed practice in his native city. 

FRED C. HORNBECK, Supervisor of the town of Poughkeepsie, was born at 
"Wawarsing, Ulster county, N. Y., December 4, 1868. He located in Dutchess 
■county in 1883, and engaged in the grocery business in Poughkeepsie, continuing 
the same for a period of thirteen years. He then purchased his present farm on 
the Dutchess Turnpike, four miles East of the court house, where he has since re- 
sided. Politically Mr. Hornbeck is a Democrat. He was elected a member of the 
■County Board of Supervisors in 1905, and re-elected in 1907. He is a member of 
Tritme Lodge, No. 782, F. & A. M.; the Royal Arcanum, No. 391, and the Pough- 
Iceepsie Grange. 

In 1895 Mr. Hornbeck was united in marriage with EUura Bedell of Clinton 
Corners, N. Y., and they are the parents of one son. 

Following the death of Jacob Hinsdale in 1909, chairman of the Board of Super- 
visors, Mr. Hornbeck was appointed his successor. 

CHARLES W. HORTON, merchant, of Stormville, N. Y., was born in the town 
of Kent, Putnam county, where he acquired his education in the district schools. 
In 1861 he moved to the town of East Fishkill, and engaged in general mercantile 
business which he has successfully continued to the present time. Mr. Horton 
was elected to the office of Supervisor of the town of East Fishkill, 1871-'73, and 
again in 1880. He has also served several terms as Postmaster. 

Mr. Horton has been twice married. His first wife was Mary Ann Fox. For 
his^econd wife he chose Sarah J. Brevoort. His children are: Mary, Charles and 
Grace. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL, 73* 

GEN. JOSEPH ROWLAND, patriot and philanthropist, was born in the city of 
New York December 3, 1834 a, lineal decendent of John Rowland, who signed the 
memorable compact in the cabin of the "Mayflower," November, 1620, before the 
landing of the Pilgrims on Plymouth Rock. His father, Samuel Shaw Rowland, 
was one of the well known firm of Rowland & Aspinwall, shipping merchants of 
New York. His mother was Joanna Esther, daughter of John Hone, and neice of 
Philip Rone, one of the eariiest mayors of New York City, and largely identified 
with and one of the founders of the Matteawan and Glenham factories. 

Mr . Rowland was never a rugged man, and yet he accomplished more than most 
of his contemporaries. 

At the age of twenty-one he married Miss Eliza Newton Woolsey, which mar- 
riage by reason of their similarity of tastes and aims in life was unusually congenial 
and happy. In 1859 he purchased the Tioronda farm and soon made it a place of 
beauty and good taste, but hardly had he become settled in his new home when the 
Civil War broke out, and he enlisted as an Adjutant of the Sixteenth Regiment of 
New York State Volunteers. Later he became Adjutant-General and Chief of the 
Brigade under the command of General Slocum. Subsequently, on the promotion 
of General Davies, the Colonel of the Sixteenth New York, Major Howland was un- 
animously chosen to succeed him at the battle of Gaines Mills where he was seriously 
wounded. For his gallantry on this occasion he was breveted Brigadier-General. 

His feeble constitution compelled him to retire from the army, but his whole soul 
was in the country's cause, and he sent a man of more rugged mould, at his own ex- 
pense, to represent him in the ranks of the army. 

In 1865 General Howland was elected Treasurer of the State of New York, and 
discharged the duties of the ofiice, for two years, with honor to himself, and satis- 
faction to the people of the State. General Howland was largely interested in the 
organizing and building of the Hudson River State Hospital for the Insane, and was 
one of the managers of that institution, to which he gave, for fifteen years, contin- 
uous service. 

To the people of Fishkill and vicinity General Howland has been a blessing, not 
only for his benefactions in the shape of the beautiful Tioronda school building; 
the Highland Hospital, of which he was the principal founder, and to which he gave 
a home, the Howland Library which he erected and perpetually endowed. General 
Howland was also the promotor of the Mechanics Savings Bank and was its first 
president, but it was not his benefactions alone that endeared him to the people of 
Fishkill. Re gave them an example of an unselfish and heroic life. He was in- 
tent on aiding his fellowmen, whether in high or low estate. 

General Howland on account of his failing health was compelled to seek a more 
genial climate, and at Mentone, in southern France, he took up his residence for a 
time. Here his noble spirit left his frail body to join those around the great white 
throne, for the pure in spirit they shall see God. 

J. L. HUGHES, former president of the village of Wappingers Falls, was bom in. 
this village in 1869, and as a young man was employed in his father's grocery store.. 
From 1888 to 1893 he was associated with his brother in the grocery business at 



734 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Paterson, N. J., and with the exception of the years he attended military duty, he 
has always been engaged in the grocery trade, succeeding to his father's business 
in December, 1904. 

During the Spanish American War in 1898 Mr. Hughes enlisted in the Morris 
Guards, attached to the Fourth New Jersey Regiment. He was mustered out as 
Corporal, April 6, 1899, at Camp Wetherill, S. C. He subsequently served three 
years in the hospital corps, and was made acting hospital steward. He was trans- 
ferred to the Philippines, where he served eighteen months. He returned in 1902 
to Fort Constitution, N. H., serving one year as steward in the hospital corps, and 
was mustered out January 12, 1903. July 27, 1903, he returned to the hospital 
corps, and was sent to Fort Wingate, New Mexico, where he remained until May 5, 
1904. 

In public life Mr. Hughes was elected clerk" of the town of Wappinger in 1906, 
holding the oflSce until 1908. He was also elected president of the village of Wap- 
pingers Falls in 1906, and re-elected 1907-'08. 

MILES HUGHES for forty years merchant in Staatsburg, N. Y., was bom at 
the old family homestead there April 8, 1836. His father, Christopher Hughes, 
was one of the first supervisors of the town of Hyde Park, and also Cavalry Captain 
in State Militia. He married Sarah Lamoree, daughter of John Lamoree, and they 
had four children, viz.. Miles, Edgar, Sarah and Lucinda. 

Miles Hughes received his early education at district school, and afterward fin- 
ished his studies at an academy in Hinsdale, Mass. He then returned home and 
taught school for six months, followed by seven years of farm work with his father. 
He next went into partnership with Joseph Wood, and they conducted a general 
store for seven years until the death of Mr. Wood. Mr. Hughes then took over the 
business and ran it himself until his death. He served two terms as Postmaster, 
being appointed in 1863, and again in 1903. He was also Justice of the Peace two 
terms. 

In 1865 he married Emily Maria, daughter of Benjamin Seymour Pier of Upper 
Red Hook, N. Y. Of their five children two only survive, Marion, wife of Harry C. 
Barker, and Edwin B. Hughes. His second wife Minnie Pier, survives him, and 
his son Edwin B. was appointed Postmaster at his death. 

Mr. Hughes was a life long member of the Episcopal Church, and was for many 
years warden in St. Margaret's. 

The store business which he left is now conducted by his estate, and is managed 
by his son and H. C. Barker as Administrators. 

J. FRANK HULL was the son of John F. Hull, for many years cashier of the Fall- 
kill National Bank. He was born in Pine Plains, and was educated at College Hill 
School and Riverview. His business experience was as a clerk in the Fallkill Bank, 
but this work was not to his taste, and in 1879 he purchased an interest in the 
Dut^ess Manufacturing Company, and became a member of the firm of Lasher & 
Hull. He subsequently bought out Mr. Lasher's interest and established the plant 
of the Dutchess Manufacturing Company in the present location on Crannell street. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 735 

The co-operative system found a strong advocate in Mr. Hull and he organized 
his factory on the profit sharing plan. There is probably no industrial enterprise 
anywhere that reflects in every department so strong a spirit of loyalty to the head 
as this Poughkeepsie factory, which is a momunent of Mr. Hull's genius and energy. 

Mr. HuU was a member of the Second Reformed Church, but in a more general 
way he accepted the spirit rather than the letter of Christianity and all denomina- 
tions found in him a sympathteic and generous friend. He took much interest in 
Florentine Council, Knights of Columbus, and furnished a room in the Columbus 
Institute building. 

For a time Mr. Hull was interested in local politics. He was elected Mayor of 
Poughkeepsie in 1896 on the Republican ticket, and as such proved himself to be 
an able and efficient factor in the cause of good government. He was a charter 
member of the Amrita Club. 

Mr, Hull died July 5, 1907. 

ROBERT HURD, of Pawling, N. Y., was born in this town October 5, 1869, on 
tlie Hurd homestead. He attended the public schools of his native place, and the 
select schools of Dover and Pawling. At an early age he entered into partnership 
with a Mr. Smith, and they became engaged in the ptu-chasing of cattle, on an ex- 
tensive scale, in the West, disposing of them in the eastern market. Mr. Hurd 
has also been engaged in the cultivation of the farm where he resides. He has been 
prominent in political circles, and has been a delegate to various district, county 
and State Conventions. 

CHESTER HUSTED, attorney, was born at Pleasant Valley, N. Y., April 12, 
1883. He received his education in the district schools of his native town, and 
graduated from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1902. He then entered the law 
office of Hackett & Williams, and after serving a clerkship was admitted to the Bar 
in January, 1907. Mr. Husted engaged in the practice of his profession in Pough- 
keepsie with the firm of Hackett & Butts. 

EDWIN B. HUSTED was bom August 26, 1843 on a farm near the village of 
Pleasant Valley. He was one of seven children — six sons and one daughter — of 
Nathaniel Husted and Elmira Btirhans. He attended the schools of his native 
town later attending the State Normal college at Albany graduating in 1863. He 
also attended Bryant & Stratton Commercial college for one year. At the age of 
19 he began to teach in the public schools at Chapel Corners, Dutchess county, and 
New Paltz, Ulster County. From 1866 to 1882 he served as Deputy Clerk of the 
United States Supreme Court at Brooklyn— a Court having a wide jurisdiction and 
extensive business presided over in part by a Justice of the Supreme Court and in 
which William M. Evarts, Joseph H. Choate and others like them frequently pleaded 
their cases. This position he resigned in 1882 preferring country life, and settled 
in the village of Pleasant Valley. 

In 1882 he married Emily Conover of Pleasant Valley and of this union six chil- 
dren were born: Chester, Edna, Raymond, Lucy, Stanley and Albert. The sub- 



736 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

ject of this sketch is active in the religious and educational welfare of the community 
in which he lives and for many years has been an Elder and an active worker in 
the Presbyterian church of that village. 

THE JOHNSTONE OR JOHNSTON FAMILY ' is associated with Lithgow, 
Hyde Park and Annandale. Lithgow, in the Town of Washington, is named after 
the home of the Jamisons in Scotland ; and Annandale, in the Town of Red Hood, 
is named after the home of the Johnstones in Scotland. 

Dr. John Johnstone sailed from Leith, Scotland, in the bark "Henry and 
Francis" and landed at Perth Amboy, New Jersey, in December 1685. He was 
member of the New Jersey Provincial Assembly from 1709 to 1722, Speaker for 
ten years. Mayor of New York City from 1714 to 1718, and a Member of the Gov- 
ernor's Council of New York from 1720 to 1722. He died the 7th of September, 
1732, and was buried at Perth Amboy, New Jersey. On the 18th of April, 1686, he 
married Eupham Scot, the only daughter of George Scot, Laird of Pitlockie. 
George Scot was the son of Sir John Scot, of Scotstarvet. 

One of their sons, John Johnstone, of Perth Amboy, New Jersey, born there the 
7th of May, 1691, died the 6th of September, 1731, a large landed proprietor of 
Monmouth County, New Jersey, married on the 19th of May, 1717, Elizabeth, the 
daughter of David Jamison, one of the Great Nine Partners, who was Secretary of 
State of the Colony of New York, Warden of Trinity Church, Chief Justice of the 
Colony of New Jersey in 1711, and Attorney -General of the Colony of New York 
in 1720. 

One of their sons, David Johnstone, was born at Perth Amboy, New Jersey, the 
3rd of January, 1724, and died at Nine Partners, New York, the 12th of January, 
1809. On the 27th of May, 1753, he married Magdalen Walton, a daughter of 
Jacob Walton, of New York, whose father was an Admiral in the British Navy. 
David Johnstone was a member of the Committee of the Chamber of Commerce of 
New York that waited on General Washington on his triumphal entrance into New 
York City. He was President of the St. Andrew's Society in 1774-1775 and also 
in 1784-1785. He was one of the signers of a call for a New York Provincial Con- 
gress, which was dated the 26th of April, 1775. From his mother, who was a daugh- 
ter of David Jamison, one of the Great Nine Partners, he inherited large tracts of 
land in Dutchess County. The estate on which he resides he maned "Lithgow", 
after the ancestral home of his grandfather, David Jamison. From the estate of 
David Johnstone, the present post-office and hamlet of Lithgow derived its name. 

One of their sons, Judge John Johnstone, who was bom at Lithgow, the 13th of 
June, 1762 . , died at Hyde Park, the 29th of August, 1850. He married on the 23d 
of May, 1792, Susannah, daughter of Dr. Samuel Bard. He was presiding Judge 
of the Court of Common Pleas of Dutchess County, and his grave and tombstone 
are in the cemetery of St. James' Church, Hyde Park. The Johnstone family for 
several generations after that were identified with Hyde Park, and even at the pres- 
ent time the Johnstones bury their dead in the old cemetery of St. James' Church. 

One of their sons. Dr. Francis Upton Johnstone, was bom at Hyde Park, the 4th 

IThe name is spelled differently through a number of generations. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 737 

of September, 1796, and died at New York City the 7th of January, 1858. He was a 
graduate of the New York College of Physicians and Surgeons. On the 7th of May, 
1822, he married Mary, daughter of Captain John Williamson, of Charleston, S. C, 
who was an original member of the Order of the Cincinnati. 

One of their sons, Dr. Francis Upton Johnstone, (bom at New York City, the 8th 
of April, 1826, died the 20th of November, 1892,) graduated at the College of Phy- 
sicians and Surgeons. He married on the 8th of February, 1853, Margaret Antoin- 
ette, daughter of John Cortlandt Babcock, of New York City. Dr. Johnstone is 
survived by his widow and seven children. 

Mary Williamson, a daughter of Dr. Francis Upton Johnstone, who was bom the 
26th of July, 1824 and died the 21st of November, 1894, married on the 29th of 
March, 1864, the Rev. George Bailey Hopson, D. D. After her marriage, Mrs. 
Hopson resided at Annandale, Dutchess County, where Dr. Hopson has been Pro- 
fessor in Latin of St. Stephen's College for a period of over forty-five years. Mrs. 
Hopson is survived by her husband and two sons, Francig Johnstone Hopson, a 
lawyer practising in New York City, and William Oliver Hopson, a resident of San 
Francisco. 

JOHN R. KEECH, attorney, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born in this city August 
12, 1870. After completing his preUminary studies in the public schools he studied 
law in the oflSce of Charles Morschauser, and was admitted to the Bar December 15, 
1892, and has since been successfully engaged in the practice of his profession in 
his native city. 

BERNHARD KEINE, Supervisor of the Fourth Ward, and a member of the 
Board of Public Works of the city of Poughkeepsie, was bom in this city in 1866. 
After graduating from the public schools of his native place he entered the employ 
of the Poughkeepsie Cracker Company. Upon the consolidation of the various 
cracker manufacturies throughout the country, under the name of the National 
Biscuit Company, in 1890, Mr. Keine was made cashier of the new company, and 
still holds such position. 

Politically Mr. Keine is a Democrat, and in 1907 was elected Supervisor of the 
Fourth Ward of Poughkeepsie, and in 1909 received the appointment from Mayor 
Sague as Commissioner of Public Works. Socially he is a member of Poughkeepsie 
Lodge, No. 266, F. & A. M. He is also affiliated with the I. O. O. F. 

FRANK H. KELLY, attorney, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born in Herkimer, N. 
Y., April 5, 1881. He was educated in the pubUc schools of Poughkeepsie, graduat- 
ing from the Poughkeepsie High School. Mr. Kelly studied law in the offices of C. 
W. H. Arnold, George Wood and Alexander Dow. From 1903 to 1905 he attended 
the New York Law School, and was admitted to the Bar in January, 1907. Mr. 
Kelly is a member of Co. K, 10th National Guards of New York, and in reUgious be- 
lief is affiliated with the Baptist church. 

JOHN A. KELLY, Deputy County Clerk of Dutchess county, was born January 
22, 1879, and was educated in the public and high schools of Poughkeepsie, grad- 



738 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

uating from the latter institution in 1896. He read law in the office of Frank B. 
Lown, and after a course in the New York Law School was admitted to the Bar in 
June, 1900. Mr. Kelly was associated in practice with the late Robert F. Wilkin- 
son until his death in 1893, and has since been connected with the office of Robert 
Wilkinson, who succeeded his father as local counsel to the New York Central Rail- 
road Company. Mr. Kelly was appointed Deputy County Clerk in 1898, succeeding 
the late Edward M. Stillman. He is a member of the Poughkeepsie Club, the Apo- 
keepsing Boat Club, the Dutchess County Horticultural Society, and the CathoUc 
Society of New York. 

JOHN T. KELLY, attorney, Matteawan, N. Y., was born in this village March 3, 
1881, where he obtained his education at the public schools. He read law in the 
office of James G. Meyer, Esq., and was admitted to the Bar, May 1, 1903. 

Mr. Kelly was united in marriage in 1905 with Miss Anna Van Voort of Mattea- 
wan, N. Y. 

Socially Mr. Kelly is a member of the Knights of Columbus. 

GEN. JOHN H. KETCHAM represented the people of Dutchess County in the 
National House of Representatives for thirty-six years, a longer period than any 
other Congressman since the Federal Legislature was established. Nor was this 
the result of chance or fortuituous circumstance. It was due primarily to honesty, 
fidelity and the devotion to the interest of his constituency on the 'part of the re- 
preseiitative; and to an appreciation on the part of the constituency of the efforts 
which their representative was continuously exerting in its behalf. 

Mr. Ketcham was a native of Dutchess County, as were his parents before him. 
He was bom at Dover Plains on December 31st, 1832, the second son of John M. 
and EUza (Stevens) Ketcham. The family is descended from old English stock, 
and the first authentic record of the name in the days of the colonies is of John 
Ketcham, who emigrated to this country from England with the Pilgrim Fathers, 
and whose descendants subsequently settled in Connecticut and on the shores of 
Long Island, and somewhat later took up their abode in the beautiful Harlem 
VaUey. 

James Ketcham, the grandfather of the subject of this sketch, was the pioneer 
of the family in the Harlem Valley. Before the end of the eighteenth century he 
had settled at Dover Plains, and had become one of the prominent and influential 
men of the place. 

James Ketcham's son, John M. Ketcham, was a farmer in very moderate circum- 
stances, and John Henry Ketcham was one of a family embracing nine children, 
five of whom are still living. All his boyhood and young manhood was spent on 
the farm ; he attended the District School in the winter and in his spare time as- 
sisted in the ordinary farm work. But the boy's father fully realized and ap- 
preciated the advantages of giving his children the best educational advantages 
that he could afford, and John H. Ketcham was for a time a student at the Amenia 
Seminary, a noted school in its day, and later was in attendance at the Suffield Acad- 
emy, Suffield, Conn, for one year, and one year at the Worcester Seminary, Wor- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 739 

cester, Mass. Upon leaving the Worcester Academy, and before he had attained 
his majority, John H. Ketcham's father died, leaving the care of his mother and a 
numerous family to the resources of John Henry Ketcham and his older brother, 
William. The two older brothers acquired the farm in common and began its cul- 
tivation. Very soon there was located a marble quarry on their property and the 
two brothers, working hard, developed a prosperous and pairing industry from this 
quarry, which continued for a number of years. 

His neighbors and townsfolk early recognized in John J. Ketcham qualities of 
industry and capacity for leadership, which later were so remarkably developed, 
and in 1853, before the subject of this sketch had attained his majority, they elected 
him a member of the Board of Supervisors to represent his town at the County 
seat. So well and so faithfully did he acquit himself in this, his first public office 
that in the following year he was re-elected for a second term as the representative 
of the town of Dover in the County Board. While still a member of this body he 
was chosen a member of the State Legislature and was r&elected in the following 
year. 

When only 25 years of age in 1857 he was chosen a member of the State Senate, 
being one of the youngest men who had ever been chosen a member of it. In 1859 
he was unanimously renominated and re-elected by a handsome plurality. 

Upon the expiration of his term as a state Legislator, Mr. Ketcham returned to 
Dover Plains and resumed the care of his marble interests, and it was while thus 
engaged that the call to arms for the preservation of the Union arose. 

Upon the second call of President Lincoln for volunteers John H. Ketcham, in 
conjunction with Benson J. Lossing, the noted historian, and the Hon. James P. 
Emott, then a Justice of the New York Supreme Court, was appointed by Edwin D. 
Morgan, War Governor of the State of New York, a member of the War Committee 
for the counties of Dutchess and Columbia. Throughout the summer of 1862 John 
H. Ketcham worked both night and day in an effort to recruit a regiment of the 
"Sons of Dutchess", which would be representative of the best citizenship in Dutch- 
ess County and by the fall of that year he had completed his quota. It was in re- 
cognition of the untiring efforts in recruiting this regiment, (a further account of 
which will be found in Chapter XIV of this work) that the choice unanimously fell 
upon him to lead it, and he was chosen its Colonel. 

At Savannah Gen. Ketcham was made Brigadier-General by Brevet, and sub- 
sequently a Major-General by the same token. Upon being finally mustered out of 
service it was with the full rank of Brigadier-General in the Volunteer Service. 

It was while at the front with his command that the people of his district, as if in 
grateful recognition of his military service, nominated him as its representative in 
the 38th Congress, and he was elected to that body by a large majority. Gen. Ketch- 
am was subsequently unanimously renominated and re-elected to the 39th, 40th 
and 42nd Congresses and received the unanimous nomination of his party for mem- 
bership in the 43rd Congress, in which election he was defeated. This was the 
'famous campaign of 1872 an account of which will be found on page 246. 

Gen. Grant, who throughout his whole public life entertained the warmest regard 
for Gen. Ketcham, at this time offered the General a Commissionership of the Dis- 
trict of Columbia. General Ketcham accepted this post andJgave to it the same 



740 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

careful, painstaking and intelligent service which he had displayed in every position 
of trust. His colleagues at that time were former Gov. Dennison of Ohio, and the 
Hon. Henry T. Blow of Missouri. The city of Washington was then a primitive 
city, but Gen. Ketcham was quick to see its possibilities, and it was largely through 
his efforts that the Nation's capital has become what it is to-day — one of the most 
beautiful cities in all the world. At the conclusion of his four years of service the 
broad streets had been largely repaved with asphalt, dozens of parks had been laid 
out, and the local government, which was then in the nature of an experiment, had 
been placed on a sure and firm foundation. That his work for the benefit of Wash- 
ington was appreciated by her citizens was evidenced by the many letters of com- 
mendation and regard which Gen. Ketcham received at the expiration of his term 
of office; and he was the guest of honor at a banquet tendered by the citizens of 
Washington in commemoration of his faithful and intelligent efforts to serve the 
District. 

The people of Dutchess County were not content, however, to allow him to re- 
tire from public life, and they elected him as their representative in the 45th 
Congress ; and he was subsequently re-elected to the 46th, 47th, 48th, 49th, 60th, 
51st and 52nd Congresses and was the unanimous choice of his Party for a nomina- 
tion to the 53rd Congress, when owing to impaired health he was obliged to decline 
a further nomination. 

In 1894, after four years of retirement, he again yielded to the solicitation of his 
constituents and was elected to the 55th, 56th, 57th, 58th and 59th Congresses, and 
while lying on his bed in what proved to be his last illness, the Convention, well 
knowing that it was doubtful whether he would survive, unanimously chose him as 
their representative in the 60th Congress. Death came as the result of successive 
apopletic strokes on the morning of Sunday, November 4th, 1906. No other mem- 
ber of Congress, either in the Senate or in the Lower House, had represented his 
people for so long a time as Gen. Ketcham. He was the dean of both branches of 
the Federal Legislature. In the memorial serivces which followed warm tributes 
of admiration and respect were tendered by many of his colleagues, including 
Speaker Cannon, Representative (now Vice-President) James S. Sherman, and 
Senator Chauncey M. Depew. 

During his long Congressional career if there was one service more than another 
in which Gen. Ketcham took an interest it was the Postal Service of the National 
Government, and for many years he was a member of the Committee on Post Offices 
and Post Roads in the National House. He also took a warm personal interest in 
the government employees in the Postal Service, and it was largely through his 
efforts, aided by the late Representative S. S. Cox of Ohio, that the law was passed 
giving each employee in the Postal Service a yearly vacation of fifteen days with 
pay. Another subject to which Gen. Ketcham gave much time and thought was 
the establishment of Rural Free Delivery Routes, now indispensable in the various 
Rural Districts throughout the length and breath of this land. 

Very few men in the history of the State of New York have been so signally 
honofed as Gen. Ketcham, and in these honors the people of Dutchess County have 
taken a just pride. As was so happily said by Senator Depew in his memorial ad- 
dress before the United States Senate, General Ketcham was one of the Country's 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 741 

best products — manly, courageous and faithful in all the various relations of life, 
and one who in his entire public service always deported himself with modesty, 
dignity and propriety. The people of Dutchess County will find his place impossible 
to fill, and, as the years go on, his loss will be felt more and more keenly.' 

Gen. Ketcham was married on February 4th, 1858, to Augusta A., daughter to 
William H. and Sarah A. Belden of New York City. From this marriage four chil- 
dren were born: Augusta A., Henry B., Charles B. and Ethel B., of whom the three 
latter, together with Mrs. Ketcham, survive. 

Henry B. Ketcham was married on September 12th, 1889, to Sallie Gray Holman, 
daughter of the late Samuel K. Holman, of Englewood, N. J., and they have three 
children: Henry H., Katherine H. and John B. 

Charles B. Ketcham was married in 1900 to Suzanne Brightson, daughter of 
George E. Brightson, Esq., of Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., and they have two chil- 
dren: Howard and Vernon. 

WILLIAM S. KETCHAM, of Dover Plains, N. Y., a lead* of the Democratic party 
in the Harlem Valley, was bom March 10, 1830, son of John M. and Elizabeth A. 
(Stevens) Ketcham, both natives of Dover Plains. After finishing his education at 
the public schools he was on the homestead farm for a time, and then was engaged in 
the marble qtiarries for about twenty years with his brother John. His present farms ' 
which are devoted largely to dairying, comprise over 350 acres, with a stock of 60 
head of cattle. Mr. Ketcham is a stockholder in the National Bank of Pawling, and 
is interested in various other enterprises. He served his town as Supervisor in the 
years 1859, 1866 and 1867. 

Mr. Ketcham married Emily, daughter of Obediah Titus, and three sons were bom 
to them, one of whom, William M., is now living, and was a former Mayor of Pough- 
keepsie, and also held the office of Postmaster in the same city. 

GEORGE W. KIDDER, coal and lumber dealer, of Staatsburg, N. Y., was bom 
at East Alstead, Cheshire County, N. H., April 10, 1845, and received his education 
in a school at the same place. He remained at the homestead until he reached his 
majority, when he purchased a Kalf-interest in a machine shop at Alstead, taking 
the name of Roob & Kidder for two years. In 1869 he sold out his interest and lo- 
cated at Staatsburg, where he became a member of the firm of Herrick & Kidder 
dealers in lumber and building material. This partnership was dissolved in April, 
1875. Mr. Kidder then went to New York City, where he was engaged for ten 
years by the Mutual Benefit Ice Company. In 1887 he purchased the coal business 
of James Roach of Staatsburg, to which he added a stock of lumber and building 
material. In 1888 he established a planing and sawmill, in which he has since 
continued very successfully. 

In December, 1874, Mr. Kidder was married to Julia, daughter of William H. 
Rersley, of Staatsburg, and to them have been bom one son and one daughter. 
Bertha M. and George Nelson. 

Politically, Mr. Kidder is a Democrat of the old school. Socially, he is identified 
with the Rhinebeck Lodge, No. 432, F. & A. M. 



742 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

JOHN P. KIERNAN, Pawling, N. Y., was born in the town of Patterson, Put- 
nam county, October 31, 1867. His parents removed to Pawling in 1869, where 
the subject of this review acquired his education in the public schools. He was 
then employed by Mr. G. S. Lee in the bottling of soda, with whom he remained for 
over thirteen years, and in 1895 he purchased and has successfully continued the 
business. 

Mr. Kiernan has been active in the affairs of the Democratic party, and now holds 
the office of Committeeman. 

GEORGE M. KNAPP, Coroner of Dutchess county, was bom August 1, 1856, at 
Highland, Ulster county, N. Y. After finishing his studies at the public schools of 
his native place he was employed by Louis Leroy in the grocery business at Pleasant, 
Plains, and then removed to Poughkeepsie to enter the employ of John A. Bailey 
dealer in leather and shoe findings. From 1878 to 1882 Mr. Knapp was associated 
with OHvet Brothers at FishkiU Landing in the meat business, and then estabhshed 
a meat market for himself, in which he has since been successfully engaged. Mr. 
Knapp in political belief is a Democrat, and has held the office of Collector of the town 
of FishkiU for two terms; was trustee of the village of Fishkill Landing for one term, 
and in 1906 was elected to the office of Coroner. 

In 1867 he was united in marriage with Idella Elmendorf, and two children have 
been bom to them : EUa and Grace. 

Socially Mr. Knapp is a member of the Odd Fellows and of the Knights of Pythias. 

EUGENE M. LADUE, of East Fishkill, Dutchess county, was born November 
17, 1852. Since finishing his studies at the Dutchess Academy he has been engaged 
in the occupation of farming, and now conducts one of the most productive farms 
in the town of East Fishkill. 

Mr. Ladue was united in marriage with Miss Larina Smith. 

W. WARD LADUE, of East Fishkill, Dutchess county, was bom October 1, 
1861. He obtained his education in the public schools, later attended the Seymour 
Academy at Pine Plains, and has since been occupied in the cultivation of his farm, 
which has been in the Ladue family for four generations. 

Mr. Ladue married Luella, daughter of the Rev. George R. and Susan Jane Shaw. 

GEORGE LAMOREE, deceased, was bom December 8, 1819, on the Lamoree 
homestead, in the town of Pleasant Valley, Dutchess county, N. Y. After finishing 
his studies at the New Paltz Academy he engaged successfully in farming in his native 
town. Mr. Lamoree was an active member of the RepubUcan party and held several 
elective offices, including Justice of the Peace, Town Supervisor, and Sheriff of Dutch- 
ess county. He was appointed by President Lincoln internal revenue collector of 
his district. Mr. Lamoree was one of the founders of the Poughkeepsie City Bank, 
and a member of the board of directors during its existence. 

In flie year 1864 he was united in marriage with Miss Jane Pells, a native of Rhine- 
beck, N. Y., and four children were bom to them. Franklin Lamoree, the second 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 743 

child, was born at Pleasant Valley, May 19, 1847. He finished his studies at the 
Dutchess County Academy, and succeeded his father in the management of the home- 
stead farm. He married Miss Kate Conover, and they are the parents of the following 
children: Frederick, who married Lena Adams of East Park, N. Y.; Alice M., and 
Grace, the latter now Mrs. Cooper Vanderwater of Salt Point. 

WILLIAM G. LARY, Salt Point, N. Y., formerly Supervisor of the town of 
Pleasant Valley, N. Y., was born September 21, 1857. In 1889 he engaged in the 
wholesale butcher business which he has successfully continued to the present time, 
his weekly shipments to New York exceeding four tons of dressed meats. 

Mr. Lary was elected Supervisor in 1904; served as collector of the town of 
Pleasant Valley for two terms; was Deputy Sheriff for sixteen years, and Post- 
master of Salt Point for seven years. 

LOUNT LATTIN, a prominent agriculturist residing at Staatsburgh, in the town 
of Hyde Park, N. Y., was bom at Albion, Orleans county, and came to Dutchess 
county in 1868, where he has since been engaged in farming. Mr. Lattin has taken 
an active interest in the public affairs of his adopted town, and in 1893 was elected 
to the office of Supervisor. 

Mr. Lattin married Rosilla Morehouse of Hyde Park, N. Y., and the following 
children were bom to them: Austin S., Bertha, Ezra M., Nathaniel T. and Justin I. 
In religious beUef Mr. Lattin is aflSliated with the Presbyterian church of Pleasant 
Plains. 

WILLIAM J. LEAHEY, president of the Dutchess Manufacturing Company, 
Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born in this city, July 12, 1863. He was educated at St. 
Peter's School, and also at the Poughkeepsie High School. He began.his business 
life as a boy in the employ of the Dutchess Manufacturing Company at $2.00 a 
week. Thorough and efficient in all his duties, Mr. Leahey made his services in- 
valuable to his employers, and upon the death of Hon. J. Frank Hull in 1907 he 
succeeded him as president of this company. 

FREDERICK W. LEE, coal and lumber merchant, of Red Hook, N. Y., was bom 
in the city of Poughkeepsie in 1873, a son of W. Morgan Lee, a prominent attorney 
of Poughkeepsie, N. Y. He was educated in the pubKc schools of his native city, 
and in 1901 succeeded to the business of D. W. Wilbur, who had conducted a coal 
and lumber business at Red Hook for twenty-two years. Mr. Lee also handles an 
extensive line of building material. 

He was united in marriage with Anna R. Hendricks of Red Hook. 

Socially Mr. Lee is a member of the Masonic fraternity. 

DAVIS C. LENT, manager of the Ramsdell brick yards, Fishkill, N. Y., was born 
at Naugautuck, Conn., October 31, 1854, a son of Robert and Catherine (ConkUn) 
Lent. He has a thorough knowledge of the various details of brick-making and was 
the first to attempt the burning of brick with anthracite Coal, which he successfully 
accomplished at his father's brickyard at Glasco, N. Y. 



744 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In 1898 Mr. Lent took charge of the Ramsdell yard, which at that time was 
operated with six machines, having an average output of 18,000 bricks per ma- 
. chine daily. In 1905 three machines and an electric plant were added to the 
equipment, and the yard now has a capacity of 27,000,000 brick per annum. 

October 18, 1878, Mr. Lent married Mary E. Seaman of Ulster County, and the 
following children were bom to them; Grace E. (deceased) Mabel May and Ward S. 

JERRY LINEHAN, a prominent citizen of the town of Dover, was bom in this 
town March 8, 1876. After acquiring his education in the public schools he engaged 
in the occupation of farming for six years, and then engaged in the blacksmith busi- 
ness for a period of twelve years. He is now conducting a hotel and livery business 
at Wingdale, N. Y. 

FRANK B. LOWN was bom at the village of Red Hook, Dutchess county, N. Y. 
Jantiary 1, 1849. He is the son of David and Jane M. Lown, and with his parents 
removed to the city of Poughkeepsie in 1857, where he has since resided. Mr. 
Lown was educated at the public schools of Poughkeepsie, and in 1871 entered the 
law ofifice of Nelson & Baker as a law student. After being admitted to the Bar 
he became a clerk in the office of Thompson & Weeks, then the oldest firm of 
practitioners in the county. In 1878 the firm of Thompson, Weeks & Lown was 
formed, and upon the death of James H. Weeks, in 1887, and of John Thompson, 
in 1891, Mr. Lown became the sole survivor. He is still engaged in the practice of 
his profession in the city of Poughkeepsie. 

MICHAEL J. LYNCH, deceased, of Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was bom in Ireland 
June 8, 1846. When eighteen years of age he accompanied his mother to America 
and at once entered the employ of a florist on Staten Island, and was so engaged 
until 1868, when he accepted a position with WiUiam B. Dinsmore as head gardener 
of "The Locusts," Staatsburgh, N. Y. In 1871 Mr. Lynch came to Poughkeepsie 
and established the present seed and floral business, which is continued by his widow 
and son. "Lynch's Tested Seed" is known throughout Dutchess and adjoining 
counties, and the demand for their plants and cut flowers exceeds that of any in this 
section of the State. 

In 1870 Mr. Lynch married Catherine Powers of Rhinebeck, and to them have 
been bom the following children: Thomas M., John M., Mary, Maggie, James E. 
and Catherine. 

JAMES E, McCAMBRIDGE, M. D., was bom at Kingston, Ontario, in 1881. 
After graduating from the Kingston Collegiate Institute in 1899 he took a course in 
Regiopolis College. His medical education was acquired at the Queen's Medical Col- 
lege, Canada, from which he graduated in 1903. He then entered the New York 
State Hospital for the Insane at Ward's Island, where he served as interne from April 
1903 to August of the same year, and from that time until June 1, 1906, pursued his 
specialty of eye and ear surgeon at the Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital; he was ap- 
pointed assistant surgeon to this institution, which office he still retains. He located 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 745 

in Poughkeepsie, N. Y., January 1, 1906, where he has since been engaged in the 
practice of his profession. He is a member of the Medical Society of Dutchess Coun- 
ty; the New York State Medical Society, and the Manhattan Alumni. 

Dr. McCambridge was united in marriage with Miss Isabella Milford of St. Louis, 
Mo., in 1908. 

JOHN E. MACK, District Attorney of Dutchess County, was born in Pough- 
keepsie June 10, 1874. He received his preliminary education in St. Mary's Paro- 
chial school and the Poughkeepsie High School. He then began the study of law 
in the offices of Hackett & WilKams, and Allison Butts. He was admitted to the 
bar in January, 1896. 

Politically, Mr. Mack is a Democrat, and in November 1899, was elected a Jus- 
tice of the Peace of the town of Poughkeepsie. So impartially did he administer 
the duties of his office during his first term that in the fall of 1903 the Republicans 
unanimously endorsed his nomination for re-electionfor the ensuing four years' term. 
In 1907 Mr. Mack was elected to the office of district attorney, and is today dili- 
gently and ably performing the duties of that office. 

Mr. Mack is a member of the Knights of Columbus, and of St. Mary's Catholic 
Church. October 25, 1899, he was united in marriage with WiUielminia B., daugh- 
ter of Theodore and Mary Imrriekus, of Poughkeepsie. They have three children, 
Margaret M., John and Frances. 

D. H. MACKENZIE, M. D., was bom in Nova Scotia in 1860. He received his 
academic education at Dalhousie University, Halifax, and pursued his medical 
studies at the University of the City of New York, graduating in 1889. He located 
in the village of Mabbettsville, Dutchess county, in 1890, and removed to Millbrook 
in 1900. Dr. MacKenzie served as Health Officer of the town of Washington for 
fifteen years. He is a trustee of the Millbrook library, and Past Master of Halcyon 
Lodge, P. & A. M. 

In 1893 Dr. MacKenzie was united in marriage with Helen Coffin, and the fol- 
lowing children were bom to them : Hugh ; Gilbert Coffin ; Edwin Gordon. 

THE MAHER FAMILY came to America from MuUinahbne, County of Tipper- 
ary, Ireland, where they were residents for centuries, and the old homestead in the 
county mentioned is stiU in the hands of relatives. In Irelartd they were engaged 
in the wheat grinding business. John Maher, grandfather of David, and great 
grandfather of Richard F., was married in 1720 to Anastatia O'Brien, and to this 
union were born seven children, as follows: Michael, John, Thomas, Richard, Mary 
Alice and Margaret. Michael Maher married Catherine Meagher, and they became 
the parents of nine children: John B., Anna, EUza, Richard, Thomas, Ellen, David, 
Mary and Joseph A. Michael Maher came to this country in 1849 and settled on 
Quaker Hill and in 1856 moved to the town of Dover. John B. married Mary Or- 
mond of Putnam county; they had one son, Richard Francis Maher. Thomas 
married Isabella Bennett of New York City; Eliza married John Costin; Ellen died 
in infancy; Joseph A. studied for the'priesthood, and was ordained at St. John 



746 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Lateran's, Rome, Italy, in 1882; David F., Richard, Anna and Mary never married. 
Richard F. Maher, the present town clerk and collector of the town of Dover, is 
one of the Democratic political leaders in the Harlem Valley. He is engaged with 
his uncle in the marble business at Dover Plains. Mr. Maher is of a literary turn of 
mind, and is the author of the history of the Town of Dover, which is a part of this 
pubUcation. He is also the author of Historic Dover, and a trustee of the Dover 
Plains Ubrary. 

ARCHIBALD M. MARONEY who is engaged in the farm produce business in 
the town of Poughkeepsie, is a native of Orange county, N. Y., and was for many 
years engaged in the cattle business at Washingtonville, N. Y. He was for a time 
interested in the hotel and livery business at Cornwall, N. Y., and then spent four 
years in Chicago and Wisconsin dealing in horses and cattle. 

Since 1906 Mr. Maroney and his family have made their home in Dutchess county. 

GEORGE E. MASTEN, town clerk of the town of Pleasant Valley, N. Y., was 
bom August 26, 1873. After graduating from Eastman's Business College he was 
engaged in farming for a time, operating a steam-thresher. In 1903 he estab- 
lished his present feed store, under the name of Hasten & R3rmph, and in 1906 
Mr. Hasten purchased the interest of his partner. He served as member of the 
Board of Election Inspectors from 1899 to 1907, and was Justice of the Peace from 
1903 to 1907. Socially he is a member of the Hasonic fraternity, the Grange, 
and the Pleasant Valley Fire Company. 

In 1900 he married Rose E. Hyers of East Park, and they are the parents of one 
son, Floyd Edward, born Harch 8, 1906. 

EDWARD D. MAYER, attorney, Matteawan, N. Y., was born at Kingston, N. 
Y., September 30, 1879, where he obtained his education in the pubUc schools and 
Kingston Academy. This was supplemented by a course in Muhlenberg College 
at AUentown, Pa., from which he graduated in 1900 with the degree of A. B. He 
then entered the New York Law School, from which he graduated in 1904. Hr. 
Hayer was employed for a time in the office of Judge G. D. B. Hasbrouck, New York 
City, and was admitted to the Bar in 1905. 

March 9, 1905 he married Amelia C. VanVliet, and they are the parents of one 
son, Lloyd Van Vliet. 

MORRIS PHILIP HEADE of Wingdale, N. Y., was born November 14, 1882, a 
son of Roselle and Martha W. (Hoag) Meade. After finishing his studies in the 
Poughkeepsie High School and the Wesleyan Academy at Wilbraham, Mass., he 
engaged in his present vocation of farming. In addition to cultivating his own farm 
of 196 acres, he leases the adjoining farm of 200 acres. 

Mr. Meade was united in marriage with Jennie S. Paulson of Catskill, N. Y., and 
theyjiave one child, Marion A. 

Roselle Meade, father of the subject of this sketch, was born in the town of Kent, 
Putnam county, in 1847, and died April 25, 1898. In 1868 he purchased the home- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 747 

stead farm in the town of Wingdale, where he resided until his death. He held 
the office of Assessor for twelve consecutive years prior to 1897, when he was elected 
Supervisor. 

In 1875 he married Martha, daughter of Philip Hoag, and they became the par- 
ents of six children, of whom four are now living. 

JAMES G. MEYER, attorney, was born at Fishkill Landing, N. Y., in 1864. He 
was educated in the public schools of Fishkill Landing, and at Rutgers College,from 
which he graduated in 1884 with the degree of A. B., and in 1887 took the degree of 
A. M. He studied law in the office of Judge S. K. Phillips at Matteawan, N. Y., 
and was counsel to the town and village boards of Fishkill Landing and Matteawan. 
He has planned and put through nearly all the improvements which the villages 
now enjoy. 

Mr. Meyer was married to Annie, daughter of William and Elizabeth Rothery of 
Matteawan, and to them have been bom one son and one daughter: Charles A., a 
student at Wilson's School, Matteawan, and Marion R., a student at Wells College, 
Aurora, N. Y. 

Mr. Meyer is a member of the F. & A. M. ; also the Hudson River Commandery. 

WALTER P. MILLARD a retired lumber merchant residing at New Ham- 
burgh, N. Y., was bom in this village October 8th, 1840, where he attended the 
district schools, finishing his studies at Hamilton Collegiate Institute, White Plains, 
and at Bryant and Stratton's Mercantile College at Poughkeepsie, N. Y. 

From 1858 to '66 he was employed by his father in the lumber trade at New Ham- 
burgh. They then removed to Tarrytown, where for five years they continued the 
same business under the firm name of W. P. & W. Millard. Our subject then be- 
came associated with his brother Justice E. in the lumber business at Yonkers, 
under the firm name of J. E. & W. P. Millard. In 1877 he returned to New Ham- 
burgh where he has since resided. 

Mr. Millard was united in marriage November 17, 1868, with Emma, daughter of 
James D. and Eliza (Hoffman) Bishop. One child Mary Eliza was bom to them 
May 11, 1870. She is now the wife of Frank B. Drake of New Hamburgh, who are 
the parents of Walter Millard, bom March 30, 1897, and Edna Frances, born July 
24, 1900. 

Mr. Millard is a member of the following Masonic organizations: Solomons 
Lodge No. 196 Tarrytown; Poughkeepsie Chapter R. A. M. No. 172; King Solomon 
Council No. 31; R. & S. M. Poughkeepsie; and Poughkeepsie Commandery No. 43. 
He is also identified with other fratemal orders. In religious belief he is affiliated 
with the Presbyterian Church. 

The paternal ancestors of Mr. Millard were from New England. His great-grand- 
father, John was bom in Massachussetts, January 15, 1736, and died November 
22, 1812. He married Christina Rust, June 17, 1831. They had the following chil- 
dren: Charles, Rufus, Philo, Ira, Russell, Sarah, Jerasha, Clove, Diantha, of whom 
Charles, grandfather of our subject was bom in Cornwall, Conn., Febmary 19, 1763. 
He served in the Revolutionary Army, and was stationed at Newburgh under Gen- 



748 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

eral Washington, at the time Benedict Arnold betrayed his country, and fled from 
West Point. August 13, 1788, he married Lidia, daughter of John and Magdaline 
Pride, who conducted the notable hostelry "Pride's Tavern" on the post road three 
miles north of Poughkeepsie. It was at this Inn that the Marqiiis de Chastellux 
lodged in 1781, on his journey through Dutchess County, and account of which ap- 
pears in Chapter XIII. 

Mr. and Mrs. Charles Millard lived on a farm in what is now the town of Hyde 
Park, until 1792, when he moved to Poughkeepsie, and engaged in the manufacture 
of lumber in Walter Livingston's mill. In 1796 he moved to Marlborough, N. Y. 
and continued the same business. To this couple were bom the following children : 
John, a merchant in Brooklyn, N. Y., James, a lumber merchant in Catskill, N. Y., 
Charles, a merchant in New Orleans, La., and WiUiam a gentleman of means who 
travelled extensively; Walter (our subject's father) was associated in business with 
bis father; Cornelia who married Heckaliah Purdy; Catherine married Elam Dun- 
bar, and Caroline remained single. Mrs. Millard died June 17, 1816, and October 
22, 1818, Mr. Millard married Sarah Miller, by whom he had two children, Mar- 
geret C. who became the wife of Justice E. Earl, and Franklin who married Fannie 
VanZant. Walter Millard, our subject's father, was bom in Marlborough, Ulster, 
County, N. Y. on February 27, 1802, and remained there until the removal of his 
family to New Hamburgh in 1824, where he was engaged in the lumber business. 
In 1834 he also became interested in freighting and built the barge "Lexington" 
which plied between New York and New Hamburgh. In 1844 he purchased the 
steamboat "Splendid" and carried freight and passengers from New Hamburgh 
and Marlborough to New York. About 1855 he disposed of this line of business to 
give his attention to dealing in lumber and coal, which he continued until his 
death August 20, 1880. 

Mr. Walter Millard was married November 14, 1834, to Martha Hyer Bull of 
New York City. She died June 14, 1896. The following children were bom to 
them: William B., Sarah A., Walter P., Justice E., Fenwick T., Howard C. and 
Charles. 

ALFRED MOORE, deceased, a native of Dutchess county was born at Verbank, 
and always lived in the town of Lagrange. He was a son of Stephen and Ruth 
Clark Moore. Stephen Moore came from Plattsburg, N. Y. early in the nineteenth 
centvary and owned and operated the mill at Moore's Mill from which the village 
derived its name. This mill was built in 1812 and has been in the possession of the 
family for nearly a century. On maintaining manhood he engaged in fanning and 
also operated the mill. He was a Quaker in faith and a devoted friend to liberty, 
his house having been a station on the "Underground railroad" by which so many 
slaves made their way to freedom. His wife, Charlotte Haviland, was a daughter 
of Isaac Haviland, of Quaker Hill, and both lived to a ripe old age, Mr. Moore de- 
parting this life at the age of eighty-eight and his wife at the age of eighty-nine. 
They .had seven children: Lydia, the wife of Daniel Willets of Jericho, L. I.; 
Ruth (Mrs. P. A. Skidmore) ; Susan who resides at Moore's Mill and Alfred H. who 
is in the employ of the United States Government, at ElUs Island and also con- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 749 

ducts a stock farm at Moore's Mill. Three children, Charlotte, Andrew and Annie 
are deceased. Miss Susan Moore is the proprietor of "Floral Home", a delightful 
summer boarding house at Moore's Mill. 

. FREDERICK N. MORGAN, cashier of the First National Bank, Poughkeepsie, 
N. Y., was bom in this city October 3, 1870. He received his education in private 
schools and at Riverview Academy, from which he was graduated in 1889, and the 
same year he secvtred a position as correspondence clerk in the Merchants National 
Bank, Poughkeepsie, continuing as such until 1893, when he was made teller of 
the First National Bank. In July 1907 he was appointed assistant cashier of this 
institution, and in 1908 was further promoted to the position of cashier upon the 
resignation of Mr. Whipple. 

Mr. Morgan is a grandson of Mr. Reuben North, a former cashier of the Pough- 
keepsie National Bank, who died October 26, 1880, at the advanced age of 73 years. 
Mr. North was a native of Goshen, Conn., and since 1833 had been a resident of 
Poughkeepsie. In 1876 he was chosen teller of the Poufhkeepsie Bank, and in 
1844 was appointed cashier, which position he filled with signal ability. 

In 1837 he was united in marriage with Helen Wood of Poughkeepsie, and the 
following children were bom to them: Rebecca O., who married Joseph G. Frost; 
Sarah F., who became the wife of Walter S. Morgan, parents of the subject of this 
review; May H., who married Isaac Newlin, and John W. 

JOSEPH MORSCHAUSER, Justice of the Supreme Court, in the Ninth Judicial 
District, State of New York, was bom in the town of Hyde Park, Dutchess County, 
New York, March 30th, 1863. 

His parents were natives of Germany, his father being Joseph Morschauser, who^ 
with his family, settled in the town of Hyde Park in 1850. He attended the public 
schools of his native town and removed in his youth to Poughkeepsie, where he 
studied law with the late Judge Charles Wheaton and Daniel W. Guernsey and was 
privately tutored for two years by Miss Helen Mary Everett, who had been a teacher 
for thirty years in our public schools and retired in 1878. 

Miss Everett was regarded as one of the most remarkable teachers the city ever 
had and many well known men have testified to her ability to impart information 
and leave a lasting impression. She was an exceptionally intelligent and indepen- 
dent woman. 

He was admitted to the bar in 1884. He at once began the practice of law in 
Poughkeepsie, where two years later he was appointed justice of the peace, and was 
twice thereafter elected to that office, which he filled for six years. 

In 1898 he was elected on the Republican ticket recorder of the city of Pough- 
keepsie. In 1902, a city court was created for the city of Poughkeepsie, and Judge 
Morschauser was appointed by the mayor to be judge of that court. His term of 
four years expired December 31, 1905, when he was re-appointed for another term. 

During the twenty-one years in which he practiced law. Judge Morschauser was 
prominently and successfully connected with many important cases at the Dutchess. 
County Bar. 



750 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

When, in 1906, the counties of Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Rockland and 
Orange were separated from the second judicial district and embodied in the new 
Ninth Judicial District by act of the Legislature, the Republican party selected 
Judge Morschauser to be one of three nominees for the new judgeships provided for 
the district, the other nominees being Mr. Justice Isaac N. Mills of Westchester and 
Mr. Justice Arthur S. Tompkins of Rockland. The Republican nominees were 
elected by large majorities and began the duties of the court on January 1st, 1907. 

Although the work of the court requires his attendance in Westchester and the 
other counties outside of Dutchess nearly half of his time, Mr. Justice Morschauser 
makes his home in Poughkeepsie, his house being at 310 Mill Street, and when not 
engaged by assignment in other parts of the district he is almost always to be found 
in the Supreme Court Chambers in the Dutchess County Court House, following 
the practice pursued for so many years by the late Judge Barnard of making him- 
self available at all times to lawyers and litigants having business before the Court. 

He was married in 1889 to Miss Katherine W. Bauer, daughter of the late Joseph 
Bauer of Poughkeepsie. They have one son, Joseph Morschasuer, Jr., bom 1895, 
who is a student at Riverview Military Academy. 

JAMES H. MULLEN was born December 4, 1853 at what is now 693 Main Street, 
Poughkeepsie, N. Y. In 1867 his parents removed to 585 Main Street, conducting 
a small grocery until 1873, when they erected the Mullen building at the corner of 
East Mansion Street. In the same year James H. Mullen imdertook the manage- 
ment of the business and has continued it successfully since. 

Mr. Mullen was associated for years with the Retail Merchants Association and 
latterly with the Chamber of Commerce. He has given considerable time to poli- 
tics as a Democrat, and from 1890-92 served as Alderman of the fifth ward, Pough- 
keepsie. In 1895 he was elected supervisor of the seventh ward and re-elected in 
1897-'98;: 1899-1900, and again in 1905. He resigned January 1, 1907, to accept 
the appointment of city assessor, to which office he was re-appointed in 1909 by 
Mayor Sague. 

Mr. Mullen was married May 31, 1883 to Miss Mary Hayes of Poughkeepsie. 
They became the parents of three sons and two daughters. 

J. W. MULLEN, president of the village of Wappingers Falls, is a native of Ire- 
land, and came to America at the age of seven years. He has been a resident of 
Wappingers Palls for forty years, of which he spent twenty-six years in the employ 
of the Dutchess Print Works. Nineteen years ago he acquired his present hotel. 

In public life Mr. Mullen has served two years as village assessor and two years as 
village trustee. He was elected president of the village in March 1909. 

Mr. Mullen married Annie Dowling, and eight children were bom to them, of 
whom Katherine V. is a teacher in a Poughkeepsie school; Thomas and John are 
engaged in business in New York City, and the remaining children reside with their 
parents. 

WILLIAM A. MURPHY who conducts a grist and saw mill near the village of 
Poughquag, in the town of Beekman, Dutchess county, was born at Arthtirsburg 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 761 

in the adjoining town of La Grange. He was educated in the public schools of his 
native place, and soon became interested in the niilling business, in which he has 
been continuously engaged, purchasing his present property in 1898. 

Mr. Murphy has served as school trustee, and has held the office of town clerk of 
the town of Beekman for four years. Socially he is a member of the I. O. O. F. 

EZRA MUSSELMAN, Superintendent of the Seneca Button factory, Poughkeep- 
sie, N. Y., was bom in Ontario, Canada, January 23, 1867. Early in life he entered 
the employ of the Seneca Button Company at Seneca Palls, N. Y., and by diligent 
effort has worked his way up to the present position. When the plant was removed 
to Dutchess county in 1907 Mr. Musselman was instrumental in establishing the 
business here. The capacity of this plant exceeds 75,000 gross and gives employ- 
ment to about 300 hands. 

Mr. Musselman is a member of the Masonic fraternity, including the Blue Lodge, 
Chapter and Commandery. He was united in marriage (Ksith Annie Gillies of On- 
tario, Canada. 

GEORGE NAGENGAST, the efficient and popular chief of the Pire Department, 
was bom in Poughkeepsie, June 10, 1852, the son of Charles Nagengast who came 
from Bavaria, Germany to this city in 1840, and who was foreman for the blasting 
furnace located here. 

Mr. Nagengast at the age of eleven years entered the cigar factory remaining at 
that calling until early in 1883, when he embarked in the meat business for a short 
time. He then returned to his trade remaining until October of the same year. 
He began life as a hotel keep^ in what is now known as the Hudson River House. 
He conducted the same for eight years when he purchased the International at 
435 Main Street, where he remained over five years, and then purchased The Globe, 
403 Main Street. He has been very successful in business and in real estate in- 
vestments and is the owner of a number of valuable properties in Poughkeepsie. 

He is a public spirited citizen and ever ready and foremost to promote the real 
welfare and prosperity of his native city. 

Politics he has never sought, nor accepted offices of any kind, but has always de- 
voted all his spare time to the interest of the fire department. He joined the 
Niagara Engine Company when only eighteen years of age and has been its foreman 
and treasurer four years, later resigning and joining O. H. Booth Hose as active and 
has been its treasurer, and is at present the same. He has also been treasurer for 
several tournaments held by the department. 

He has been chief since 1901 and is now rounding out his thirty-ninth year of 
active service as a fire fighter, having a record for both work and achievement un- 
equalled by any other citizen of Poughkeepsie, or probably of any other city in 
the country. 

Mr. Nagengast was married November 2, 1878, to Miss CaroKne L. Swartout, 
daughter of WiUiam and Adeline (Martin) "Swartout, to whom was born, two 
daughters, Araminta H. and Lillian M. 



752 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

HORATIO NELSON was born in Brooklyn, N. Y., April 15, 1863. He obtained 
his education at Cheshire Academy, Cheshire, Conn., and Trinity College, Hartford. 
After travelling extensively abroad for a period of two years, he became connected 
with the Jersey City stock yards. He then engaged in farming at Dover Plains un- 
til 1893, when he purchased a country place on the South Road in the town of 
Poughkeepsie, known as "The Farms," where he now maintains his residence. 

THE NELSON HOUSE. In 1874 the old Forbus House, on Market street, was 
purchased by Judge Nelson for his sister, Mrs. E. P. Taylor. The year following 
the structure was torn down, with the exception of the three story brick addition, 
which was built several years earUer, and now forms the southern part of the present 
Nelson House. The new hotel, the Nelson House, was formally opened, with a 
banquet, on May 19, 1876, by Peter Foland, who came here from Albany. Shortly 
thereafter Captain A. P. Black purchased Foland's interest, leased the property 
for a term of years, and conducted the hotel for a time. During the existence of 
his lease several proprietors occupied the hotel for short periods until May 1, 1884, 
when the present proprietor, Horatio N. Bain, took possession, and has conducted 
it continuously to the present time. 

The Poughkeepsie Hotel, another of the city's old landmarks, has several times 
been partially destroyed by fire. After its partial destruction by fire while under 
the management of Isaac N. Seaman, the property came into the possession of 
Richard P. Morgan, Jr., as guardian of the grandchildren of John H. Rutzer. Mr. 
Morgan altered the building in 1877-78 by removing the lower veranda. In the 
spring of 1878 the hotel was leased to Milton Bain, who died in the spring of 1883 
and was succeeded by his son, Horatio N. Bain, who conducted it until 1884, when 
Mr. Bain sold it to Edward D. Morgan, son of Richard P. Morgan, Jr., who ran the 
hotel for a time, became involved, and made an assignment. He was succeeded 
by Mrs. Isaac N. Seaman and her son Fred. This property was then sold at 
auction — ^partition sale— and was purchased by the Hon. Homer A. Nelson, April 
1, 1886. In the meantime Horatio N. Bain had purchased the furniture and fix- 
tures from O. D. M. Baker, assignee for E. D. Morgan. Mr. Bain conducted the 
hotel for a short time prior to the time Judge Nelson removed the balconies, and 
constructed an entirely new front, as it appears to-day. Mr. Bain was the last 
actual proprietor of the Poughkeepsie Hotel. Since 1886 the property has been 
occupied by Horatio N. Bain as an annex to the Nelson House. 

THE NEW YORK RUBBER COMPANY was organized under the original 
Mining and Manufacturing Act of 1848, to manufacture articles under the Good- 
year patent. Messrs. Benjamin F. Lee ,W. D. Judson, John Greacen of New York, 
and others, being the charter members. The company first began operations on 
Staten Island, and in 1857 they bought the water power of what was then known 
as the Wiccopee Mills, in the town of Fishkill, which was then making "jeans," or 
cotton goods of blue or slate color. The New York Rubber Co. on taking posses- 
sion enlarged the mill, but did not at first put in steam as the water power was con- 
sidered sufficient. The capital which was then $75,000. has been increased from 




JOHN V. O'FARRELL. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 753 

time to time, so that it is now $300,000. Steam was introduced six years ago, and 
the business had grown to nearly a million dollars in 1907. Previous to that time 
the company had built a new dam just below what is known as Wolcott Bridge, and 
this gave rise to a long litigation with the Rotherys, who had operated file works 
on the creek above for many years. The dispute was finally adjusted. 

Mr. John P. Rider, president of the company, became connected with the indus- 
try in 1863, holding the office of Secretary, with headquarters in New York until 
1883, when, after the death of Henry A. Alden, he was made Vice-president, and 
manager of the works at Fishkill. 

The other officers are John Acken, Vice-president, Henry Montgomery, 2d Vice- 
President, Rxifus A. Brown, Secretary and Treasurer. 

The plant gives employment to 250 persons. 

DANIEL O'CONNELL, a prominent citizen residing at Barrjrtown, N. Y., was 
born in the town of Red Hook in 1860, and attended the sckools of his native place. 
He served four years as an operator for the New York Central Railroad, and in 1883 
was appointed station agent at Barrytown. He has also held the office of Postmaster 
at Barrytown since Cleveland's second administration, and has taken an active part 
in all matters pertaining to the welfare of this village. Mr. O'Connell is a trustee of 
the Sacred Heart Church, and a member of Florentine Council, Knights of Columbus. 

JOHN V. O'FARRELL was bom in the county of Waterford, Ireland, March 2, 
1845. In 1848 his parents came to America, locating at Wappingers Palls, N. Y.,. 
where he received his education in the public schools. At an early age he was em- 
ployed in the Print Works of that village, and in August, 1864, he enlisted in the 
Third New York Calvary, and served until the end of the Civil War, being mustered 
out at Suffolk, Va. He then returned to Wappingers Falls and learned the carpen- 
ters trade and began business for himself as contractor and builder, which occupa- 
tion he filled continuously for thirty years. 

Mr. O'Farrell was for a time also interested in the ice business. In 1906 he re- 
tired from an active business career. At the present time he is vice-president of 
the Wappingers Palls National Bank. 

Politically Mr. O'Farrell has always been a consistent Republican, and has taken 
an active part in the affairs of that party in Dutchess county. He has served two 
terms as assessor of the town of Poughkeepsie, and nine years as trustee of the vil- 
lage of Wappingers Falls, and is now serving his fourth term as Supervisor of the 
town of Wappingers. He is a former chief of the village fire department. 

In 1867 he was united in marriage with Mary A. Downey, and to them have been 
bom six children: Vincent, Leo, Joseph, Raymond, Marie and Emmet. 

FRANK S. ORMSBEE, attorney, of Madalin, N. Y., was born in the town of 
Windham, Greene county, N. Y., March 20, 1844. He obtained his preUminary 
education at Ashland Collegiate Institute, Windham, and studied law in the office 
of D. K. Olney of Catskill, graduating in the year 1865 from the Albany Law School, 
when he was admitted to the Bar. In 1869 Mr. Ormsbee took up his residence at 



754 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Madalin, Dutchess county, where he has continuously made his home. Politically 
he is a Republican, and has held the ofBce of Supervisor of the town of Red Hook 
for two consecutive terms, — 1881-'82. The last term he was chairman of the Board. 
In 1877 Mr. Ormsbee was united in marriage with Mary C. Wagner of Columbia 
county, N. Y. 

DR. JOHN HAVILAND OTIS was bom at Harts Village, Dutchess County 
New York, July 27th, 1871, son of Dr. John C. and Catharine Haviland Otis. He 
with his parents removed to Poughkeepsie, January 1, 1872. Educated at private 
schools he graduated at Riverview Military Academy in 1888, and immediately 
took up the study of medicine entering the New York Homeopathic Medical Col- 
lege in that year, and was graduated in 1892. He commenced practice with his 
father at Poughkeepsie immediately after graduating. In October 1894 he married 
Miss Louise N. Smith also of Poughkeepsie, and she with three children, Anna 
Smith, aged 10, John Hunting, aged 7, and Catharine Haviland, aged 5, survive 
"him. During his absorbing professional career he gave special attention to diseases 
of children. Almost every year he took a course in Post Graduate in New York. 
He was a member of New York State Homeopathic Medical Society, President of 
the Dutchess County Homeopathic Medical Society, member of the Tri-County 
Homeopathic Medical Society of Dutchess, Orange and Ulster Counties, and the 
Alumni Society of the New York Homeopathic Medical College. He was also a 
Mason and Knight of Phythias. For several years he was attending physician at 
the City Home, and at the time of his death one of the Charity Commissioners. 
Repeated attacks of rheumatism finally produced valvular heart disease which he 
bravely combatted for several years, but finally in 1905 he began to first show 
•signs of serious trouble. He continued the practice of his profession with slight in- 
terruptions up to the first part of January 1907, when a severe attack of La Grippe 
disabled him, and he went south for several weeks, but the unprecedented heat 
there greatly weakened him, and on his return home serious liver and kidney com- 
plications supervened from which he partially rallied, but the onset of extreme hot 
weather gradually reduced his strength, heart stimulants failed, and in the early 
morning of June 30, 1907 the end came. His labors ceased, and he is at rest. 

GEORGE OVEROCKER, attorney, was bom in the town of Poughkeepsie, 
November 28, 1875. He finished his academic studies in the Poughkeepsie High 
School and St. Stephen's College, Annandale, N. Y. He read law in the ofiice of 
Stephen G. Guernsey, Poughkeepsie, and was admitted to the Bar June 1894. 
Politically Mr. Overocker is a Republican, and held the office of Justice of the Peace 
in Poughkeepsie for two years; he was deputy County Clerk for Dutchess county 
from 1901 to 1906. He is a member of the Amrita and Dutchess Clubs. 

HENRY F. OWSLEY, M. D. was bom in Ohio in 1870, and educated in the 
■school^of his native State, including the Rayne School at Youngstown, O. He 
piursued his medical studies at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, 
from which he was graduated with the degree of M. D., and received an appoint- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 755 

ment as interne surgeon to Bellevue Hospital, 1897 to 1899. He was engaged in 
the practice of his profession in New York City until 1908, when he removed to 
Green Haven, Dutchess county. Dr. Owsley is a member of the Medical Society 
of Dutchess county; the New York State Medical Society, and the Alumni of 
Bellevue Hospital. 

Socially he is affiliated with the Masonic fraternity, and is a member of the New 
York Yacht Club. 

CHARLES B. PALMER was bom in the town of Thurman, Warren county, N. 
Y., September 16, 1868. After finishing his studies at Fort Edward Institute he 
came to Dutchess county (July, 1891) to accept a position, as book-keeper with the 
Dutchess Mantifacturing Company. He was made credit manager of this concern 
in 1896, and June 1, 1907, was elected a member of the board of trustees. The 
same year he was appointed secretary and treasurer of the company. 

Mr. Palmer was united in marriage with Miss Nellis M. Caijtnon of Poughkeepsie 
in 1889, and they are the parents of two children: Julia Evelyn and Charles B., Jr. 

Socially Mr. Palmer is a member of Triune Lodge, No. 782, F. & A. M. ; Lodge 
No. 275, B. P. O. E. He is a member of the Amrita Club, Poughkeepsie; the New 
York Athletic Club, and in religious belief is affiUated with the Congregational 
church. 

EDWA.RD E. PERKINS, attorney, and chairman of the Dutchess County Demo- 
cratic Committee, was bom in the town of Poughkeepsie February 4, 1863. He 
acquired his early education in the schools of his native town, and at the age of 
fifteen entered the Pelham Institute, Poughkeepsie. After finishing his prelim- 
inary studies he read law in the office of O. D. M. Baker, and was admitted to the 
Bar in 1886; he began the practice of his profession in Poughkeepsie. In 1887 
Mr. Perkins was one of the organizers of the Poughkeepsie & Eastern Railroad Co., 
and was elected its first president and treasurer. In 1890 he went to Texas and 
engaged in reorganizing and building an extension of the Fort Worth & Rio Grande 
Railroad from Comanche to Brownwood. He then became associated with Mr. T. 
L. MassaUs of Dallas, Texas, in the completion and extension of the Dallas & Oak 
Cliff Railroad, and later in the building of the West Dallas Railroad, of which Mr. 
Perkins became president. While residing in Dallas he was elected president of 
the American Savings Bank and Trust Company, and was selected by the Travellers' 
Insurance Company of Hartford, Conn., for their financial and loan representative 
of the State of Texas. In 1893 he organized the American National Bank, of which 
he held the office of vice-president. The same year he returned to his native town 
and resumed the practice of his profession. In 1909 Mr. Perkins was chosen pres- 
ident of the First National Bank of Poughkeepsie. He is also president of the 
Enterprise Publishing Co. 

June 23, 1891 he was united in marriage with Mary D. Beard of Poughkeepsie, 
and three children have been born to them: OUve E., Jeannie Marie and Argenta. 

EDMUND SCHOFIELD PHILLIPS, deceased, the first lawyer to locate at 
Matteawan, N. Y., was born in the town of Wappinger, (then Pishkill) December 6, 



756 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

1836, and was educated in the public schools of Dutchess county. In 1862 he set- 
tled at Matteawan, and resided there until his death, July 23, 1898. 

Mr. Phillips held the office of Justice of the Peace in Matteawan from 1863 to 
1867, when he was admitted to the Bar and began the practice of his profession. 
He was united in marriage with Miss Rebecca Onderdonk of Matteawan, and the 
following children were born to them: William O. who died in infancy; Samuel K.. 
Eleanor; Sherwood, and Eveline Gertrude (Bishop). 

JARVIS S. PHILLIPS, farmer and auctioneer, residing near Hopewell Junction, 
N. Y., was bom in the town of East Fishkill March 21, 1853, a son of William W. and 
Mary M. Phillips. Besides cultivating his farm of 120 acres, Mr. Phillips has de- 
voted considerable time to pubUc afEairs. He has served three years as Commis- 
sioner of Highways, and has also held the ofBce of Postmaster. He was one of the 
organizers of the East Fishkill Telephone Co. 

March 3, 1875 he married Susan E. Brackett of the town of Greenfield, Saratoga 
county, N. Y., and two children were bom to them,: Joseph W. and Ella A. 

SAMUEL K. PHILLIPS, former Judge of Dutchess County, was bom in Brook- 
lyn, N. Y., Feb. 12, 1858. Since the age of four years he has had his home in the 
village of Matteawan, his father, Edmund S. Phillips, being the first lawyer to locate 
in that village. 

Judge Phillips received his education in private and public schools of the Town 
of Fishkill, and at an early age began his professional studies in his father's ofiice. 
He was admitted to the Bar in 1879 and immediately engaged in practice. He has 
been retained as counsel in nearly all the cases of note in southern Dutchess during 
the last twenty-five years. He was engaged by the state of New York to take 
charge of the legal matters in connection with the location of the State Hospital at 
Matteawan, and later was employed by the state to acquire a right of way for a 
sewer from that institution to the Hudson River. He is the legal adviser of many 
of the leading enterprises of the town of Fishkill. He is President of and attorney 
for the Matteawan Savings Bank, attorney for The Mechanic's Savings Bank of 
FishkiU Landing, a director of the Matteawan National Bank, and of the Fishkill 
Railway system. He is a trustee and treasurer of the Highland Hospital, and for 
over a quarter of a century has been prominently identified with the affairs of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church at Matteawan. 

Judge Phillips possesses the qualities which insure success in pubhc hfe, and for 
many years hcis been a leader of the Republican party of Dutchess County. In 
1895 he was elected to the office of County Judge, and was re-elected at the expira- 
tion of his first term in 1901, having no opponent. 

Judge Phillips is a Past Master of Beacon Lodge F. & A. M., a Royal Arch 
Mason, a Masonic Knight Templar, and a member of the Mystic Shrine. 

In October 1885 he married Henrietta, daughter of Luke and Abagail (Darling) 
Re5d, of Hudson, N. Y. They have one son, Samuel Vincent Phillips, a student 
of Blair Academy, Blairstown, N. J. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 757 

CHARLES W. PILGRIM, M. D., was born at Monroe, Orange County, N. Y., 
March 27, 1855, a son of Roe C. and Prances Wilkes Pilgrim. He was educated at 
Monroe Institute, N. Y. ; also largely by private tutors and in the academic depart- 
ment of the New York University, from which institution he graduated in medicine 
in 1881. He also studied in Europe. 

Dr. Pilgrim was house physician, Bellevue Hospital, 1881-82; assistant physician 
Utica State Hospital, 1881-89, with an intermission of two years in Europe, which 
time was mostly spent at the Universities of Munich and Vienna; resident physi- 
cian Frauenklinik, Munich, Bavaria, 1885; medical superintendent, Willard State 
Hospital, 1889-93; medical superintendent, Hudson River State Hospital, Pough- 
keepsie, 1893; appointed President of State Commission in Lunacy by Gov. Hig- 
gins April, 1906, and served until May 1, 1907, when he resigned for the purpose of 
returning to his old position as Superintendent of the Hudson River State Hospi- 
tal. He is Vice President of the Poughkeepsie Trust Co. ; also a director in several 
corporations; fellow New York Academy of Medicine; Secretary of the American 
Medico-Psychological Association; member of the State Medical Society, Medical 
Society of the County of Dutchess, Bellevue Alumni Association, and the Lotus 
Club, New York City. For several years he was associate editor of the American 
Journal of Insanity, and his published contributions upon insanity and allied sub- 
jects are numerous and important. 

Dr. Pilgrim married, in 1889, Florence M. Middleton. He has one child, a daugh- 
ter, Florence. 

WILLIAM BARNES PLATT was born at Pleasant Valley, Feb. 1, 1799, and 
died at Rhinebeck April 15, 1879. He was a lineal descendant of Richard Piatt 
who came from Hiuitingfton, England, and settled in New Haven, Conn, in 1638, 
purchasing about 90 acres of land, part of which is now in the center of the city. 

The Platts were prominent in England in the time of Edward III; in the records 
of the Heraldy OflBce in London it is called "The Ancient and honorable family of 
Piatt." WilUam B. Piatt's father, John Piatt, fought in the Revolution. His 
mother was Catherine Barnes of Clinton. 

Mr. Piatt was highly esteemed by a large circle of friends in Dutchess and adjoin- 
ing counties. He was devoted to the interests of the village of Rhinebeck, and his 
advice was sought on financial and political matters by people in the various walks 
of life. He was a devout member of the Old Dutch Church and prominent in all 
charitable works. 

He was President of the First National Bank of Rhinebeck, from 1868 until his 
death; Trustee of The Rhinebeck Savings Bank, and a director of the Rhinebeck 
and Connecticut Railroad. 

He married Sarah Catherine Stoutenburgh, a lineal descendant of Jacobus 
Stoutenburgh, who is supposed to have been the first settler in Hyde Park, and who 
was the owner of one of the nine "water-lots. " He came to the county about 1720. 
They had two children: their son, John H. Piatt, was a member of the well 
known law firm in New York of Hutchings and Piatt. He married Mary Cheney 
of South Manchester, Connecticut. Their children were: John Cheney, Charles 



768 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Adams, Richard Goodman, Elizabeth Piatt Jencks and William Barnes, 2d, all 
living except William Barnes, 2nd. 

Their daughter, Elizabeth, married Charles H. Adams of Cohoes, N. Y., State 
Senator and Congressman from the Albany District, and a member of the historic 
Adams family who gave us our second and sixth Presidents. Two children sur- 
vive, Mary Adams Johnston, widow of the late Robert Johnston of Cohoes, N. Y., 
who has one son. Rev. Robert Johnston of Holy Trinity, New York City; and 
William Piatt Adams, a prominent citizen of Cohoes, N.. Y., and director in various 
financial institutions in Albany County. He married Catherine Whiteman, daugh- 
ter of Jacob Whiteman Elseffer of Red Hook. They have two daughters, Eliza- 
beth Piatt and Katherine ElseflEer. William B. Piatt spent most of his long and 
useftd life in the village of Rhinebeck, loved, esteemed and honored. 

J. WILSON POUCHER, M. D., of Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born at Claverack, 
Columbia coimty, N. Y., April 24, 1859. After graduating from Claverack College 
in 1879 he taught school for a year, and then entered the medical department of Union 
University, gradimting in 1883. He practiced two years at Modena, Ulster county, 
and then went abroad to pursue his studies in surgery and gynecology at Berlin, 
Vienna and Paris. 

When war was declared between the United States and Spain Dr. Poucher offered 
his services to the government, and was commissioned Lieutenant and Assistant 
Surgeon of the 201st Regiment N. Y. V. He was detached from the Regiment and 
given charge of the Division Hospital at Camp Black, L. I. From 1888 to 1898 Dr. 
Poucher was visiting surgeon at Vassar Brothers Hospital, and is now consulting sur- 
geon of the Highland Hospital at Matteawan. In 1898 Dr. Poucher established a 
private hospital in Poughkeepsie with accommodations for eight patients. This 
building has recently been enlarged. He is a member of the Medical Society of Dutch- 
ess county, and the New York State Medical Society, and a Fellow of the American 
Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. He is also a member of the Holland 
Society of New York, the Society of the Cincinnati, and the Masonic fraternity. 
In public life he has served the city of Poughkeepsie as a member of the Board of 
Alderman, and for three terms was a member of the Board of PubUc Works. 

In 1892 Dr. Poucher was united in marriage with Catharine D., daughter of the 
late Jacob LeFevre of New Paltz, who represented that District in Congress from 1892 
to 1896. 

. POUGHKEEPSIE GLASS WORKS, one of Poughkeepsie's thriving industries, 
was organized as a corporation in November 1880, succeeding the Anglo-American 
Glass Company which was organized in July 1879, for the purpose of engaging in 
the manufacture of glass in which iron slag was utilized. A factory was constructed 
for manufacturing hollow glassware from the scoria, or slag, from blast furnaces 
but the rise of such an ingredient not proving a success the process of manufacture 
was changed and the use of slag abandoned. The first successful continuous tank 
for th^manufacture of glass ever constructed in the United States was then erected 
and the making of glass commenced in March 1880. December 1, 1881 the factory 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 759 

was nearly destroyed by fire but was rebuilt, and in one month manufacture was 
resumed. Fire again visited the factories in April 1897 and many of the storage 
buildings destroyed. The company then purchased adjoining property and erected 
the buildings they now occupy. They now have three tanks running day and night 
and their output has increased from 30,000 gross to 130,000 gross per annum, giving 
emplojrment to about 350 hands during the busy season. At the organization of 
the corporation in 1880 the following officers and directors were elected — President, 
William C. Ely; Vice-president, Henry C. Wisner; secretary, George O. Baker; 
Treasurer and Superintendent, Evan R. Williams. Board of Trustees, William C. 
Ely; Charles W. Reed; Charles D. Ely; George O. Baker; Evan R. Williams; 
George H. Hoyt of Clyde and Henry C. Wisner of Rochester, N. Y. Charles W. 
Reed had charge of the construction and early operation of the works. The 1908 
officers are: President George H. Hoyt, Vice-President, Frank P. Wisner, Secre- 
tary and attorney, George O. Baker, Treasurer and Superintendent, William G. 
Baker; General Factory Manager, Robert Good. Directors: — George O. Baker; 
William G. Baker; Charles P. Buckley; Robert Good; Gforge H. Hojrt; Mary K. 
Nickols; Frank P. Wisner. 

ADRIAN C. RAPELJE, County Engineer of Dutchess county, was born at Hope- 
well Junction February 3, 1866. He finished his preliminary education at the New- 
burgh High School, and became connected with the engineering department of the 
Erie & Wyoming Valley Railroad, where he remained two years during the con- 
struction of that road. He spent several years in the engineering department of 
various railroad enterprises, and with the engineering department of the United 
States Government on surveys and dredge work of the upper Hudson. He was 
appointed County Engineer of Dutchess county February 3, 1908, at which time he 
disposed of a coal, feed and lumber business at Hopewell Junction in order that he 
might devote all his time to his new duties. 

June 23, 1892 Mr. Rapelje married Miss Blanche R. King of Chambersburg, Pa., 
and they became the parents of the following children: Adrian K., Helen R., Law- 
rence C, and Blanche R. Mrs. Rapelje died December 21, 1901. 

LAWRENCE CORTELYOU RAPELJE, for many years a representative citi- 
zen of Dutchess County, residing in the town of East Fishkill, was born in the City 
of New York the 26th day of August, 1826, and died at his residence, Hopewell 
Junction, N. Y., November 30, 1902. 

Mr. Rapelje was a son of Daniel Lawrence and Phoebe Cortelyou Rapelje, and a 
descendant, eight generations removed, of Joris Jansen de Rapelje who settled in 
New Amsterdam in 1623. His early life was spent in New York City where he re- 
ceived his education, later entering his business career with the N. Y. & Harlem R. 
R. Co. In 1857 Mr. Rapelje purchased a farm in the town of East Fishkill upon 
which the village of Hopewell Junction was subsequently built. In addition to his 
agricultural pursuits he became interested in many public enterprises. He was one 
of the organizers and early directors of the Poughkeepsie Bridge Co., the Dutchess 
& Columbia R. R. Co., a director of the Dutchess Mutual Insurance Co., etc. 



760 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In political views Mr. Rapelje was a Democrat, and served his adopted town eight 
years as a member of the Board of Supervisors. 

Mr. Rapelje was united in marriage in 1855 with Hannah M., daughter of Major 
Coert Horton, and the following children were bom to them: John, Lawrence 
Wortman, Annie M. (wife of Charles Underbill) and Adrian Cortelyou. 

THOMAS REED, one of the oldest members of the New York Stock Exchange 
was bom at Rhinebeck, New York, September 14, 1822. He was of piure English 
descent, his father and mother both being English born. For many generations 
his ancestors resided in Ctmiberland when his grandparents, Thomas and Anna 
Hall Reed, reared a family of three children; Stephen, who died at sea in 1785; 
Mary, who died unmarried at the home of her brother in Rhinebeck, and John. 
The latter was bom in 1777 and received his education in his native town. In 181 1, 
determined not to fight against the States he came to America, landing at Quebec. 
The vessel being searched by the British for able-bodied men, he only escaped being 
impressed into the service by the wit and ingenuity of the Captain. He was a 
Baptist in religious faith and was especially active in every form of religious work. 

He married Elizabeth Scott Thompson, widow of Robert Thompson and daugh- 
ter of the Rev. Robert Scott, one of the early settlers of Rhinebeck who came to 
this country in 1794 from Lincolnshire, Eng. In a record left by himself Robert 
Scott says he left England sailing from London, Aug. 21, 1794, and arrived in New 
York, Oct. 10 of the same year. 

"My reasons for leaving England" he says, were, first for the sake of religious li- 
berty, not being able to take the oaths then required of those who dissented from 
the Episcopal Church; and second for the sake of civil liberty. He was a man of 
fine talents and his superior education enabled him to become a very successful 
teacher. In 1796 he opened a school at Rhinebeck, and enrolled the children of 
some of the best families in New York City, among them being Henry Stokes, 
President of the Manhattan Life Insurance Co., and Robert Colgate, president of 
the Atlantic White Lead Works. He pubUshed the following works: Antidote to 
Deism; Chronology from the Creation to the year 1810; "A Treatise on the Millen- 
ium", and last his own funeral sermon. 

He carried on the work of a surveyor with that of a teacher and many of the old 
maps of the town bear his name. It was he who brought the Baptist Church into 
Rhinebeck, and on July 5, 1821 at the age of sixty years he was ordained to the 
gospel ministry and set over the infant church as pastor. He died Sept. 24, 1834. 
His wife, Elizabeth Kitching survived him twenty years, dying at the age of ninety- 
four. Of his five daughters, Mrs. Reed was the eldest. She died in 1852, five years 
before her husband. 

Thomas Reed received a good education for his times in the schools of his native 
town, and his later reading made him an unusually well informed man. His first 
employment was in the dry-goods store of William B. Piatt in which he afterward 
became a partner, in all covering a period from 1837 — 1850. He then went to 
New York as buyer for the wholesale dry-goods house of L. & V. Kirby, from thence 
going to ^augerties, N. Y. where under the firm name of Wilbur, Reed & Russel 
he engaged in the wholesale bluestone and general merchandise business. He con- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 761 

tinued there until 1864 when he became a member of the New York Stock Ex- 
change. His first partner as a stock broker was C. N. Jordan (the firm being Reed 
& Jordan) afterward sub-treasurer at New York. Mr. Reed's fine sense of honor, 
his unfailing courtesy, his recognized business integrity made him a great favorite 
in Wall Street, and he was "Uncle Tom" to a very large proportion of the members. 
He was always a public spirited man, a Republican in politics, and a devoted 
Churchman. 

June 7, 1851 he married at Rhinebeck, N. Y., Julia Van Keuren, daughter of 
Garret Van Keuren and Sarah Hagadorn. They had six children as follows; Cora, 
wife of Rev. Lewis A. Mitchell; Anna, unmarried; Sarah, wife of Frank Herrick; 
Thomas, an attorney and Counsellor at law and a member of the New York Stock 
Exchange, who died Oct. 27, 1907.; Helen, wife of Theo. de Laporte and Julia 
who is at home. 

Mr. Reed died at Rhinebeck, Sept. 3, 1899, two years before his wife. His 
daughters are all living in the home town. ^ 

ALLEN S. REYNOLDS, attorney, was born in the city of Poughkeepsie January 
12, 1882, and graduated from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1899. He then en- 
tered the law office of Benjamin M. Fowler, and later that of George Card. His- 
legal education was supplemented by a course in the New York Law School, and 
in June 1904 he was admitted to the Bar and has since been engaged in the prac- 
tice of his profession in Poughkeepsie. 

Mr. Reynolds is a member of the Poughkeepsie Club and the Euterpe Glee Club. 

WILLIAM THACHER REYNOLDS, senior member of the firm of W. T. Rey- 
nolds & Company, was born in Poughkeepsie, December 20, 1838. In 1860 he be- 
came a member of the firm of Reynolds & Company, in partnership with his father, 
William W. Reynolds, and his uncle, James Reynolds, Jr. 

James Reynolds, grandfather of William Thacher Reynolds, bom in Rhode Is- 
land April 7, 1777, was the son of William Reynolds, ensign in a Rhode Island Reg- 
iment in the Revolutionary war. 

James Reynolds came to Poughkeepsie about 1800 and soon entered into part- 
nership with Aaron Innis in the operation of a line of packet sloops, running from 
what was known as the "Upper Landing" to New York. In 1811 two sloops, the 
"Mary "and the "Driver," left for New York on alternate weeks, carrying freight 
and passengers; they were replaced in 1816 by the "Huntress" and "Counsellor," 
and then still later by the barges "Clinton" and "RepubUc." Reynolds and Innis, 
in 1818, gave notice in the columns of the Poughkeepsie Journal ,"to the Farmers 
and Merchants of Dutchess County that the subscribers have taken the mill lately 
occupied by Martin HoflEman and Co., and tender their services to the customers of 
that firm in the milling business." About 1820, James Reynolds added a general 
store which, with the mill, were natural outgrowths and feeders of the transporta- 
tion line. 

The two sons of James Reynolds, William W. and James Reynolds, Jr., succeeded 
their father about 1840, as W. W. and J. Reynolds, and later developed the whole- 
sale flour and grain branch of the business. 



762 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

In 1849 the warehouse at the Upper Landing was built, and the business conduct- 
ed there until .1871. Increased railroad facilities and through freight lines had then 
changed the methods of transacting business, and a. location where freight could be 
received by rail was necessary, which led to the erection of the present warehouse 
opposite the passenger station of the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad, 
in 1872. 

At the death of James Reynolds, Jr., in 1865, the firm became Reynolds & Son; 
in 1869, when John R. Reynolds, son of James Reynolds, Jr., entered it, W. W. Rey- 
nolds & Co. ; in 1874, at the addition of George E. Cramer, Reynolds & Co. ; in 
1889, at the death of John R. Reynolds, Reynolds & Cramer; and in 1899, when 
George E. Cramer died, W. T. Reynolds & Co. 

WilUam W. Reynolds married a daughter of the Rev. WilUam Thacher, a des- 
cendant of Hon. John Thacher, of Yarmouth, Mass. The latter served with dis- 
tinction in King Philip's war, 1675, and was for many years a member of the Gov- 
ernor's Council. Their son, WilUam Thacher Reynolds, the subject of this sketch, 
is president of the Board of Trustees of the Washington Street Methodist Church ; 
president of the Vassar Brothers Home for Aged Men ; trustee of the Old Ladies' 
Home, of Vassar Brothers Hospital, of the Poughkeepsie Rural Cemetery, and di- 
rector of the Fallkill National Bank, and of the Poughkeepsie Savings Bank. He 
married July 6, 1864, Miss Louise Smith, and has two children, Harris Smith Rey- 
nolds, a gradtiate of Yale, and a member of the firm of W. T. Reynolds & Co., and 
May Louise Reynolds.. 

JOHN P. RIDER, president of the New York Rubber Company, Matteawan, N. 
Y., was bom at Rhinebeck, Dutchess county, January 28, 1835, and received his 
early education in the schools of his home town ; he also later attended the Rhine- 
beck Academy. When sixteen years of age he accepted a clerkship with his vmcle, 
John F. Jennings, in Kingston, N. Y., where he began his business career. Two 
years later he returned to Rhinebeck to act as deputy postmaster to his father who 
had been appointed postmaster by President Pierce. In 1855 Mr. Rider accepted 
a position in a wholesale drygoods house in New York City, and in 1863 was appoint- 
ed secretary of the New York Rubber Company, which position he held in New 
York City until 1883, when he was made vice-president of the company, and took 
charge of their plant at Matteawan, where he has since made his home. 

Politically Mr. Rider is a Democrat, and in 1886 was elected Supervisor of the 
town of Fishkill; a year later he was re-elected, and was chosen chairman of the 
Board. Later Mr. Rider was nominated and elected president of the village of 
Fishkill-on-the-Hudson, serving one term. Mr. Rider has taken various chairs in 
Masonry, including the Shrine and Scottish Rite order. 

R. RAYMOND RIKERT of Rhinebeck, N. Y., was born in that village Novem- 
ber 14, 1871. He received his education at DeGarmo Institute, from which he was 
gradtj^ted in 1891, and then entered the employ of his father as book-keeper. 

January 1, 1893, in connection with WilUam R. Tremper, he purchased the 
Rhinebeck News, July 1, 1894, he purchased his partner's interest, and also ac- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 763 

quired the Gazette, and conducted the business alone until January, 1907, when he 
disposed of the same. In 1900 Mr. Rikert was made secretary and general manager 
of the Rhinebeck Light, Heat & Power Company, and he is an officer in various 
other corporations. He is secretary and manager of the Rhinebeck Water Com- 
pany; treasurer of the Rhinebeck Coal Company, and president of the Realty and 
Development Company. Mr. Rikert is a Past Master of Rhinebeck Lodge, F. & A. 
M . , and trustee of the Starr Institute. 

JAMES ROY, Sr., was born in Belfast, Ireland, in 1816. Learning the business 
of Calico engraving he became the foreman of his father's business when but a boy. 

When 18 years of age he came to America, living for a short time at Stockport, 
N. J., being foreman engraver at the print-works at that place. In 1837 he re- 
moved to Wappingers Falls, working as an engraver at the print-works for about 10 
years. In 1848 he opened a drug business which he conducted successfully until 
his death, which occurred in 1868. This business is still carried on by his sons un- 
der the firm name of James D., William K., and Albert M. Roy. James Roy was 
married May 25, 1843, to Susanna M., daughter of Sheriff Seth Darling of Pall River, 
Mass. SettUng in Wappingers Falls, they reared a family of five children: James 
D., married to Carrie A. Orr, has two children; Emma D., married to Edward 
Griffin, of Newport, Rhode Island has two children; William K., tmmarried; 
Albert M., married to Priscilla Ackermann, who died in 1907 after a career of much 
promise; Elizabeth C, married to George H. Kelley, of Newport, Rhode Island, has 
two children. Susanna M. Roy, the mother, died in February 1898. 

James Roy, Senior, during his life took an active part in all matters of public 
interest, especially in the cause of education. He was largely instrumental in 
building up the present excellent school system in the county. He was one of the 
small number who secured the grounds and laid out the beautiful cemetery at 
Wappingers Falls, of which association he was Secretary and Treasurer up to the 
time of his death. In politics, like his sons, he was a staunch Democrat; and in 
all the relations of life proved himself a most loyal and honorable man whose in- 
fluence did not cease with his death. 

JAMES S. ROY, eldest son of James and Susanna M. Roy, was bom at Wappin- 
gers Falls, March 5, 1849 ; was educated in the public school of the village, served 
his apprenticeship in the drug business under his father, and on his death in 1866 
succeeded him in the business. Mr. Roy has been much interested in the growth 
and welfare of his native village, having served as Village Treasurer and on the 
Board of Health, and having been a Village Trustee for five terms and Village Presi- 
dent for seven consecutive terms. During his incumbency many marked improve- 
ments were carried out; the curbing and grading of the street and the laying of 
water mains were largely done under his supervision. The purchase and laying 
out of the beautiful village park was mainly effected through his efforts. He has 
been connected with the Wappinger Savings bank as Trustee and President for 
thirty-three years. In 1879 Mr. Roy was married to Carrie A., daughter of James 
Orr, the founder of the well known firm of Sweet, Orr & Co. In 1898 his wife died 



764 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

leaving him with two children: Edna E., and William A. Mr. Roy is one of Wap- 
pingers most prominent and substantial citizens, a man of sterling character and 
conservative business habits, retaining throughout his career the respect and con- 
fidence of his friends and associates. 

WILLIAMlK. ROY, second son of James and Susanna M. Roy, was born at 
Wappingers Falls, N. Y., December 31, 1853, and graduated from Union Free 
School No. 1, Wappingers Falls in 1870. He competed for and won the Cornell 
University scholarship, and entered that institution in 1872, graduating with his 
class, with the highest honors, in 1876. He then entered into partnership with his 
brothers in the drug business at Wappingers Falls, with which the name has so long 
been identified in this county. Mr. Roy entered actively into the strenuous Tilden 
political campaign, and was for many years a member of the Democratic County 
Committee, and also served for several years as its chairman. 

He was town clerk of Poughkeepsie Township for two terms, and was also Super- 
visor, acting during his term as Democratic leader in the Board of Supervisors. In 
May 1887 he was appointed by President Cleveland, Postmaster of Wappingers 
Falls. In July 1892 he resigned the Postmastership to become index clerk of the 
State Assembly at Albany. In 1896 he was again appointed Postmaster serving 
out his full term of four years. He was mainly instrumental in the building of the 
notable Stone bridge at Wappingers Falls, was active in securing the introduction of 
the telephone line and of the electric trolley line, of which he has been a director 
since its organization. He has served for many years as Secretary and Chairman 
of the executive committee of the Wappingers Savings Bank; and he has been a 
Trustee of the Grinnell Library since its incorporation ; is Chairman of its Library 
Committee and has served as the Secretary of the Library Board since its estab- 
lishment. He has been a member of the Board of Park Commissioners for the 
village ever since the office was created, has served as Consulting Engineer of the 
Water Supply Committee of the village, and was Clerk of the Village Board for 
two terms. 

JOHN J. RYAN, who is engaged in the hotel business at Wappingers Falls, was 
born at Cold Spring, Putnam county, November 8, 1874. After finishing his edu- 
cation in the public schools of his native place he began life as a clerk in a hotel, 
and in 1888 moved to Dutchess county to accept a clerkship. In 1898 Mr. Ryan 
purchased his present hotel business. Socially he is a member of the Red Men, the 
A. O. H., and the Wappingers Falls Fire Department. 

JAMES E. SADLIER, M. D., was born at Walden, Orange county, New York on 
March 28, 1865, his parents being James and Ann Jeanette SadUer. The paternal 
grandparents were natives of France; the maternal side of the house have lived in 
Orange ^county, New York for over 100 years, and prior to that time, in the old 
colonial days, were residents of Long Island, a certain section of which to the pres- 
ent day bears the name of the family, viz., Jessup's Neck. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 765 

The subject of the sketch received his early education in the public and private 
schools of his native town, and afterwards at the academies at New Paltz, Ulster 
county, and Montgomery, Orange county. At the age of eighteen he began the 
study of medicine with his uncle who was a physician practicing in that vicinity, 
and later in his 19th year entered the Medical Department of Union Universitiy at 
Albany, from which he was graduated in 1887 at the age of twenty-two. 

Upon competitive examination he was awarded a position as resident surgeon of 
the Albany Hospital and served in that capacity for two years, at the expiration of 
which time, May 1, 1889, he located at Poughkeepsie, New York for the purpose of 
practicing medicine. One year after locating in Poughkeepsie he was appointed 
one of the attending physicians at Vassar Brothers' Hospital, and retained that 
position until 1898 when the staff was disbanded. 

The first several years of practice were that of general practice, but a natural in- 
clination for surgical work led to the gradual abandonment of general practice to 
take up surgery and specialize in that branch. During the year 1899 he spent a 
period of several months doing clinical work and patholog^ at the Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Baltimore, Md. In 1902 and 1905 several months were spent in the study 
of surgery in Europe, attending clinics in many of the large medical centers of that 
coiintry. 

Dr. Sadlier is the author of several medical articles, conspicuous among which are 
the following: "Consistency in Aseptic Surgical Technique", read at the Detroit 
meeting of the American Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in 1907; 
"A Study of the treatment of Appendicitis", read before the Dutchess County 
Medical Society in 1903; "Report on Cases of Intraabdominal Hemorrhage", 
read at the centennial meeting of the Dutchess County Medical Society; "Acute, 
Diffuse Septic Peritonitis", read before the Dutchess Medical Club in 1909. 

In 1899, he established a private hospital strictly for surgical work, which at the 
present time and for a number of years past has been in full performance. 

Dr. Sadlier is a member and ex-president of the Dutchess County Medical Socie- 
ty ; President of the Dutchess Medical Club ; a member of the Medical Society of the 
State of New York and of the American Medical Association; a member, and at 
the present time First Vice-president of the American Association of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists, and also a member of the New York Academy of Medicine. 
He is one of the eleven representatives of New York State in the House of Delegates 
of the American Medical Association. A Democrat in politics and served as Pen- 
sion Examiner for this district from 1894 to 1897 under the late Grover Cleveland, 
and at present is one of the members of the Board of Public Works of Poughkeepsie. 

Dr. Sadlier was also a member of the Committee from New York State to organize 
and prepare for the International Congress on Tuberculosis held in Washington in 
September and October of 1908. 

In 1891 Dr. Sadlier was married to Hattie C. Millspaugh of Walden, Orange Coun- 
ty, N. Y. 

JOHN K. SAGUE, the present Mayor of Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was born in this 
city, January 30, 1866. He was educated in the public schools and graduated 
from the Poughkeepsie High School in 1882. He entered the employ of the Pough- 



766 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

keepsie Savings Bank in 1883 and is now the assistant treasurer of that institution. 
He was commissioned captain of the 15th Separate Company in 1895, and in 1898 
his company became a part of the 1st New York Volunteer Infantry and on May 2d, 
were encamped with the regiment at Camp Black, Hempstead, L. I. The regiment 
was mustered into the service of the United States on May 20, 1898 and served un- 
til the following February. During this time Captain Sague was commissioned as 
Major and upon the muster out of the regiment from the service of the United 
States, he became Major in the First Regiment, N. G. N. Y. 

Mr. Sague was nominated for Mayor of Poughkeepsie on the Democratic ticket in 
the fall of 1906 and was elected by a majority of 1527. He was again nominated 
in the fall of 1908 and re-elected by a majority of 684. 

JOHN PETER SCHENCK, Jr., M. D. The Schfenck family for several genera- 
tions were prominently identified with the history and development of the town of 
FishkiU. 

The first factory in Matteawan — a cotton mill — was established in 1814, by Peter 
A. Schenck and Philip Hone. Mr. Schenck married Margaret Brett, grand-daugh- 
ter of Roger and Madam Brett. He built the Blossom house, now occupied by the 
Green Fuel Economizer Company. He was succeeded in the management of the 
cotton mill by his nephew Peter H. Schenck. 

Henry Schenck, brother of Peter A., married and lived in what is now known as 
the Teller house, built by Roger Brett in 1709. Henry Schenck bought this house, 
together with a large tract of land adjacent, from his brother-in-law Theodorus 
Brett. 

Abraham H. Schenck, at one time president of the Matteawan Company, was 
the father of Dr. John P. Schenck, who was bom February 2, 1798, and was the 
first physician to locate at Matteawan, where he practiced for half a century. His 
son John P. Schenck, Jr., was bom February 13, 1842. He also chose the pro- 
fession of medicine, and in his father's office acquired his preliminary medical 
training. He then entered the medical department of Columbia College, from 
which he was graduated iii 1863. Enlisting as a surgeon in the Civil War, he served 
through General McClellan's Peninsular Campaign, when he resigned, and later be- 
came assistant surgeon on the receiving ship, ''North Carolina," In the fall of 1863 
he returned to Matteawan where he continued the practice of his profession for a 
period of 33 years. He died March 14, 1896. 

Dr. Schenck was a member of the Dutchess County Medical Society; of the New 
York State Medical Association ; and for twenty-three years was one of the visiting 
physicians of Highland Hospital. 

He was united in marriage March 28, 1866 with Mary Elizabeth Bush of New 
York City. They became the parents of two children, John Peter and Grace. 
John Peter married Clare C. Rikert of Matteawan. They have two children, 
Evangeline M., and John Peter, the fourth. Grace is now the wife of William 
Lovett Sutphin of New York City. They have one daughter, Gladys Van Nydeck. 

RICHARD A. SCHOUTEN of Staatsburgh, N. Y. was born in the town of East 
Fishkill, Dutchess county, in 1835, a descendant of J. Schouten, a Holland immi- 



• BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 767 

grant, who located in the town of Fishkill, where his son, John S., grandfather of 
our subject, was born in 1776. He married Phebe Perry, and to them was born a 
son, Stockholm, (Dec. 20, 1803), the father of the subject of this review. 

Stockholm Schouten conducted the homestead farm until the spring of 1850 
when he removed to the town of Hyde Park, purchasing 260 acres of land. For a 
number of years Mr. Richard A. Schouten conducted a meat market at Staatsbiirgh, 
and in 1872 purchased his present property from William B. Dinsmore, and has suc- 
cessfully continued in the butcher trade to the present time, in which he is associated 
with his sons. 

Mr. Schouten was married in 1857 to Laura J., daughter of Henry Velie of Hyde 
Park, and they have become the parents of the following children: Charles Henry; 
Alice L., deceased; Frances M., deceased; Richard Underbill, deceased; Laura 
Velie, deceased; Sterling Bird; Anna S. ; and Emma D. Mrs. Schouten died May 
15, 1905. Mr. Schouten is a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church at Staats- 
burgh. 

JACOB SCHRAUTH, retired baker and confectioner, was born at Kreuznach, 
in the Rhine Province, Germany. At the age of twenty he came to America and 
followed the trade of baker for three years in New York City, and in 1857 he located 
in Poughkeepsie, where he continued his trade for a period of nine years. In 1866 
Mr. Schrauth engaged in business on his own account, and conducted the same until 
May 1, 1897, when his sons, William H. and Edward L., purchased the business of 
their father, forming a co-partnership under the name of J. Schrauth's Sons, which 
is still in existence. Schrauth's Sons are among the representative business men 
of the city of Poughkeepsie. 

ALFRED B. SCOTT was born at Coldenham, Orange County, N. Y., January 
1, 1846. He began his business career in New York City when a young man, and 
later became senior member of the drug firm of Scott, Piatt & Co. Shortly there- 
after he placed on the market the proprietary medicine known as ''Scott's Emul- 
sion," and through his extensive business interests became as well known in 
Europe as America. 

Mr. Scott was united in marriage with Miss Ella F. Puffer of Boston, and four 
children were born to them: Walter Bowne, AUys PufiEer, who married James 
Stowell Anthony of New York, Harold Churchill, and Walter B. Jr. 

Mr. Scott died at his home "LE SOCAGE" Geneva, Switzerland, January 8, 1908. 

WILLIAM SEWARD. The Seward family in Dutchess county dates back to 
William S., who located in New Hackensack, N. Y. in 1797. He was a retired clergy- 
man, and the family has been prominently identified in the public affairs of this coun- 
ty. William Seward, Brevet Brigadier General, N. G., S. N. Y., was bom at New 
Hackensack, Dutchess county, August 19, 1837, a son of William Seward, and was 
educated in the High School at Newark, N. J. October 1, 1858 he joined the N. Y. 
National Guard, and served in the Civil War from 1861 to 1863. He was commis- 
sioned First Lieutenant while in the service of the United States, 1862; Adjutant 



768 THE COXJNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

9th Regiment, 1866; Major in same, 1868; Assistant Adjutant General, Third Brig- 
ade, N. G., S. N. Y., 1870; Colonel, 9th Regiment, N. G., S. N. Y., 1882; Brigadier 
General, Brevet, 1898. He served his country thirty-eight years, and was finally re- 
tired at his own request. In political belief Mr. Seward was a staunch Republican. 
He died August 16, 1905, leaving a widow, Louisa M., and the following children: 
Elizabeth L. Madden of Troy, N. Y. ; William Seward of Hartford, Conn. ; Louise 
Roe Seward of New York; Edward Townsend Seward, New Rochelle, N. Y. ; George 
Schermerhom Seward, and Julia Lockwood Seward of New York City. 

WILLIAM SHEEHY who for the past fifteen years has been engaged in the hotel 
business at Mabbetsville, town of Washington, N. Y.,.is a native of Ulster County. 

In 1868 he came to Dutchess County, locating at Lithgow, where he entered the 
employ of Caleb Holmes, and received for the first eight months the meagre salary 
of $3.00 a month. He was later employed by Timothy Conklin with whom he re- 
mained twelve years and became manager of the place. The next three years he 
spent on the Homer Wheaton place, and a like period with Edwin Thorne. He 
then became manager of the property of E. Wright Vail where he continued nine 
years. 

Socially Mr. Sheehy is prominently identified with the Benevolent Protective 
Order of Elks, and has a large circle of friends throughout Dutchess county. 

L. LAWSON SLATER was born in West Hurley, Ulster County, N. Y. Sept. 19, 
1873 and became a resident of Poughkeepsie in the year 1882. He was educated 
in the public schools and at the age of 17 entered the printing office of Mr. A. V. 
Haight, where he continually advanced until in the year 1904 he was appointed 
Superintendent of the establishment. On January 1st, 1907 he was admitted as a 
member of the A. V. Haight Company and elected one of its directors. 

Mr. Slater was for a nimiber of years greatly interested in military affairs. He 
volimteered at the outbreak of the Spanish war and served as first Sergeant of Com- 
pany K 1st Regt. N. Y. V. in the Hawaiian Islands. On December 6, 1898 he was 
promoted 2nd Lieutenant and served as such until April 1890 when he was mustered 
out with his regiment. In December 1904 Mr. Slater received his Commission as 
2nd Lieutenant in Company K 10th Regt. N. G. N. Y. and served in that capacity 
until May 2, 1907 when he resigned. 

Socially, Mr. Slater is a member of J. K. Sague Camp -44 U. S. W. V., Pough- 
keepsie Lodge -21 1. O. O. F. Past Councilor of Harvey G. Eastman Council -97 Jr. 
O. U. A. M. and Commander of the Uniformed Rank of the last mentioned order. 

In January 1902 Mr. Slater married Miss Lena C. Goodfriend, daughter of Mr. 
and Mrs. Felix Goodfriend; a daughter, Margarita, is the issue of this marriage. 

THE SLEIGHT FAMILY. Henry Sleight, born 1740, and his wife, Margaret 
Simpson, bom 1746, came from Long Island to the town of CUnton, Dutchess 
County, N. Y. in 1768, and settled on the farm known as the Alpheus C. Briggs' 
farm, wfeere they kept a tavern in the house still standing. Their children were :. 
Daniel H., who married Deborah Humphrey; Henry married Mary Van Vliet;. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 769 

Simpson married Rowland; Jacob married Lydia Van Vliet; Mary; 

Anna; John; Margaret married Barnes; Robert married Elizabeth 

; Sally married Jacob Lawless; Martin married Achsha Williams. The 

Sleight family, in the male line, is now extinct. 

CHARLES H. SLOCUM, Treasurer of Dutchess county, N. Y., was born in Pawl- 
ing in 1861. At an early age his parents removed to the town of Beekman, Dutch- 
ess county, where our subject received his education, and later taught school for a 
few years. He then engaged in general mercantile business in the town of Beek- 
man, and held the office of Postmaster for twelve years. 

Politically Mr. Slocum is a Democrat, and in 1885 was elected Supervisor of the 
town of Beekman. For several years he filled the position of travelling salesman for 
Edward M. Depew & Co., wholesale grocers, New York City, resigning January 1, 
1908, to assume the duties of County Treasurer, to which he had been elected in 
November, 1907, which he has filled with diligence and fidelity. He is also pres- 
ident and treasurer of the Standard American Electric Company of New York 
City. February 12, 1885, Mr. Slocum was united in marriage with Miss Ella M. 
Odell of South Amenia, N. Y. They are the parents of two children: Blanche and 
Russell. 

WILLIAM C. SMILLIE was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, September 23, 1818, 
a son of David and EUzabeth (Cvunmings) Smillie. His father was a silversmith, 
and removed with his family to Quebec, Canada, when William was eight years old. 
There William acquired his schooling, and learned the rudiments of engraving under 
his father's supervision. Following his father's death in 1827 the family removed 
to New York, where William entered the employ of Rawdon, Wright, Hatch & Co., 
banknote engravers, and was for some time in charge of the Philadelphia office of 
the firm. It was in Philadelphia that he met his wife, Agnes Earle, and they were 
married October 10, 1843, after which Mr. Smillie became a. member of the firm. 
His specialty was the engraving of the lettering on bank notes, his brother James 
engraving the vignettes. 

In 1856 he purchased a place on the Hyde Park road above Poughkeepsie. His 
brother James had preceded him here, and was then living at "Springside." Wil- 
liam C. Smillie built the house now owned by Mr. and Mrs. Henry H. Van Cleef, and 
lived there until 1866, when he went to Ottawa, Canada, and organized the British 
American Bank-note Company. Its headquarters were removed in 1871 to Mon- 
treal, where Mr. Smillie lived for a time, retiring finally from business in 1874, when 
he returned to Poughkeepsie. 

Mr. and Mrs. Smillie celebrated their golden wedding in 1893 while living in the 
house now part of the estate of Judge Taylor, Hamilton street. Mrs. Smillie sur- 
vives with one son, Walter de Forest, and two grandsons. 

ISAAC SMITH, an early settler in Dutchess county, was born at Hempstead, L. I., 
Septehiber 9, 1722. January 2, 1744 he was united in marriage with Margaret Piatt, 
at St. George's Church, Hempstead. They came to the precinct of Amenia and set- 



770 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

tied at the square, about six miles north of Lithgow. Here he built a house for him- 
self which is still standing, and here he died, March 29, 1795, and is buried in the 
Smith Cemetery, just opposite. Mr. Smith was a large slave holder. His son, Isaac 
Smith, Jr., bought the property in 1813 and came here to Uve. He had married 
Phebe Lewis in 1794. He died at Lithgow in 1825. Further reference to this family 
will be found on page 482 of this publication. 

JOHN T. SMITH, merchant and bank president, Fishkill-on-the-Hudson, N. Y., 
was bom at Matteawan, N. Y., July 15, 1840, a son of Silas G. Smith, for many years 
identified with the commercial and financial development of the town of Fishkill. 
The education of the subject of this review was obtained in public and private 
schools, and in 1857 he entered the employ of his father in the dry goods business, 
and in 1861 became a member of the now widely known firm of S. G. & J. T. Smith. 

On the organization of the Mechanics Savings Bank in 1866 Mr. Smith was elect- 
ed secretary, and served in that capacity until the death of his father in 1883, when 
he was elected to succeed him as president, which position he has since occupied. 

In 1886 he succeeded James Mackin as president of the First National Bank of 
Fishkill Landing, the position he holds at the present time. These banks have 
always retained the full confidence of the pubUc, and never during the time of 
the most serious national panic and disaster has there been a run, or any indication 
of want of faith in their stability or in the integrity of their officers. 

Up to 1892 the local transportation between the villages of Fishkill Landing, 
Matteawan and Glenham was by stage, and this impelled Mr. Smith and some 
friends to form a more expeditious mode of transit. Accordingly the Citizens' 
Street Railway Company was organized and cars put in operation August 27, 1892. 
In 1895 the Fishkill Electric Railway Company was organized, and Mr. Smith was 
elected president. The road was completed to Fishkill Village June 13, 1895. 

Mr. Smith was one of the promoters of the Mt. Beacon Association that con- 
structed the incline railway up Mount Beacon in 1900. The large demand for 
•electric power occasioned by the increased business of the railroad, the incline 
railway, and the demand from manufacturers, made it necessary to largely increase 
the power plant and an arrangement was made between the Railroad Company and 
the Carroll Electric Company, the owners of the Electric plant, to merge the two 
companies under a new organization. The Citizens Railroad, Light and Power Com- 
pany. The organization was completed in 1901 and Mr. Smith was made president. 
The electric plant was remodeled and enlarged. 

In 1906 the gas plant was acquired, the operation of which under the laws of the 
State required a separate organization and the Southern Dutchess Gas & Electric 
Co. was formed with Mr. Smith as President. 

Mr. Smith served several years on the Board of Education and as trustee of the 
village of Fishkill Landing and was president of the village from 1877 to 1882. 
Prom 1882 to 1886 he represented the town of Fishkill in the Board of Supervisors 
and was twice elected Chairman of the Board. 

Mr. Smith represented the First District of Dutchess County in the Assembly 
from 1898 to 1904 and served as Chairman of the Committee on Banks during the 
last four years of his service. One of the important measures that he procured the 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 771 

passage of was the bill that put a stop to the plan of the City of New York to divert 
and appropriate the waters of the Fishkill and Wappingers streams to the city water 
supply. 

Mr. Smith was married in 1866 to Carolyn A., daughter of Rev. John B. and Mary 
A. Pitman, they have four children, Bertram L., Arthur Raymond, Clarence A. 
and Elsie A. The sons are associated with their father in business. 

GEORGE V. L. SPRATT, Corporation Counsel of the city of Poughkeepsie, was 
bom in this city March 25, 1873. After finishing his preliminary studies in the 
public schools of his native city he began the study of law in the office of Hon. 
Henry M. Taylor, and was admitted to practice in;the courts of New York State 
May 15, 1894. PoKtically Mr. Spratt is a Democrat, and in public life has served 
one term as PoUce Commissioner, and was appointed Corporation Counsel of the 
city of Poughkeepsie January 1, 1908, to fill an unexpired term. He was re-appoint- 
ed to this office January 1, 1909. 

When war was declared between the United States and S^ia Mr. Spratt enlisted 
as a private in the First United States Signal Corps, and served in the Ninth Com- 
pany, U. S. V. S. C. in the first Porto Rican expedition under General Miles. He 
was discharged with the rank of Sergeant, and has since been engaged in the prac- 
tice of his profession in Poughkeepsie. 

CHARLES GILBERT SPROSS, composer, pianist and organist is a native of 
Poughkeepsie. His chosen career of music was begun quite early in life studying 
piano with Prof. Kuehn and harmony with Miss Helen Andrews, in Poughkeepsie. 
His natitral aptitude for organ study and playing placed him very early in the pos- 
ition of organist of St. Paul's Episcopal Church of this city, a position he occupied 
for eight years. He spent several months in travel through the old world and 
upon his return entered the Scharwenka school in New York city, taking up com- 
position, harmony and an advanced piano course, the latter with Xavier Schar- 
wenka. 

His reputation as organist went with him to New York, and in consequence he 
was appointed organist of the second Presbyterian church, Paterson, N. J., a 
position he held for three years, resigning to take the position of director and 
organist of Rutgers Presbyterian Church, New York, where he remained six years. 
He was again appointed organist of the Second Presby1:erian Chtirch, Paterson, 
N. J. and has since occupied that position. 

Mr. Spross is the pianist of the famous Mendelssohn Trio Club, of New York city. 
His brilliant pianism and scholarly interpretation, whether in solo or in ensemble 
has gained for him a deserved appreciation from public and press of which any ar- 
tist may be proud. He has played in every State east of the Mississippi river and 
his services are in demand by many of the noted artists, such as Mme. Nordica, 
Mme. Jomelli and others. 

As a composer, Mr. Spross has emphasized the talent that is innate, each and 
every composition showing the exceptional gifts of the composer. The following 
are some erf his best known compositions: "Jean"; "Eventide and Thee"; "For- 
ever and a Day"; "Ask me no more"; "I love, and the world is mine."; "My 



772 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

Light"; "A Nocturne"; "Go, lovely Rose;" "A White Rose" ; "Gathered Roses" ; 
"Her cheek is Kke a tinted Rose"; "In April"; "The Wind"; "Love planted my 
Rose"; "Thoughts of You" ; "I know"; "Yesterday and Today"; "Tomorrow"; 
"The Call"; "Sunrise and Sunset" ; "Dreaming"; "Will-o-the-Wisp" ; "Morning 
and Evening"; "Lover-Bloom" 

Mr. Spross has also written numerous works for piano, and many anthems and 
choral works for both male and female choruses. Mr. Spross was bom in Pough- 
keepsie, January 6, 1874, a son of Michael and Louisa (Ranch) Spross, with whom he 
still makes his home. 

W. J. STORM, a descendant of one of Dutchess county's early residents, was 
born at Stormville, N. Y., July 9, 1845. He acqmred his education at the Dutchess 
Academy and the Albany High School, and as a young man was engaged in farming 
in his native town. In 1873 he purchased from his father the old homestead at 
Stormville. Mr. Storm is also the senior member of the firm of W. J. & W. B. 
Storm, dealers in feed, flour, coal and lumber. 

In 1872 he was united in marriage with Miss Isabelle Horpel, and four children 
have been born to them: G. Horpel, Ethel M., William R., and Isabelle M. 

WALTER HERRICK STOUTENBURGH was bom in the town of Hyde Park, 
N. Y., November 18, 1841. His preliminary education was obtained at Amenia 
Seminary and Fort Edward Institute, after which he was engaged for a time with 
his brother, John A., in the quarrying of slate at Hoosick Falls, N. Y. Mr. Stouten- 
burgh subsequently operated the farm on the old homestead at Hyde Park and was 
engaged in horse raising for a few years. He then removed to Washington, D. C. 
to accept a position in Washington Asylum, where he remained twenty-two years. 
In 1904 he retiimed to his native county and purchased the farm he now occupies 
on the South Road in the town of Poughkeepsie. 

Mr. Stoutenburgh has been twice married. His first wife was Ada Parker, by 
whom he had one son, J. A. Stoutenburgh, now a physician in Washington, D. C. 
For his second wife he chose Sarah Flint Hyatt. They are the parents of one son 
and three daughters: Bameveldt Hyatt; Mrs. James E. Peck, Los Angeles; Mrs. 
Thomas W. Barrett of Poughkeepsie, and Miss Blanche. 

SWEET, ORR & COMPANY, Wappingers Falls, N. Y. and elsewhere. The 
firm of Sweet, Orr & Co. was founded by James A. Orr, who was the pioneer of the 
overall business. Mr. Orr gained an enviable reputation in overall making, com- 
mencing in California in 1849. In 1871 he came East and having interested his 
nephews, Messrs. Cla3rtpn E. and Clinton W. Sweet, in his scheme, he started the 
first factory in Wappingers Falls, Dutchess County, N. Y. 

From a very small beginning the firm has made great strides. The early factory 
which was small, was enlarged in 1876. There were then 250 employes and a week- 
ly piteduct of 1,000 dozen pairs. By this time the firm had gained the reputation 
of making a "Never Rip" overall, a hand-made button-hole that would not wear 
out and a button that would not come off. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 773 

In 1880, as there was need of greater facilities for manufacturing, the firm de- 
cided to start an additional and larger factory in Newburgh, which, due to the cen- 
tra;! location and transportation facilities, became and has continued the principal 
factory; additions and improvements were made from time to time. The output 
of the company was then so large that offices and ware-rooms were opened in New 
York. Thomson E. Goring was Superintendent of the Wappingers Falls plant 
and C. W. Bartrum is Superintendent of the Newburgh factory. In 1900 Sweet, 
Orr & Co. operated 1,450 machines and employed 1,800 people. There were 39 
salesmen, and offices in New York, Chicago and Newburgh. 

The demand for Sweet, Orr & Go's goods growing greater, the capacity for manu- 
facturing was increased and factories were opened in New York, Brooklyn, Phila- 
delphia, Port Jervis, Joliet, 111. and New Orleans, La. 

It must not be supposed that Sweet, Orr & Co. are confined to the manufacture 
of overalls — ^by no means — that is the firm's foundation of their business, but trous- 
ers are made, ranging in prices from that payable by the working man to that paid 
at the finest of custom tailors. Coats are made suitable for truckmen, drivers^ 
engineers; and for men in all kindred position also working, flannel and outiflg shirts. 

In 1909 there are twelve factories run by Sweet, Orr & Co. They are situated as 
follows : Wappingers Falls, two in Newburgh, three in New York City, Brooklyn, 
three in Philadelphia, one in Port Jervis, one in Joliet, 111., and one in New Orleans, 
La. Some 2,000 odd machines are operated and employment is given to upwards 
of 2,500 people. Mr. Robert A. Clarke, of New York, is head of the Advertising 
and Sales Departments; there are 66 salesmen under his charge. Mr. Charles E, 
Howe, of Summit, N. J., is the head of the Buying Department. The main offices 
and warerooms are situated at 817-819 Broadway, New York City, Newburgh, N. 
Y., Chicago, 111. Philadelphia, Pa., Dallas, Texas, and New Orleans, La. 

The superintendents of the factories are: D. L. Walker, Wappingers Falls; C. W. 
Bartrum, Newburgh; James A. Orr, Jr., Port Jervis; W. J. Cummings, Western 
manager of Chicago and Joliet, 111. Mr. T. E. Goring, formerly Supt. of the original 
factory at Wappingers Palls, Dutchess County, N. Y., is now Manager of the Manu- 
facturing Department.. It was due to Mr. Goring's love of flowers and desire to 
beautify his town and make the factory attractive, that the depressing effect of 
bare brick walls, common to factory buildings, is entirely eliminated. The walls 
are covered in summer with creeping ivy and clematis, and in the windows are 
boxes and on the roof tubs containing flowering plants, while in the office and fac- 
tory, here and there, are potted plants. 

Mr. Orr died in 1899, and Mr. Clayton E. Sweet in 1909, but the name is still 
carried on as originally adopted. The firm is well known to the trade and in the 
business world in general for its broad, liberal and honorable poHcies. Sweet, Orr 
& Co. revolutionized the clothing trade of this country by offering neat, well made 
and serviceable garments at small cost, and have been of incalculable benefit to 
the working classes. Their trade extends all over this great country, to South 
America and across the Atlantic. 

GEORGE K. TABER, deceased, was born February 5, 1822, at the Taber home- 
stead about two miles below the village of Pawling. At the age of twenty-one years 



774 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

he graduated from the old Dutchess County Academy at Poughkeepsie, and then en- 
gaged in fanning in his native town. Mr. Taber was prominently identified with 
pubUc and business affairs of his native place. He was for many years a director of 
the First National Bank of PawUng. In political belief he was a staunch Prohibition- 
ist. 

In October 1845 Mr. Taber was united in marriage with Charlotte Field of Pawling 
N. Y., and they became the parents of five children: Gilbert F., deceased; Anna K., 
deceased ; Martha A. ; Alicia, and Lottie who died at the age of eighteen years. 

LEWIS TOMPKINS came of English origin. The first of his ancestors whom we 
will mention was Stephen, who had the distinction of being the father of sixteen 
children, from whom descended so many of the Tompkins' name. In coming from 
England the earUest settlers located, it is thought, in Connecticut ; thence moving 
into Westchester County, New York, there to engage in tilling the soil in common 
with all of those pioneers, clearing off the forests to become in time fruitful fields 
and rich pasture lands. 

James Tompkins, a son of Stephen, was the next ancestor in line. He was a 
brother of Jonathan Griffin Tompkins. Both rendered important service during 
the Revolutionary War, acting on the side of the patriots, which evidenced the 
truest courage as Westchester County at that time was overrun with Tories, and 
neighbor was arrayed against neighbor and friend against friend; much of it was 
neutral ground not to be claimed by either. It may be remarked in passing that 
Jonathan Griffin Tompkins was the father of Daniel D. Tompkins, who graduated 
from college, read law to practice it with distinguished merit, was a Member of 
Congress, Supreme Court Judge and Governor, and honored Vice-President under 
the presidency of Monroe. 

The son of James Tompkins was Solomon, who grew up in the same calling as 
did his son Solomon, who migrated with him Some years later to the then wilds of 
Greene County where now is the village of Ashland, to which region settlers were 
then coming. The second Solomon was the father of the subject of this sketch. 
He had only those limited advantages of that early time, but he took his place 
among the most worthy. He married Betsey, daughter of Timothy Randall of 
Roxbury, Delaware County. Mrs. Solomon Tompkins, nearly ninety-five years of 
age is still living in Matteawan with her married daughter, Mrs. S. A. Coldwell. 

Lewis Tompkins was born on his father's farm at Ashland, August 5th, 1836. 
In his younger days he worked on the farm in summer, and attended the district 
school for a few weeks in winter. He early showed those characteristics of perser- 
verance and untiring energy which he carried through Kfe. In his seventeenth 
year he gave up farming and went to work for the firm of Strong & Ruggles, wool 
hat manufacturers at Ashland, where he remained about three years. In 1852 
he formed a partnership with Leveritt Conine, manufacturing wool hats, which 
venture proved tmprofitable. Undaunted still he set his face westward with hardly 
enough money in his pocket to pay his way to Chicago, from which place he wended 
his Wby on foot to Kansas, often sleeping on the prairie. After much hardship he 
finally reached Manhattan, Kansas, setting up his new home on a government claim 
on Blue River. His energy and intelligence soon attracted attention and he became 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 775 

one of the delegates to the Topeka Convention, there taking part in the adopting of 
a Constitution for the new State. He was an anti-slavery man and, naturally, a 
great admirer of Abraham Lincoln. Mr. Tompkins remained in the West about two 
years, returning to New York State in the year 1859, at twenty-two years of age. 
For a few months he worked at hat finishing with Willcox & Draper, Middletown, 
N. Y., afterward going to Matteawan, N. Y. where he was for several years engaged 
in the Seamless Clothing Manufacturing Company. During a portion of the time, 
while with the last named Company, he carried on the business of Merchant Tailor- 
ing and Gent's Furnishing Goods, both at Fishkill Landing and Matteawan. But he 
was not at rest even there; he purchased much real estate, laid out streets, erected 
buildings, thereby adding to his own prosperity as well as to that of the town. In 
1872 he sold out nearly all of his business interests, spending the year abroad. On 
his return a new enterprise was set on foot, namely, a large hat manufactory 
near the river at Fishkill Landing. The extensive buildings of the Dutchess Hat 
Works were begun in 1873, starting off into full operation the following year. From 
time to time it was found to be necessary to enlarge the pl%nt; later a branch was 
built at Tioronda, a mile or so away, and still later an establishment was purchased 
at Middletown, New York. 

Mr. Tompkins was twice married, his first wife being Miss Van Voorhis. Their 
son, Charles Randall, died in early manhood. His second wife was Miss Helen E. 
Mathers, of Wellsboro, Pa. Their three children Mrs. Paull J. Challen, Mrs. Louise 
W. Stotesbury and Mr. Ralph S. Tompkins, still survive him. Mr. Lewis Tompkins 
died January 9, 1894. 

RALPH S. TOMPKINS, president and treasurer of the R. S. Tompkins Co., hat 
manufacturers at Fishkill-on-the-Hudson, N. Y., was born May 13, 1876, a son of 
the late Lewis Tompkins, who for many years was prominently identified with the 
industrial and commercial development of the town of Fishkill. 

Ralph Tompkins was educated at St. Paul's School, and at the age of nineteen 
years became interested in the Dutchess Hat Works, which his father established, 
and is now president of that extensive industry. September 1, 1906, he organized 
the R. S. Tompkins Co., for the manufacture of men's straw hats. This plant has 
an output of 12,000 dozen annually, and gives employment to 150 persons. 

Mr. Tompkins is a director of the First National Bank of Fishkill Landing, a 
director of the Mattaewan National Bank, and a trustee of the Mechanics Savings 
Bank of Fishkill Landing. 

In political views Mr. Tompkins is a Republican, and in 1903 was appointed by 
President Roosevelt to the office of Post master, Fishkill-on-the-Hudson, and was 
reappointed in 1907. 

In 1898 Mr. Tompkins married Lillian C, daughter of the late Joseph H. Weller, 
of the New York wholesale dry-goods house of Tefft, Weller & Co. They are the 
parents of three children, Ralph Lewis, Richard Weller and Frederick Gordon. 

JOHN E. TOWNSEND, Under-Sheriff of Dutchess County, was born at La 
GrangeviUe in the town of La Grange, November 21, 1866. His education was 



776 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

obtained at Wesleyan Academy, Wilbraham, Mass., after which he was engaged in 
fanning and stock buying for the New York market. 

In political belief, Mr. Townsend is a Democrat, and has taken an active part in 
the public affairs of his native town and county. In 1897 he was elected Super- 
visor of the town of La Grange and filled that oflSce continuously until 1903. In 
January, 1908, he was appointed by Sheriff Chanler to the office of Under-Sheriff 
of Dutchess County, a position he has filled with diligence and fidelity. 

December 5, 1894, Mr. Townsend was united in marriage with Miss Edith Landon, 
and they are the parents of two children, Landon and Richard Ken worthy. 

THE TRAVER FAMILY. Among the early settlers of Pleasant Plains was Se- 
.bastian Traver, who settled on the farm owned by Thomas Cookingham, a Uttle later 
than 1750; this was a portion of the land known as the 700 acre lot in the western part 
of the Great Nine Partners which was originally purchased by Francis Van Dyke, 
Adolphus Banker and Joost Garrison in the year 1741. Sebastian Traver's wife was 
Christina Uhl, daughter of Henrich Uhl. Their children were: Nicholas, bom 1720, 
married Catherine Lambert; Henrich, baptized July 29, 1722, married Eva Eckert; 
Catharine, baptized December 1, 1723; Susanna married Jacob Reisley; Frederick 
married Maria Barbara Eckert; Peter married Magdalena Teal; David married 
(April 8, 1755) Catharine Lewis; Joseph, baptized December 16, 1732, married (May 
11, 1769) Rebecca Van Etten; Anna Maria, bom May 11, 1734, married (Dec. 9, 
1756) Daniel Cookingham; Johannes B., baptized October 17, 1736, married (May 
30, 1762) Catherine Becker; Carl, baptized November 7, 1738, married Jemmima, 
daughter of Capt. Joost Garrison; Margaret. 

The numerous family of Travers of the towns of CUnton, Hyde Park and Rhine- 
beck are largely descendants of this family. 

WILLIAM J. TRAVER was born in the town of Hyde Park September 1, 1863. 
He received his education in the district schools and De Garmo Institute. He then 
engaged in the occupation of farming on land which had been in the Traver family 
for a century. Mr. Traver disposed of this property in 1905, and after travelling 
extensively accepted a position with Mr. Odgen Mills, and is now acting superin- 
tendent of Mr. Mills' country estate in Dutchess county. 

EVERETT HUSTIS TRAVIS, attorney, Poughkeepsie, was bom at Garrison, N. 
Y., a son of Rev. Richard H., and Hannah M. (Hustis) Travis. He prepared for 
college at the Hudson River Insitute, Claverack, N. Y. and graduated from Wesly- 
an University, Middletown, Conn, in 1889, with the degree of A. B. He read law 
in the office of Judge Daniel W. Guernsey, and was admitted to the Bar in 1891, 
after which he formed a partnership with the late Judge Horace D. Hufcut. 

Mr. Travis was elected Justice of the Peace in 1894, and served four years. In 
November 1908, he was elected on the Republican ticket a Member of Assembly 
from' the second Dutchess district. He is a member of the Masonic fraternity, 
Poughkeepsie Yacht Club, Chamber of Commerce and Civic League and a trustee 
of Vassar Brothers Home for Aged Men. 

September 5, 1894, Mr. Travis married Mary E. Tabor, They have one child, a 
daughter, Lois. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 777 

H. B. TURNBULL, who is engaged in the real estate business in the city of 
Poughkeepsie, was born in New York City, March 22, 1860, where he attended the 
public schools, and later the military school at Norwalk, Conn. He was then for 
some years connected with the real estate firm of Quincy & Co., of Boston and New 
York. He then entered the employ of the New York, Susquehanna and Western 
Railroad as auditor, remaining with this company until it was merged with the 
Erie Railroad. In 1898 Mr. TurnbuU came to Poughkeepsie, where he has built 
up an extensive and lucrative real estate business. He is a member of the Pough- 
keepsie Chapter of Masons, of the Y. M. C. A., and secretary and treasurer of the 
Sunday School of the Second Reformed Church. 

ROBERT K. TUTHILL, M. D., son of Samuel Tuthill, M. D., who came to 
Poughkeepsie in 1848, and was a leading physician here for many years, was bom 
in Newburgh, N. Y. He was trained to follow in the footsteps of his father by thor- 
ough classical and preliminary courses, and graduated from the New York Medical 
College in the class of 1859. He commienced practice herS that year, but respond- 
ing to the call of his country early in 1861, was appointed Assistant Surgeon of the 
80th N. Y. Vols. In April, 1863, he was promoted to the post of Regimental Sur- 
geon of the 145th N. Y. Infantry, and in June of the same year was advanced to 
Brigade Surgeon of the First Brigade (six regiments) , First Division, Twelfth Army 
Corps. Early in 1864 he was made Surgeon in Chief of the First Division (fourteen 
regiments) of the twelfth Army Corps. He was in all the principal battles of the 
Army of the Potomac, and also did duty in the Army of the Cumberland. By his 
devotion to sanitary regulations, and his general ability as a surgeon he made and 
kept his regiment and brigade in such a healthy and efficient condition that he re- 
ceived special commendation from the War Department therefor. Resuming pri- 
vate practice in Poughkeepsie in 1864, Dr. Tuthill soon attained the highest emi- 
nence in his profession by the same watchful and faithful care which won him dis- 
tinction in the field. 

Dr. Tuthill 's hospital service was extensive and notably successful. He had 
■charge of the Fredericksburgh Hospital in 1862, was member of the surgical staff 
of St. Barnabas Hospital in Poughkeepsie from its organization in 1870 until its 
close in 1887, was one of the surgeons selected by the founders of Vassar Brothers' 
Hospital, on its opening in 1887, and served until 1898, and since been a member 
of its consulting staff. He visited many hospitals and attended many clinics in 
Europe, viz : in London, Paris, Berlin and Vienna, seeking to gain new methods 
and experience for home work. 

In politics Dr. Tuthill was a staunch Republican, but never sought or desired 
public office, and accepted none except the position of Health Officer of the city, 
which post he filled for four terms. He was president of the Dutchess County 
Medical Society for two terms; was a member of the New York State Medical So- 
cieljy from 1880 a member of the New York Commandery, Loyal Legion of America, 
amd a charter member of Hamilton Post, No. 20, G. A. R. He was also affiliated 
with Masonry, and was a Knight Templar. Dr. Tuthill had hosts of friends who 
believed in him, because he proved himself a true and sincere man and a con- 
scientious, faithful and vigilant physician and surgeon. 



778 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

HENRY HOWELL VAN CLEEP, attorney, Poughkeepsie, N. Y., was bom in 
this city June 8, 1871. After attending Bishop's and Leslie's private schools and 
the Poughkeepsie High School he entered Cornell University, from which he was 
graduated in the class of 1893. His legal education was acquired in the office of 
his father, the late J. Spencer Van Cleef, and at the New York Law School; he was. 
admitted to the Bar June 8, 1898. 

Mr. Van Cleef was united in marriage with Mary T. Thompson November 4, 1905^ 
and they are the parents of two children: Henry Howell and William Reed Thomp- 
son. 

DANIEL VAN DE BOGART, for many years a prominent resident of Red Hook, 
and one of the leading contractors and builders of the county, was a descendant of 
one of our most distinguished pioneer families, the name of his old Dutch ancestors, 
being closely interwoven with the early history of Dutchess County. 

The great-great-grandfather of the deceased was Myndert Van de Bogart, who in. 
1702, with his brother Jacobus, emigrated from Amsterdam, HoUand, and settled 
on the site of Poughkeepsie. They acquired a large tract of land, and built one of 
the first eleven houses in that city. In 1726, Myndert Van de Bogart was chosen, 
as the first sheriff of Dutchess county. 

The two brothers. Jacobus and Mjmdert, gave the land and contributed liberally 
to the support of the first church in the village, which was to be a Reformed Dutch; 
meeting house. 

The property on which the first court house was built was conveyed by Jacobus^ 
Van de Bogart to Barendt Van Kleeck, in 1718, but the earUest record to the pro- 
perty seems to be that of Nov. 13, 1747, a "lease and release" of the land with the 
court-house and "gaols" already built on same, to four of his Majesty's Justices 
of the Peace. The parchment release is preserved in the County Clerk's office 
among the maps. It provides that the property shall revert to the Van de Bogart 
family if used for any other purpose than that for which it was granted. 

The first book of the supervisors and assessors shows that a meeting of the 
"frie houlders" was held at the house of Leonard Lewis, June 22, 1717, and that 
Jacobus Van de Bogart and Barendt Van Kleeck were chosen as a building commit- 
tee for the first court-house and gaol. As the ancestors of the late Daniel Van de 
Bogart gave the land and helped build the first court-house, it would have been 
eminently fitting, had his name gone down in the history of the County as the 
builder of the present one, but his being a member of the Board of Supervisors, at 
the time of its erection, made that impossible. 

Myndert was, in 1744, married to Gretchen Kipp, daughter of Jacob and Engellge 
Pells. His son, Myndert, Jr., was married in 1765 to Hanna Velie. Peter, son of 
Myndert, Jr., was married in 1807 to Mary Maria Wilcox. 

James Van de Bogart, our subject's father, was a Ufelong resident of Poughkeep- 
sie, following the trade of mason. He married Miss Mary I. Windover, of that 
city, and had seven children: James K., who died in infancy, Ellen, Lydia Ann, 
Daniefc Eugenie, James and Harriet. 

Daniel Van de Bogart, the last surviving member of the above family, was bom 
in Poughkeepsie, Dec. 25,1849,and after availing himself of the excellent educational 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 779 

advantages offered in the schools of that city, he learned the trade with William 
Sague, a prominent builder. For a few years he worked at his trade, and then 
went into business for himself at Verbank, where he met with such success that he 
looked about for a wider field of operations. In 1873, he moved to Red Hook, and 
maintained his residence here to the time of his death. 

Mr. Van de Bogart erected many of the finest structures in Eastern New York 
and his home vicinity. Among the most notable are the two beautiful residences 
at Summit, N. J., built for Miss Donaldson and Mrs. Bronson; St. Paul's Lutheran 
Church and the Methodist Episcopal Church at Red Hook; the residence of John 
Henry Livingston and the De Peyster Memorial Chtirch at Tivoli; St. Paul's Train- 
ing School and the Hospital for Consumptives at Verbank; the country homes of 
Stuyvesant Fish at Garrison, and of Mrs. Hastings at Staatsburg; and the Red 
Hook High School building. This building in architectural beauty and skillful 
workmanship is said to be the finest school building in the county. 

On Sept. 3, 1873, Mr. Van de Bogart was married to Miss Estelle Pulver of Red 
Hook. Of this union eight children were bom: AUard A., Mary I., Edna, Daniel, 
Earnest, Lucinda, who died in infancy, and Myndert Jacobus. 

In politics he was a staunch Democrat, and to the day of his death was the recog- 
nized leader of the strong, conservative element of that party in his town. In 1893 
he was nominated for Supervisor of his town, and in 1901 he was again nominated 
and elected by an overwhelming majority, the first Democrat in twelve years to 
attain that honor. When the village was incorporated in 1894, he was one of the 
chief promulgators of this movement, and was chosen one of the trustees, and held 
the office of President of the Village 

Mr. Van de Bogart died April 8, 1909, in the prime of his manhood. It is one of 
the consolations of a useful life thus suddenly terminated that the memory of a 
good man shall not die; that the remembrance of his services and virtues shall be 
preserved as an inheritance to his children, and an incentive to those who knew 
and loved him. 

DR. FEDERAL VANDER BURGH was bom in the town of Beekman, Dutchess 
Co., N. Y., May 11, 1788, and died at Rhinebeck, Dutchess Co., N. Y., January 23„ 
1868. He was the son of Colonel James Vander Burgh and Helena Vander Burgh. 
His father (born 1709 — died 1794) had a long and distinguished career. He be- 
came a member of the Provincial Congress, and a Colonel in the American Army 
in the War of the Revolution. He entertained General Washington at his home in 
the town of Beekman on a nimiber of occasions. 

Dr. Vander Burgh's grand-father, Henry Vander Burgh, was one of the first set- 
tlers in Poughkeepsie, and among the most prominent men in the country in his; 
time. He was one of its first Board of Assessors in 1716 ; the first supervisor of the 
territory between Wappinger Falls and little Esopus Island in 1720, and Coimty 
Clerk in 1721. His will shows him to have been possessed of a large property for 
those days. Dr. Vander Burgh's father in his will expressed the desire that his son 
"be prepared for the study of Physics, if he shall be agreeable, when he comes of 
suitable age" and wisely following his father's will, he became one of the most dis- 
tinguished physicians of his time. He enjoyed a large, fashionable and lucrative- 



780 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

practice in New York City for many years, and was the author of many valuable 
publications on medical subjects. He was the founder of Homeopathy in this coun- 
try, and devoted his life to spreading its beneficent methods. 

Dr. Vander Burgh married March 5, 1812, Esther Orinda Boardman, daughter of 
Homer Boardman of New Milford, Connecticut. Only two of his children grew to 
maturity, — Mary Helen, who married John B. James, of Albany, N. Y., and Char- 
lotte, who married Robert McKim of Baltimore, Md. 

The latter years of his life were passed at his beautiful country home, on the 
banks of the Hudson River, about three miles from the village of Rhinebeck, 
Dutchess Co., N. Y. Dr. Vander Burgh had a very attractive personality. He 
-was tall (over six feet), erect, finely proportioned; had very regular features, very 
charming manners, and made friends wherever he went. He was greatly beloved 
by his many patients, as he stopped at no personal sacrifice in working for their re- 
covery. His love and enthusiasm for his profession was very great and above aU 
for the great principles of Homeopathy, which he did so much to establish in this 
country. 

HOLMES VANDERWATER, attorney, of Wappingers Palls, N. Y., was born 
at Hyde Park, Dutchess county, May 27, 1886. His preliminary education was ob- 
tained in the public schools of his native place and at Poughkeepsie. He continued 
his studies at Cornell University, from which institution he was graduated in 1907. 
Mr. Vanderwater was soon after admitted to the Bar and imtnediately began the 
practice of his profession with oflBces at Wappingers Falls and Poughkeepsie. 

Socially Mr. Vanderwater is a member of Poughkeepsie Lodge, F. & A .M. 

THE VAN DYKE FAMILY: Francis Van Dyke, grandson of Franz Claissen 
Van Dyke, who came to New Amsterdam before 1655, was an early settler in the 
Crom Elbow Precinct. He purchased a lot of 1000 acres in the westerly part of the 
Great Nine Partners bordering on the Crom Elbow creek. It comprised what is 
now the farms of Mrs. H. Schultz, Lount Lattin, William F. Odell, M. Hayes, J. Z. 
Frost, George H. Schultz, W. L. Traver, and part of the C. W. Carpenter farm. 
Francis Van Dyke was born in New York, November 25, 1683. He married, De- 
cember 8, 1713, Rensule Montros. Their children were: Franz, baptized October 
17, 1714; Magdalena, baptized October 21, 1716, married Joost Garrison; Petrus, 
baptized October 5, 1718; Jacobus, baptized April 18, 1721, married Catharina, 
daughter of the first Albrutus Schryver; Margaret, baptized April 25, 1724, mar- 
ried Richbill Williams; Cornelius, baptized June 24, 1727, married Mercy Phillips; 
Cathalina, baptized June 19, 1731, married Peter Storm. 

GARRET VAN KEUREN who was born at Rhinebeck, N. Y., was descended 
. from a long line of patriots and of men of public affairs. 

With Abram Van Keuren, grandfather of Garret, the Revolutionary record of 
the family begins. Abram was elected Supervisor of Kingston, N. Y. for six- 
teen terms, when having signed the agreement to maintain the Constitutional 
rights he enlisted in the Ulster Militia holding the rank of Captain in Colonel Jo- 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 781 

hannis Snyder's Regiment in which his son Abram Van Keuren, Jr. served as Cor- 
poral, having previously served in Col. Levi Pawling's Regiment. 

With Abram Van Keuren, Jr., the family came to Rhinebeck, for in May 1783 he 
purchased the farm now known as Springbrook which for a century and a quarter 
remained the home of his descendants. In 1777 he married Eve Dumont also the 
daughter of a Revolutionary soldier in whose veins flowed the blood of the Rutgers 
and the Schuylers. 

Their son, Garret Van Keuren, served once as Sheriff of Dutchess County., 
He was not a lawyer, yet was constantly interviewed for legal advice. He was as- 
sociated always with the most influential men and women of his day. Morgan 
Lewis, Mrs. Janet Montgomery, (wife of General Richard Montgomery) , Mrs. Edward 
Livingston as well as Edward Livingston himself were his intimate friends. Among 
his private papers are their powers of attorney, giving him unlimited power in the 
management of their affairs. 

In 1822 he married Sarah Hagadom, who was the daughter, the grand daughter 
and great-great-granddaughter of Revolutionary soldier^ the three generations 
enlisting for the colonies. 

Garret Van Keuren lived all his life in Rhinebeck, dying on the old farm where^ 
he had been born, and in the house which he had helped to build with his own hands. 

He died April 10, 1868, leaving four children, Mary, wife of Isaac Kirby; Julia, 
wife of Thomas Reed; Cora Livingston and Sarah, both of whom were unmarried.. 

THE VAN VLIET FAMILY. About 1740 Aurie Van Vliet and Art Mastin pur- 
chased lot No. 5 and a similar division of the Great Nine Partners' Patent consist- 
ing of 760 acres near Pleasant Plains. Van Vliet and his four sons, Dirck, John, 
Cornelius and Benjamin, settled on this land. John returned to Ulster county and 
settled on lands of his father near Edd3rville; Benjamin removed to Fort Hunter, 
in the Mohawk Valley, in 1772; Cornelius died a bachelor, and Dirck remained 
where he settled and kept the first tavern in the town of Clinton. His wife was. 
Helena, daughter of Johannes Weaver of Rhinebeck. Their children were: Cath- 
erine (probably the first white child born in what is now the town of Clinton) ; she 
married John DeWitt; Charity married Abram FreBgh; Anna married, first, 
Dennis Reylea, second, William Brink; Cornelius married, first, Helena Garrison,, 
second, Susan Piatt; Elizabeth married, first, Benjamin Relyea, second, Conrad 
Sharp; Helena married Ebenezer Babcock; John married Helena ; Der- 
rick married Sarah Mastin; Lydia married Jacob Sleight; Mary married Henry 
Sleight, and Henry married Mary Seaman. Of the above children Cornelius Van. 
Vliet alone remained at Pleasant Plains. His children were: Cornelius married 
Mary Russell; Levi married Mary Uhl; Rachel; John married Mary Beadle; 
Elizabeth; William B.; Clarissa Maria married John Caswell; Henry Hiram mar- 
ried Jane Harris ; Richard Garrison ; Piatt Garrison married Nancy Lamoree. Of 
the above children Levi Van Vliet remained on the old homestead. His children 
were: George married Helen Bard; Lewis U. married, first, Jane Ann Brown, 
second, Mary J. Caswell; Henry Richard married Hannah M. LeRoy. Lewis U. 
and Henry R. both located on portions of their father's property, Lewis where his- 
father lived, and Henry where his grandfather lived. Henry R^ had one child 



782 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

George S. who married Mercedes Tremper of Rhinebeck; their children are: Clara 
Helena Garrison; Henry Richard, 2d, who is the seventh generation of the direct 
male line of Van Vliet's of Pleasant Plains, the line being Anna, born June 10, 1686; 
Derrick, born November 26, 1721; Cornelius, born December 21, 1760; Levi, bom 
January 6, 1786; Henry R., bom December 8, 1833; George S., born September 17, 
1865; Henry R., bom November 22, 1904. 

WALTER VAN WAGNER, who is a descendant of one of Dutchess county's 
oldest residents, was bom at Van Wagner's Station, Dutchess county, January 1, 
1883. He was educated in the public schools and worked for a time on his father's 
farm, and later was employed in the hardware store of J. W. Feedy at Highland, 
Ulster county. Mr. Van Wagner now operates the farm of his aunt, Mrs. Brincker- 
hoS, in the town of Poughkeepsie. 

January 2, 1906 he married Ada Humphrey of Bangall, N. Y., and they are the 
parents of one son, Charles Humphrey. 

J. I. VIGEANT, M. D., is a native of Lee, Mass., where he obtained his pre- 
liminary high school education. He then entered the Albany Medical College, 
from which he was graduated with the degree of M. D. in 1896. He began practice 
at ElizaviUe, Columbia county, N. Y., where he remained seven years, and in 1903 
located in the village of Red Hook, Dutchess county. 

Politically Dr. Vigeant is a Democrat, and in 1908 was the nominee of that party 
for the office of coroner. 

He was united in marriage in 1901 with Clara L. Shook, and they are the parents 
of two children: Clarence H. and Helen Elizabeth. 

PETER H. VOSBURGH was born in the Town of Stu3rvesant, Columbia County, 
March 5, 1850, the eldest son of Aaron and Elizabeth Vosburgh. His education 
was obtained in the district school of his native village, Stujrvesant Landing. At 
the age of 16 years he left school and went to work on his father's farm, and a few 
years later learned the printer's trade and followed that business continuously un- 
til October 1, 1904. 

For a number of years he was local editor of the Matteawan Journal, and in 
February 1901, he, in connection with Morgan H. Ho)rt, purchased that news- 
paper, and together they conducted it for a period of three years, after which 
Mr. Vosburgh sold his interest to Morgan Hoyt, and retired from the printing busi- 
ness. 

In 1890 Mr. Vosburgh was appointed postmaster at Matteawan by President 
Harrison. After serving in that capacity for four and a half years, he was re- 
moved on account of a change in the administration, but was re-appointed by 
President McKinley in 1899, and has received two appointments to the same office 
since, from President Roosevelt. 

Wfeen he took possession of the office in 1899, the fixtures were antiquated, and 
he threw them aside and purchased a complete new set of modem fixtures and in- 
stalled them in place of the old worn out outfit. This increased the availability of 




CHARLES F. WANZER. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 783 

the office for easier and greater work, and greatly improved its appearance. The 
business of the office has doubled during his administration as postmaster, and has 
been advanced in grade from a third to a second-class office. 

He is a member of the Board of Education, and for three years was president of 
the Board. For eight years he was president of the William H. Mase Hook and 
Ladder Comp., and at present is president of the Board of Trustees of the Mattea- 
-wan Methodist Episcopal Church. He is also a member of Beacon Lodge P. and A. 
M. In politics he has always been a Republican, ever zealous for the success of his 
party in National," State and local- affairs. 

DANIEL L. WALKER, superintendent of the Wappingers Falls plant of Sweet, 
Orr & Co., was bop in Brooklyn, N. Y., February 17, 1865, and came with his parents 
to Wappingers- Falls in 1872. After finishing his education at the public schools he 
entered the employ of Sweet, Orr & Co., arid by diligent efiEprton his part was pro- 
moted from time tp time, accepting his present position' in 1900. , 

In 1898 Mr. Walker was united in marriage with Jennie Croak of -Wappingeirs Falls, 
and two children have been born to them: Howard and Esther.' 

Socially Mr. Walker is a member of Wa!ppingers Lodge,' No.'67i;, F. & A.' M. ; La- 
fayette'Lodge No. 18 of Odd Fellows, and is affiUated with the Foresters, the Royal 
Arcanum, the American Mechanics organizations, and the village Fire Department. 

CHARLES F. WANZER. Among the energetic business men, in" the 'town of 
Fishkill, N. Y., none stands higher than the subject' of this sketch'. 

Mr. Wanzer was bom in Phillipstown, Putnam County, January 29, 1828, 
and is a son of Floyd and Jane (Foster) Wanzer, who were also natives of 
Phillipstown. 

Mr. Wanzer attended the district schools, and in 1849, moved with .his parents to 
Matteawan, where he engaged in the grocery business. May 1st, 1858 he succeeded 
to the business formerly conducted by Jacob Palmer, and for over half a century 
has continued in the grocery trade at the same location in Matteawan, meeting 
with an "unusual degree of success. 

Mr. Wanzer has never sought or cared for public office, preferring to devote his 
time to the interests of his trade, and in his eighty-first year is hale and hearty, and 
•enjoys the highest esteem of a host of friends. 

JOHN S.- WARREN, of the town of East Fishkill, Dutchess, county, .was bom in 
-that town September 1, 1872. He received his education.in the schools of his native 
.place, and then became associated with his father in the managernerit of the home- 
stead farm, and with his brother, Charles H., is now engaged in the management of 
two farms which have been in this family for many yeai^s. . 

Mr. Warren was united in marriage.with Minnie B. .Stevens,. and they are the par- 
jeiitsof two children: Ralph J. and Le-wis F. . '_:'■..[■,:,: 

Charles H. Warren, brother of John S., was born November 8, 1876, and has been 
engaged in agricultural pursuits since attaining riianhood. He married Miss Helen 
J. Barrett. 



784 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

FRED BAIN WEAVER, M. D., Hyde Park, N. Y., was bom at Galatinville, N. 
Y., April 12, 1875. Dr. Weaver graduated from the Seymour Smith Academy in 
1895, and began the study of medicine with Dr. H. C. Wilber at Pine Plains. He 
then entered the Albany Medical College, from which he was graduated April 19, 
1898, and served one year as house surgeon in St. Peter's Hospital, Albany. Dr. 
Weaver began practice with his preceptor at Pine Plains, and in September, 1900, 
accepted a position as interne at the Mothers' and Babies' Hospital, New York 
City. He was also connected with the New York Polytechnic Hospital until 
January, 1901. He then served for six months on the surgical staff of Mt. Sinai 
Hospital, New York, and in June, 1901, began practice at Hyde Park. Dr. Weaver 
was appointed surgeon at Hyde Park for the New York Central Railroad Company 
in 1903, which position he still retains. He is a member of the Medical Society of 
Dutchess County; the New York State Medical Society; the American Medical 
•Association, and the New York and New England Association of Railroad Surgeons. 
He is also affiliated with the Masonic fraternity. 

EARL S. WELCH was born in Schenectady, N. Y., December 12, 1881. He 
was educated in the public and high schools of Albany, graduating from the latter 
institution in 1901. In the same year he was employed as clerk in the Northern 
Department of the Teutonic Fire Insurance Co. in their offices in Poughkeepsie, 
and in 1903 was promoted to bookkeeper, which position he now occupies. 

Mr. Welch is a member of Triune Lodge, No. 782, F. & A. M., and Poughkeepsie 
Chapter. He is also district secretary for the Christian Endeavor Union of Dutch- 
ess county. 

WELDON F. WESTON, a representative business man of Fishkill-on-Hudson, 
was bom in Litchfield, New Hampshire April 14, 1856. He attended the Pinker- 
ton Academy, at Deny, N. H., finishing his education at the New Hampshire Con- 
ference Seminary. At the age of twenty he came to Newburgh to accept a position 
as shipping clerk for the Erie R. R. Two years later he returned to New Hamp- 
shire and engaged in mercantile business for a time. From 1880 to 1888 he was 
station agent at Matteawan for the N. D. & C. R. R., and then engaged with his 
brother, the late Major Wilbur H. Weston of Newburgh, N. Y., in the express and 
trucking business in connection with the Matteawan and Fishkill Landing stage 
line until 1892 when the electric railroad superceded the stage route. He was made 
a director of the Street R. R. Co. on its organization, and has remained in the board 
to the present time. He was also for several years a director of the Mechanics' 
Savings Bank, where he was on the funding and examining committee. 

Mr. Weston is still extensively interested in the transportation business at New- 
burgh and Fishkill and also conducts a coal, feed and mason supply business at 
Fishkill-on-Hudson. 

Politically Mr. Weston is a republican. In 1891 he was elected president of the 
village of Matteawan, and in 1892 re-elected without opposition, and has held 
variouB public offices in his adopted town. September 26, 1878, Mr. Weston 
married Anna Jeanette, daughter of Charles M. and Elizabeth A. (Davis) Elkins, 
of Wakefield, Mass. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 785 

Mr. Weston has been a Knight of Pythias for more than thirty years, joining 
that order at Laconia, N. H., becoming a charter member of Mt. Belknap Lodge 
No. 20. Later he joined Hudson River Lodge of Matteawan, N.Y., and is yet a mem- 
ber. He was a Chancellor Commander of his lodge and District Deputy Grand 
Chancellor of this district. 

Mr. Weston is a past Master of Beacon Lodge F. & A. M. of Fishkill-on-Hudson, 
and a member of Highland Chapter and Hudson River Commandery of Newburgh, 
N. Y., and a member of Mecca Temple Nobles of the Mystic Shrine of New York 
City, and is also a member of the Southern Dutchess Country Club and various 
other organizations. 

WILLIAM N. WETTEREAU, who occupies the beautiful country place known 
as "The Meadows," on the South Road in the town of Poughkeepsie, was bom 
September 24, 1877. He received his preliminary education in the public schools 
of New York City, and Dr. Holbrook's Select School, Ossining, N. Y., which was 
supplemented by an academic course in Williams College. Mr. Wettereau has 
travelled extensively, and now enjoys a retired life, devoting his time to the per- 
sonal supervision of his farm. 

MICHAEL J. WHALEN, a prominent citizen, and a leader in Democratic circles, 
in the town of Northeast, was born at Millerton, N. Y., January 6, 1869, and ac- 
quired his education in the public schools of his native place. In 1886 he was con- 
nected with the Newburgh, Dutchess & Connecticut Railroad at Matteawan, N. Y., 
where he remained until 1889, resigning to assume the duties of station agent for 
the New York Central Railroad at Millerton, N. Y., which position he has held con- 
tinuously to the present time, fulfilling his duties with fidelity and diligence. 

For many years Mr. Whalen has taken an active interest in the public affairs'of 
his native place, and is at present Democratic Committeeman of the town of North- 
east. 

He was united in marriage with Katherine E. Garvin, and they are the parents 
of one son, John Garvin. Socially Mr. Whalen is a member of the Knights of Co- 
lumbus. 

THOMAS FRANCIS WHALEN was bom at Cold Spring, Putnam county, 
June 1, 1874. His parents were Malachy Whalen and Margaret Bracken. Very 
shortly after Mr. Whalen's birth, the family moved to Poughkeepsie, N. Y. He re- 
ceived his education in the public schools and at the Poughkeepsie High School. 
After leaving school he was employed as clerk at the Poughkeepsie Cracker Bakery, 
afterwards the American Biscuit Company. 

In 1907 he was elected City Clerk by the Board of Alderman of the city of Pough- 
keepsie, which position he still holds. He is Treasurer of Florentine Council No. 
304 K. of C. and a charter member of this organization. He is also member of 
Division No. 2, A. O. H., Poughkeepsie, N. Y. of which organization he was Presi- 
dent, 1903-1908. He is also a member of St. Peter's Holy Name Society, and was 
its president in 1905-'06. 

In politics Mr. Whalen is a Democrat. 



786 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

HOWELL WHITE, M. D. Fishkill, N. Y. is the eighth generation in descent 
from Thomas White, (bom, 1599) of Weymouth, Mass., who was Representative 
in General Cotirt in 1636 — 37. He died in 1679, leaving five children. 

Second Generation: Ebenezer, the fifth child of Thomas, was born 1648, and died 
August 24, 1703. He married Hannah, daughter of Nicholas Phillips. 

Third Generation: Rev. Ebenezer White, born Feb. 17, 1673, graduated from 
Harvard College in 1692, and died March 4, 1756. He married Hannah Piersons. 
Fourth Generation: Rev. Sylvanus White, third son of Rev. Ebenezer White, 
was bom Dec. 16, 1702 and graduated from Harvard College in 1723. He married- 
Phebe, only daughter of Hezekiah Howell, and had nine children, three of whom 
were physicians. He died Oct. 22, 1782. 

Fifth Generation: Ebenezer, (bom Sept. 3, 1746; died, March 8, 1827) the 
seventh son of Rev. Sylvanus, chose the study of medicine for his profession. In 
early life he married (March 22, 1772) .Helena, daughter of Theophilus Bartow, of 
New Rochelle, and great-granddaughter of General Bartow, who fled from France 
to England in 1685, on the revocation of the edict of Nantes. They had seven chil- 
dren, three of whom were physicians. Dr. and Mrs. Ebenezer White came to West- 
chester County and settled at Yorktown. Some of their descendants are now living, 
in their old home. 

Sixth Generation: Ebenezer, (born June 13, 1779; died, March 20, 1865) the 
second of Dr. Ebenezer, also made choice of the profession of medicine, as did his 
brothers Bartow and Henry. He married (April 8, 1800) Amy, daughter of the 
late Samuel Green, of the town of Somers, Westchester County, and located there. 
He had nine children, of whom three sons adorned the profession which their father 
so long followed. 

Seventh Generation: Lewis H., (bom March 17, 1807; died Sept. 24, 1886) 
fourth child of Dr. Ebenezer, 2d, married (June 7, 1853) Helena Van Wyck, of 
Fishkill. 

Mrs. Howell White is a daughter of Isaac E. Cotheal, and his wife, Catherine E. 
(Rapalje), and on the maternal side is a descendant in the eighth generation from 
Joris Jansen de Rapalje, one of the proscribed Huguenots, from "RocheUe in 
France," and the common ancestor of all the American families of this name. 

Second Generation: His son, Jerominus, born June 27, 1643, married Anna, 
daughter of Tennis Denys, and had nine children. 

Third Generation: Jan Rapalje, bom Dec. 14, 1673, son of Jerominus, married 
Annettie, daughter of Coert Van Vorhees. They had three children. He died 
in 1733. 

Fourth Generation; Jeromus Rapalje, son of Jan, was twice married, and left 
children. 

Fifth Generation: John Rapalje, (born 1722; died, 1772) son of Jeromus and 
Altje Van Artzdale, was twice married, and by his first wife, Elizabeth, had five 
children. The sons settled at Fishkill, N. Y., where some of their descendants re- 
main. 

Sixth Generation : Richard Rapalje, son of John, was bom on Long Island, Aug- 
ust 30? 1764, removed to Fishkill during the Revolutionary war, and died Septem- 
ber 2, 1825. He married, in 1800, Ann Aerrie of Nev York. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 787 

Seventh Generation: Catharine (born July 8, 1819) daughter of Richard Rapalje, 
married October 22, 1856, Isaac E. Cotheal, son of Henry Cotheal and Phebe Ber- 
rian Warner. They had three children, of whom Elizabeth M. married Dr. Howell 
White. 

It is a curious fact that both the Rev. Ebenezer and Rev. Sylvanus White had 
such long pastorates. Dr. Ebenezer was pastor of the Bridgehampton Presby- 
terian Church from October 9, 1695 to 1748, a period of fifty-three years. Rev. 
Sylvanus White was ordained and installed as pastor of the Presbyterian Church 
at Southampton Nov. 17, 1727, and continued its pastor until his death, October 
22, 1782, a ministry in one church of fifty-five years. It is also peculiar to note 
that Dr. Ebenezer White of Yorktown practiced medicine for over fifty years. His 
son. Dr. Ebenezer White, of Somers, practiced medicine for more than sixty years. 
His son. Dr. Lewis H. White, of Fishkill, practiced for fifty-eight years. Each of 
these Doctors, for three generations, had two brothers who were physicians, and 
who continued in active professional work for about the same number of years. 

* 

HENRY C. WILBER, M. D., was born at Pine Plains, N. Y., November 9, 1845. 
After attending the public schools of his native place he entered the New York 
University and Bellevue Medical College, from which he was graduated in 1867, and 
has since been engaged in the practice of his profession in the village of Pine Plains. 

Dr. Wilber is a member of the Dutchess County Medical Society, of which he 
was president in 1891-'92-'93; the New York State Medical Society; the American 
Medical Association, and is affiliated with the Masonic fraternity. He has held the 
ofiice of Health OfiScer of the town of Pine Plains, and has served as coroner for 
fifteen years. 

Dr. Wilber is a son of Benjamin S. Wilber, who was engaged in the practice of his 
profession for many years at Pine Plains, and who died January 26, 1871. 

GEORGE H. WILLIAMS, the son of Gerome and Catherine Williams, was bom 
at Chestnut Ridge, Dutchess Co., N. Y., September 16, 1844, and resided there until 
1860, when he removed to Poughkeepsie, where he has since resided. 

During his residence in the country he attended the district school, and one year 
in a private school in the Clove kept by George Draper, later school commissioner 
of Dutchess County. After removing to Poughkeepsie he took a course at Eastman 
Business College, and then comenced studying under a private tutor for the pur- 
pose of taking an examination for admission to Yale College; but the wave of war 
fever then extending over the country was too much for him, so, leaving thought of 
college behind, he, on September 22, 1862 joined Company G, 150th regiment, N. 
Y. S. v., and on October 11 left with the regiment for the front, and continued to 
serve with it until it was mustered out at the end of the war, June 8, 1865. During 
the time of his service in the army he was engaged in the battle at Gettysburg, 
Penn., in the campaign from Chattanooga, Tenn., to Atlanta, Ga., in Sherman's 
march to the sea, in the campaign from Savannah, Ga., to Raleigh, N. C, and the 
surrender of Jonhston's army; was wounded in the arm and hand at New Hope 
Church, Ga., and again slightly wounded at Golgotha, Ga. He marched in the 



788 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

grand review at Washington, D. C, May 24, 1865, and was discharged June 8, 1865, 
then sergeant of Company G. 

After his return home he studied law with his father at Poughkeepsie, and was 
admitted to the bar May 18, 1866, and has ever since practiced law there. He has 
since been admitted to practice in the U. S. Courts. 

In 1865 he joined the 21st regiment, N. G. S. N. Y., and continued a member 
until it was mustered out, he being at that time its lieutenant-colonel. 

Mr. Williams was city chamberlain of Poughkeepsie in 1875 and 1876; supervisor 
of the Fourth Ward in 1884 and 1886, and Deputy Collector of U. S. Internal Re- 
venue during part of President Cleveland's first administration. He is a mason and 
a member of Poughkeepsie Lrodge, No. 266, P. & A. M., Poughkeepsie Chapter, No. 
172, R. A. M., King' Solomon's Council, No. 31, R. & S. M., Poughkeepsie Comman- 
dery. No. 43, K. T., Mecca Temple Mystic Shrine; member of D. B. Sleight Post 
No. 331, G. A. R., and has been secretary of the Veteran Association 150th Regi- 
ment; N. Y. S. Vols, since Oct. 11, 1886 and is also Secretary of its Officers' Associa- 
tion. He has been a member of the Dutchess Club since its organization in 1888, 
and has been one of its governors since that time. 

Our subject is descended on the side of his father from a brother of Roger Wil- 
liams, who settled in Rhode Island, and comes from a line of soldiers, his grandfather 
serving in the war of 1812, and his great-grandfather during most of the Revolution- 
ary War, and his great-great-grandfather being in the French and Indian War. 
On his mother's side he is descended from Henry Emigh, who came to this country 
from Holland about 1696 and settled in Clove, Dutchess County, building a stone 
house which is still standing and inhabited. 

JAMES L. WILLIAMS was bom in Poughkeepsie, December 12, 1846. He at- 
tended the Dutchess County Academy, and on the.completion of his studies and 
after reading law was admitted to the Bar in 1867. He began practice in connection 
with the Hon. Peter Dorland, ex-Surrogate of this county; the fiitn of Dorland & 
WilUams continued until 1873, when he formed a partnership with Hon. John 
Hackett, under the firm title of Hackett & Williams. A native of Poughkeepsie, 
and always a public spirited citizen, Mr. Williams was more than usually prominent 
in political and social, as weU as legal circles. He was very active in the Democratic 
party for many years, and was the organizer and first president of the Poughkeepsie 
News Company, publisher of the News- Press and News- Telegraph. He was elected 
District Attorney in 1872, being the first Democrat elected to that office for a period 
of over twenty-five years. In 1883 Governor Cleveland appointed him State As- 
sessor, now called State Tax Commissioner, an ofl5ce which he filled with ability 
until 1893, when he resigned. 

In 1887 he was named as a member of the Executive Committee of the Democrat- 
ic State Committee, and was made chairman of the State Executive Committee. 
In 1893 Mr. Williams was strongly urged as a candidate for Justice of the Supreme 
Court to succeed Judge Barnard, having the support of Dutchess and other coun- 
ties.* He continued to be active in the councils of his party up to the Chicago con- 
vention of 1896, but then declined to endorse the national platform or its candidate, 
and after that time was fully as popular as a worker and advisor in the Republican 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 789 

party as he was in the party of his first choice. He was appointed City Attorney of 
Poxighkeepsie in 1897, serving under Mayor Hull in 1897 and 1898. In 1900 he 
was nominated by President McKinley for Supervisor of the Census for the Third 
District of New York. He was President of the Board of Education from 1900 to 
1906 during which time the schools made great advancement. 

WILLSON & EATON COMPANY, wholesale and retail dealers in lumber, coal, etc. 
at Amenia, N. Y., are successors to the original firm of Barrett Willson & Co., estab- 
lished in 1864, which was succeeded in .1878 by George T. Willson and Lewis F. Eaton 
under the firm name of Willson & Eaton. In 1903 the present corporation was formed 
of which the following are officers : George G. Stevenson, president; Lewis F. Eaton, 
treasurer and manager; Edward Bryan, vice-president; David P. Barry, assistant 
manager. The company is capitalized $125,000. A brick yard, with an annual cap- 
acity of four miUion brick, is also a part of the product of this concern. 

HENRY N. WINCHESTER, Supervisor of the town of Amexda,, was bom in 1850, 
at South Amenia, N. Y. He received his early education in the district schools and 
at a private school at Dover Plains, finishing his studies at Claverack College. He 
then engaged in farming at South Amenia, and later succeeded his father in the gener- 
al mercantile business. He held the office of Deputy Postmaster.from 1886 to 1909, 
when he was appointed Postmaster of South Amenia. Politically Mr. Winchester is 
a RepubUcan, and in 1905 was elected Supervisor of the town of Amenia, and re-elect- 
ed in 1907. He has also held the office of Justice of the Peace for several years. 

He was tmited in marriage with Frances, daughter of James Edwin Sleight of Titus- 
ville, Dutchess county, and the following children were bom to them: Milo F., Henry 
F. and James Edwin. 

JACKSON S. WING, merchant, Wingda;le, N. Y., was born in the town of Dover 
in 1858, a son of Sheldon and Jane L. (Chapman) Wing. He finished his schooling 
at the Amenia Seminary, and in the year 1880 engaged in general mercantile busi- 
ness at Wingdale, purchasing what was known as the Preston store, which was 
erected by his grandfather. Mr. Wing served as Postmaster from 1890 to 1907. 

Mr. Wing was united in marriage with Mary Straight of Kent, Conn., and they 
are the parents of one daughter, Winifred S. 

SHELDON WING, a retired citizen of Wingdale, N. Y., was bom December 10, 
1833, in the town of La Grange. His studies at the public schools were supple- 
mented by a course at a Quaker boarding school. He then began life on a farm in 
the town of Dover, and was thus employed until 1861, when he engaged in the stock 
business in Ohio and Iowa. In 1865 he returned to Dover, and took up the duties 
of farming once more. 

Politically Mr. Wing is a Democrat, and has served his town as Suprvisor two 
terms. In 1894 he received the nomination for the office of sheriff, but declined to 

run. 

October 21, 1856 Mr. Wing was united in marriage with Miss Jane L. Chapman 
of Dover, and to them have been born two children: Jackson S., and Anna F. 



790 THE COUNTY OF DUTCHESS. 

CHARLES M. WOLCOTT, for several years prominently identified with finan- 
cial and industrial institutions in the town of Fishkill, N. Y., was born at Litch- 
field, Conn., November 20, 1816, and died November 20, 1889. He was a son of 
Judge Frederick Wolcott of Connecticut, and descendant of a family that occupied 
a distinguished place in our Colonial history. Roger Wolcott, great-grandfather 
of Charles M., held the office of Governor of Connecticut from 1750 to '54. His son 
Oliver was one of the representatives of the Colony of Connecticut whose names 
are afBxed to the Declaration of Independence, and during the Revolutionary war 
he held the rank of brigadier-general in the patriot forces. In 1796 he was elected 
Governor of Connecticut. 

Charles M. Wolcott in early life engaged in the commission business with offices 
in J'hiladelphia and New York. He married in 1849, Catharine A., daughter of 
Henry Rankin, a prominent merchant of New York. Three children were bom to 
them: Henry Goodrich, Katharine Rankin, now the wife of Samuel Verplanck; 
and Annette Rankin. 

Soon after his marriage Mc. Wolcott settled at Fishkill-on-Hudson, upon the es- 
tate known as "Roseneath" where his wife had previously resided. From that 
time his attention was chiefly occupied with the management of his extensive realty 
holdings and commercial interests in the town of Fishkill. He became a stockhold- 
er and member of the board of directors of the First National Bank of Fishkill 
Landing, and was also a large stockholder and trustee in the firm of the New York 
Rubber Company. 

i 

CHARLES W. WRIGHT, Supervisor of the town of Clinton, Dutchess county, 
N. Y., was bom in the town of Stanford, March 1, 1866. He acquired his education 
at the public schools of his native place, and at Sackett's private school. He then 
accepted a clerkship in the store of Mr. Knickerbocker of Bangall, with whom he 
remained four years, and was afterwards engaged for a time in the butter and egg 
businesss in New York City. In the spring of 1892 he established a general mer- 
cantile store at Clinton Comers, N. Y. Politically Mr. Wright is a Democrat, and 
in 1908 was elected a member of the Dutchess County Board of Supervisors. 

September 5, 1889, he was united in marriage with Delia Stewart of Stanford, 
and to them have been born three children: Harold, Edith and Ethel. 

LEWIS H. WRIGHT, Supervisor of the town of East Fishkill, Dutchess County, 
was born in this town September 4, 1856. For many years he has been, engaged 
in the cultivation of his farm, which covers over 500 acres. 

In 1880 Mr. Wright wasunitedlnmairiagewithMissHenrietta Jackson of Dutch- 
ess county. 

Politically Mr. Wright is a Democrat. He was elected a member of the board 
of Supervisors in 1904, and has been continuously re-elected to 1909. 

CAPTAIN ANDREW C. ZABRISKIE of Barrytown, N. Y., was bom in New 
Yorl? City, May 30, 1853, and was educated in private schools and Columbia 
College. Inheriting large real estate properties, he has devoted himself mainly 
to the business connected with these interests. 



BIOGRAPHICAL AND GENEALOGICAL. 791 

Military affairs have in times past engrossed considerable of Captain Zabriskie's 
attention. He served for seven years in the Seventh New York Regiment. In 
1883 he was elected Captain of Company C in the 71st Regiment, and held that 
position until he was promoted to the rank of Inspector of Rifle Practice on the 
stafiE of the same regiment, finally resigning in 1898. He presented the regiment 
the Zabriskie' trophy, a handsome bronze, to be annually competed for at rifle 
practice. Captain Zabriskie's military training, added to his desire to promote the 
interests of those about him, led him, several years ago, to organize two companies 
of the "Blithewood Light Infantry," composed of young men in the community, 
one at Red Hook, and one at Rhinebeck. The two organizations have a member- 
ship of 160. They have been well armed, uniformed and equipped by Captain 
Zabriskie, and are very eflScient in the Manual of Arms, as a result of the Captain's 
careful and persistent work in training them. All the members are pledged not to 
smoke cigarettes, and if under eighteen years of age, not to smoke at all. 

Captain Zabriskie takes an active interest in all worthy charities. He is at pres- 
ent a trustee of St. Luke's Hospital, New York; Vice President of the House of 
Rest for Constmiptives, and trustee of the Sheltering Arms, an institution for chil- 
dren. He is prominent in the organization and work of the Episcopal church in 
this diocese, and occupies several positions of honor and responsibility. 

Captain Zabriskie belongs to the Union, Metropolitan, City, Army and Navy and 
Church Clubs. He is a member of the Holland Society, the St. Nicholas Society, 
the Society of the War of 1812, the Dutchess County Society, the New York His- 
torical Society, the American Geographical Society, the National Academy of De- 
sign, the American Museum of Natural History; and the American Numismatic 
and Archaeological Society, of which he is ex-president. He was the Democratic 
candidate for Congress from the 21st District in the fall of 1908, being defeated by 
Hamilton Fish. 

Captain Zabriskie is an American whose family history traces through 250 years 
of residence in this country. His ancestor who established the family in America 
was a Polish nobleman, who, to escape the political and religious oppression of his 
own land, emigrated to America in 1662. His ancestors have been connected in 
various honorable ways with the history of Bergen County, N. J., since its earliest 
days. The Captain's grandfather on the maternal side was William M. Titus, a 
prominent New York merchant, and an officer of the 11th Artillery in the War of 

1812. 

Captain Zabriskie married Frances, daughter of the late Charles F. Hunter, who 
was President of the Peoples Bank of New York City. His estate, "Blithewood," 
north of Barrytown station, is one of the most beautiful on the banks of the Hudson. 
Here, with his wife and two children, Julia Romesm and Christian Andrew, he leads 
a busy and useful life. His city house is at 716 Fifth Avenue, New York, and he 
maintains an office at 52 Beaver Street in the same city. 



INDEX. 



INDEX-PART I. 



PAGE 

Aborigines, The 24-27 

Accession of New York State 178 

Ackert, Peter E., 519 

Ackert, William S 603 

Adoption of the Constitution 179 

Adriance, Abraham 206, 293 

Adriance, Charles P., 249, 316, 470, 473 

Adriance, George, 293 

Adriance, Isaac 293, 295 

Adriance, John 238 

Adriance, John P., 231, 238, 241 

Adriance, Piatt & Co., 239 

Akin, Albert John, . . 402 and Part II. 

Akin, Albro 402 

Akin Hall Association 402 

Aldrich, Mrs. Richard, 430, 432 

Aldridge, Thomas 343, 345, 346 

Allen, Benjamin 358 

Alsop, John 94 

Alsop, Richard 274 

Amenia, town of 

attractive f eattires of 265 

boundaries 258 

churches 263, 264 

early growth, 259 

early settlers, 259 

effect of the Revolution on the 

residents of 263 

first white settler, 258 

iron ore mining, 258 

milk production 258 

principal streams, . 258 

religious denominations 263 

roads, 265 

Smith Stevens & Benton Motor 

Co 261 

Steel Works, The 259, 261 

Supervisors, list of 265-266 

villages, 260 

Amenia, village of, 261 

acetylene gas plant of 261 

churches, 260 

commercial gains 260 

fire and hose company, 261 

fountain 261 

Harlem Valley Brick & Supply 
Co: 260 



PAGE 

Amenia, village of. 

High School, 260 

Iron Foundry 260 

Seminary 262 

Sheffield Farms Slosson Decker 

Co 260 

water system 261 

Willson & Eaton Co 260 

American Brick Co 344 

American Cement Co., 421 

American Citizens' Corps 193 

Anchor Bolt & Nut Co 239 

Anderson, William Roe 493 

Andrews, Mrs. James W 305, 321 

Andrus, C. H 195 

Angevine, Henry 504 

Annan, Alexander 194, 321 

Annan, Daniel 320 

Annan, Jr., Daniel, 321 

Annandale (See Red Hook) 

Anthony, AUard 270, 511 

"Anti-rent War," 91 

Arkles,the 293 

Armstrong, John 385 

Armstrong, Gen. Tohn,428, 429, 430, 431 

Armstrong, Mrs. John 434 

Armstrong, Rev. R. G. 412 

Army of the Cumberland 196 

Arnold, Benedict 124, 190, 289 

Arnold, Charles 458 

Arnold, Thomas J 92 

Articles of Association, 95 

Amenia Precinct signers 96 

non-signers 99 

Beekman precinct signers, 99 

non-signers 101 

Northeast precinct signers, 103 

non-signers, 105 

Poughkeepsie precinct signers, . . . 107 

non-signers, 108 

Rhinebeck precinct signers, 109 

non-signers, Ill 

Rombout precinct signers 113 

non-signers 117 

Artsen, Gerrit, 39, 437, 438, 439 

Ask, Benjamin 353 

Assembly, members of 71-77 



u 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Assessment table of precincts, 64 

Assessments, early, 64 

Astor, John Jacob,.. 340, 356, 357, 449 

Astor, WiUiam B 431, 449 

Astor, Mrs. William B 434, 449 

Atlanta campaign, the 197 

Atwater, Mrs. Edward S 234 

Aymar, Benjamin 324 

Babcock, Rev. Rufus 253, 381 

Badeau, Joseph N 332 

Badger, Ebenezer 218, 237 

Bagger, Andrew, 53 

Bailey, Elizabeth 214 

Bailey, Henry D. B 294 

Bailey, Theodorus 214, 242 

Bain, Horatio N 284 

Baker, Lewis 520-521 

Baker, Orlando D. M 519 

Baker, Ransom, 520 

Baker, Stephen 246 

BangaU 452 

Banks: 

Amenia, 265; Dover Plains 282 

FishkiU 323, 335, 345, 346 

Matteawan, 346; Millbrook, 494 

Millerton, 384; Pawling 402 

Pine Plains 416 

Poughkeepsie, 240-241 

Red Hook, 433; Rhinebeck 442 

Stissing, 417; Wappingers 475 

Barculo, Seward 503 

Bard Infant School 359 

Bard, John 433 

Bard, Dr. John,. 354, 356, 360, 535, 536 

Bard, Mrs. Mary 360 

Bard, Dr. Samuel,354, 360, 532, 540-541 

Bard, Susan Mary, 359 

Bard, William 360, 361 

Barkalo, Rev. John 296, 471 

Barlow, Thomas, 290 

Barnard, George G., 509 

Barnard, Joseph P 241, 507-509 

Bamegat limekilns,. 216, 661, 662, 663 

Barnes, Dr. Edwin, 273, 546 

Barnes, Dr. John 542 

Barnes, Oliver W 316, 324 

Barnes, Balthazar, 201 

Bamum, Charles P 243 

Bartlett Charles 228 

Barton, Sarah 360 

Bartow, Mrs. Charles 323, 324 

Battle of Courtland Ridge, 25 

Gettysburg 196 

Harlem 136 



PAGE 

Battle of Resaca, 196 

White Plains, 173 

Baxtertown 325 

Bayley, Guy C, 528, 590 

Beadle, John 273, 420 

Beardsley, Rev. John 250 

Bedinger, Rev. Henry 334 

Beck, Edward 235 

Beekman, Henry 

40, 41. 42, 90, 267, 389, 430, 437, 438 

Beekman, Col. Henry, 

438, 439, 440, 441, 444, 446 

Beekman, town of 267 

boundaries 267 

charcoal furnace 269 

churches 269, 270 

derivation of name, 267 

early settlements and settlers, . . . 268 

hamlets of, . . . 269 

mining operations in 268 

natural features, 267 

Beekman Furnace 269 

Beekman Iron Mine, 270 

Beekman Precinct officers,1772,.. 268 

Beekmanville 270 

Beldings, the 280, 281 

Bench and Bar 498-527 

Benjamin, Franklin R 347 

Bennett, May F 485 

Benson, Egbert 94, 120, 214 

Bentley, Gilbert, 273 

Benton, Joel,. . .263, 290, 376, 488, 489 

Bentons, the 261 

Berry, Dr. Cyrus 532, 534 

Bethune, Rev. George W 446 

Bill of Rights, American 179, 180 

EngUsh 180 

BilUngs, Andrew 214, 217 

Billings, Josh 222 

Bird, Rev. Addison C 295 

Birdsall, Nathan 53, 651 

Bisbee, Joseph B 229 

Bisbee, Otis, 229 

Blauvelt, Rev. Isaac 296 

Bloom, Isaac 273 

Blossom, Joseph, 319 

Bodenstein, J. H 358 

Bodenstein, John G 358 

Boerum, Simon 94 

Bogardus, Egbert ' 314 

Bogardus, Evardus 442 

Bogardus, Peter 307, 308, 309, 310 

Bogardus, Philip 353, 355 

Bogardus, Samuel, 314 

Bogarts, the 269 

Bogle, John, 468 



INDEX— PART I. 



Ill 



PAGE 

Bogle, William 468 

Bohrer, Charles 194 

Bonesteel, Nicholas, 428 

Bonesteel, Philip N 428, 435 

Bonesteel, Virgil D 428 

Booth, Lydia 229 

Boothe, Justus 417 

Boston Comers 385, 386, 387 

Bostwick, Frederick 417 

Bostwick, J. H 417 

Bostwick, Reuben W 407, 416, 417 

Bowmans (Bowerman) , the 369 

Bowne, Henry H 521 

Bowne, James 246 

Bowne, Joshua C, 442 

Boyds, the 238 

Braley, James M., 195 

Braman, David, 355, 358 

Brand marks, Poughkeepsie Pre- 
cinct, 668 

Brant, Andrus, 195 

Brett, E. Augustus 195 

Brett, Madam (Catherine), 35, 302, 303 
305, 311, 318, 319, 320, 327, 336, 337 

Brett, Margaret 319, 321 

Brett, Peter 348 

Brett, Roger 35, 302 

Brett, Theodorus 305, 319, 320, 321 

Brett, Walter 316, 346, 348 

Brett & Co., Walter, 348 

Brett & Matthews 316 

Brewers, the 466, 467 

Brick Industries, ... 32, 260, 343-345 
Brinckerhoff, Derick, 295, 326, 337, 338 

Brinckerhoff, Dirck G 95, 119 

Brinckerhoff, Frank, 326, 327 

Brincherhoff hamlet 326 

Brinckerhoff, Isaac 343, 344 

Brinckerhoff, Col. John,. . . 173, 326, 327 

Brinckerhoff, Joris 338 

Brinckerhoff, T. Van Wyck, . . . 327, 347 

Brinckerhoff, Theodore, 337, 346 

Briody, Rev. J. H., 634, 636 

Broas, Benjamin S., 195 

Brockway Brick Co 345 

Brockway, Edwin, 345 

Brooks, David 242 

Broom, Lieut 193 

Broughton, Francis 357 

Broughton, Joseph, 357 

Brown Bros. 316 

Brown, Derrick 246, 597., 603 

Brown, Elias 469 

Brown, George-Hunter, 

344, 480, 481, 483, 484, 485, 491 
Brown, James 469 



PAGE 

Brbwn, Tames P., 313, 314 

Brown, Rev. John 312 

Brown, Samuel 465, 469 

Brown, Thomas S., 239 

Brundage, C. W., 348 

Brundage & Place, 316, 348 

Bryan, Calvin C 380 

Bryan, Edward 417 

. Bryan, Elihu W. 380 

Bryan, Ezra 380, 410 

Bryan, Ward W 380 

Bryan, William Jennings 381 

Buck, Samuel Wells, 229 

Buckeye Mowing Machine Co 344 

Budd, Gilbert, 470 

Budd, the Misses 344 

Budd, W. D., 344 

Bullock, Comer 453, 454, 455 

Bullock, Ephrian», 453 

Bull's Head 217 

Bull's Iron Works, 182 

Burgoyne, General 174 

Burke, Edmund 428 

Burr, Benjamin F 403 

Burtch, Luman 413, 454, 455, 456 

Busch, Johannes, 202 

Bushnell, William 235 

Butterfield, Gen. Daniel, . 327 

Butts, Allison, 458 

Butts, Wesley 273 

Buttner, Gottlob 26, 27 

Buttolph, John, 376, 412 

Buttolph, Rev. Milton 367 

Byrnes, Joseph, 338, 339 

Byrnes, William, 319, 320 

Byrnesville hamlet 319 



Camp Dutchess 196 

Camp Kelly 194 

Camp, William C 287 

Campbell, Archibald, 399 

Canfield, Darwin 227 

Card, Albert M 522 

Card, Colvin, 384 

Carman, Cornelius, 316, 470 

Carman, Isaac N 481 

Carman, John, 268 

Carmans, the 293 

Caro, Rev. Francis 619, 620 

Carpenter, B. Piatt, 246, 340, 457 

Carpenter,, Isaac R 310 

Carpenter, Isaac S 458 

Carpenter, Jacob 307, 310 

Carpenter, Jacob B 457 

Carpenter, Joseph 355 



IV 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Carpenter, Leonard, 307, 310 

Carroll, William 341 

Carthage Landing 470 

Cary, Henry 397, 398 

Case, James S., 255 

Case, Rev. Wheeler 274 

Casey, Alice 279 

Casey, George, 281 

Casey, Thomas, 279 

Casper creek, 29, 39, 201, 202, 209, 236 

Cast, John 53 

Catholic Church, The 608 

account of Fr. Parmer's mission- 
ary trips 609 

Catholic Association, 1832,.. .614^615 

clergy list, 1822 613 

-'Congress Own," 611, 612 

•during the Civil War 626 

■during the Revolution, 609-611 

early history 608 

first church erected 616 

institutions: 

Marist Brothers, 648 

Novitiate of St. Andrew on 

Hudson 649-650 

Amenia, Immaculate Conception 

Parish 641-643 

Barrytown, Church of the Sacred 

Heart, 646 

Beekman, Parish of St. Denis, 

Sylvan Lake 643 

Dover and Pawling churches, . 638-641 

Fishkill churches 634^637 

Hyde Park, The Roman Catholic 

Church 647 

Millbrook, St. Joseph's Church, . . 647 
Millerton, Catholic Mission, . . 642-643 
Poughkeepsie, Church of Our 

Lady of Mt. Carmel 647, 648 

Church of St. Mary 627 

Church of the Nativity 632 

PoUsh Church, 627 

St. Peter's Church, . .255, 618-627 

succession of pastors 616-634 

Rhinebeck, St. Joseph's Parish, . . 645 

Tivoli, St. Sylvia's Church 646 

Wappinger's Falls, St. Mary's 

Cihurch 644 

Cavel, James 534 

Cemeteries. See graveyards 

Census of 1714 45 

Central Hudson Steamboat Co 316 

■Chamber of Commerce, Poughkeep- 

sie 225 

Chandler, A. King 317 

Chanler, Lewis S 432 



PAGE 

Chanler, Margaret Astor 431 

Chanler, Robert W 432 

Chanler, William Astor 432 

Chapman, Dr. George B. 283 

Chapman, Mrs. H. S., 264 

Chapman, John Jay 432 

Chapman, William T 403 

Charity Organizations, Poughkeep- 

sie 256-257 

"Chase, Adam 390 

Chatterton, Mrs. Sarah 366 

Chelsea, 470 

Chestnut Ridge 286 

Christian Bibhcal Institute, The, ... 457 
Churches and pastors : . 

of Amenia 264 

of Beekman 269, 270 

of Clinton 274, 275 

of Dover 279, 284, 285, 286, 288 

of East Fishkill 294^298 

of Fishkill 300, 327-335 

of Hyde Park, 354, 359-362 

of La Grange 366-367 

of Milan 372 

of Northeast, 377, 381-384 

of Pawling 173, 174, 391, 397-402 

of Pine Plains 408-415 

of Poughkeepsie 247-255 

of Pleasant Valley 421-424 

of Red Hook 433, 434^435 

of Rhinebeck 441, 444^449 

of Stanford 453-457 

of Union Vale 461, 462-463 

of Wappingers 471-474 

Churchill, Henry 343 

Civil list 45, 67-79 

Civil organizations and divisions,. . 57-66 

Civil War, 193 

Clay formations 32 

Clay, Henry, 229, 245 

steamboat disaster, 315 

Clapp, Benjamin 468, 472, 473 

Clapp. Clinton W 465 

Clark, Hon. David 457 

Clark, Ezra 378 

Clark, Hon. George, 309 

Cleaveland, Dr. Joseph Manning, . . . 545 

Clinton, Gov. George 

94, 174, 188, 211, 212, 226 
elected President of State Con- 
vention, 176 

house, 175, 208, 665-667 

letter from Col. Beekman to, ... . 90 
letters written in Poughkeepsie,... 

175, 212 
in politics, 241 



INDEX— PART I. 



/->i ■ PAGE 

Clinton, Gov. George 

issues call for troops, 193 

issues proclamation 175 

opposes ratification of Constitu- 
tion 178, 215 

Clinton, De Witt 242, 599 

Clinton, Sir Henry 174 

Clinton, town of, 272 

assemblymen 273 

boundaries, 272 

churches 274-275 

early innkeepers 273 

first dwellers 272 

first physician of 273 

frist mill 273 

amlets of, 272 

land donations 274 

slate deposits, 275, 276 

Supervisors, list of 276-277 

town clerks 276 

Clove Spring, 461 

Clove Spring Iron Works 269 

Clove Spring Trout Co 461 

Clove Valley, 269 

Clove Valley Rod and Gun Club, . . 461 

Coe, William 460, 461, 462 

Coe, William V 461, 462 

Coffin, Tristram 665, 666, 667 

Cogswell, Joseph H., 195 

Colden, Alexander 306 

Colden, Cadwallader D., 214, 306 

Colden Ferry Charter 306-310 

Cole, Simon, 441 

Colleges See Schools 

CoUen, John 120 

CoUes, Christopher 670 

CoUes Surveys, 1789 670-680 

Collins, Gilbert 345 

CoUyer, John L 470, 473 

Colman, Joh . n, 17 

Colonial Assembly, Representatives 

in 67 

Congress 42, 93, 94 

grants, , 33 

Military Organizations, 80-93 

Colonists, taxation of 93 

Committee of One Hundred, 95 

Committee of Sixty 94 

Committees of Safety, 120, 171 

Comstock, John, 481 

Congress and Montgomery, the 172 

Conroy, Rev. E. J 630, 631 

Constitution of 1777 308 

Contine, Peter 429, 435 

Continental Congress, 95, 171, 210 



Contmental Lme, 120, 134 

Continental troops in Poughkeepsie, 

176,212 
Convention of N. Y. State Repre- 
sentatives, 171 177 

Cook, Dr. G. W .' 536 

Cook, J. Hervey 519 

Cook & Low 468, 469 

Cool, Arrye 204 

Cooper, Dr. Ananias 442 

Cooper, Ezekiel 136, 212 

Cooper's Rangers 136, 169 

Corlies, Jacob 241 

Comwell, John 287 

Coshire, Hannah 365 

Cottam, Matthew, 465, 468 

Council of Appointment 68 

of the Colonyiof New York 67 

of Safety 68 

County Bar, 498-527 

County, 

buildings, first, 65, 66 

Clerks, list of 78, 79 

court, 498-499 

District Attorneys, list of, 77-78 

Judges, list of, 77 

Sheriffs, list of , 78 

Surrogates, list of 77 

Treasurers, list of, 79 

Court house, first, 65 

of Probate, 1778 212 

of Sessions, 188 

Cousens, Bame 353 

Coutant, Charles G 351 

Cox, Jr., John 53, 651 

Coxe, Daniel, 597 

Coyle, Rev. James, 635 

Cramer, Hon. John N 438 

Crannell, Bartholomew, 210 

Cromwell, Joseph 316, 348 

Crosby, Cyrenus 528 

Crosby, Epenetus 339, 348 

Crosby, Ernest H 449 

Crugers, the, 428 

Cruger's Island (Magdalen), 

41,426,427, 437 

Crummey, Edward 195, 518 

Cunninrfiam, Walter 220, 240, 244 

Curtis, F. 1 416 

Curtiss, Milton E 346 

Cuyler, Rev. Cornelius C 249 

Dakins, the 377 

Dales, W. M 384 

Daly, Very Rev. Patrick 608, 631 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Daniels, George A 403 

Davies, Charles 322 

Davies, Henry E 322, 333 

Davies, Thomas L., 221, 252 

Davies, William A 252 

Davis, David 346 

Davis, Fred W 241, 416 

Davis, Henry, 240 

Davis, Richard D 244 

Davis, Rev. Sheldon 414; 424 

Davison, G. Howard 486, 497 

Davison, Jr., H. J 485, 496 

Deacon, Seth 282 

Dean, Gilbert 367, 504 

Dean, Herman, 351 

Dean, Rev. J. J 332 

Dean, James E. 347, 351 

de CantiUon, Richard,272, 354, 356, 360 

de CantiUon, T 360 

de Chastellux, Marquis 173 

Travels through Dutchess Coun- 
ty 181-192 

Declaration of Independence, the, . . 171 

De Forest, Col 193 

De Graff, John 208 

De GraflE, John A 356 

De Groff, Moses 364 

Deitrich, Charles F 478, 495, 496 

de Koven, Rev. Henry 432, 434, 435 

Delafield, John 220, 616 

De Lamater, Henry 442 

De La Montagne, Dr 322 

Delano, Mrs. Franklin, 449 

De Laval Separator Co., 239 

De Lavergne, Isaac, 528 

De Lavergne, Dr. Nicholas, 83, 550 

Delegates to State Constitutional 

Convention, 70 

De Long, James 268 

Dennings, the 322, 323 

Denny, W. C 384 

de Peyster, Col. John Livingston,. . . 432 

de Peyster, Gen. John Watts 461 

de Peyster (Watts) Home for In- 
valid Children 461 

de Reimer, Peter 355 

Des Brosses, James 206 

de Verrazzano, John 17 

Devine, Joel, 537 

Devine, Wright 421 

Dewall, Pecne 44 

De Wint, John Peter, 308, 309, 310, 314 
315, 322, 330, 348, 349, 470, and Part II. 

De'Witt, John 273, 274, 276 

De Witt, Rev. Petrus 446 

De Witt, Rev. Thomas 296, 471 



PAGE 

De Witt, Tierk, 427 

Dibble, Christopher 451 

Dickerson, Rev. J. L 383 

Dinsmore, William B., 358 

Disbandment of provincial forces, . . 90 
Division of counties into towns, .... 300 

Dodge, Dr. John 273, 423 

Dodge, Le Grand 506 

Dodge, Samuel 120, 299 

Donaldson, John J 494 

Dongan, Thomas 34, 57, 427 

Donoghue, George F., 352 

Dorland, Enoch 364 

Dorland, Peter 517 

Dorland, Samuel 366 

Dover, town of, 278 

boundaries 278 

churches 284, 285, 286, 288 

early settlement and settlers, .... 278 

erection of, 65 

first mill 279 

first postmaster 281 

Harlem Railroad in, 290 

Morehouse Tavern 289 

New York and Sharon Canal pro- 
ject 290 

old inscriptions in cemetery 278 

principal streams 278 

Red Lion Inn 289 

Supervisors, list of 290-291 

Valley View Cemetery 285, 290 

Washington and his troops en- 
camp at, 289 

Dover Furnace, 287, 288 

Dover Plains, village of 279 

churches 284, 285, 286, 288 

early residents 280 

Elm Stock Farm at 284 

first Board of Education, mem- 
bers of 283 

Hall & Ferguson's cold storage 

plant at 284 

in 1802 280 

J. H. Ketcham Hose Co 283-284 

McDermott Milk Co., 284 

Military School 282 

population 279 

physicians 282 

Union Free School, 283 

Dover Plains Bank 282 

Dover Plains Library 283 

Dover Plains Lodge, I. O. G. T 284 

Dover Plains Marble Works 281 

Dover Press 282 

"Dover Stone Church," 279 

Downing, Andrew J 315, 321 



INDEX— PART I. 



vU 



T\ . PAGE 

downing, William 403 

Drake, Edward C 421 

Drake, George S 195 

Duane, James, 94 

Du Bois, Dr. Abram 328 

DuBois, John C 475 

Du Bois, Lewis, 206 

DuBois, Matthew 83, 206 

Du Bois, Peter, 206 

Dudley, Alexander 338 

Duer, William A., 442 

Duerstein, Rev. Daniel, 253 

Dutch, energies of the 23 

superseded by the English 42 

Dutch churches, earliest : 

Fishkill Village, 173, 300, 302, 327-328 

Hopewell 294r-297 

Poughkeepsie, 176, 213, 214, 247-250 

Rhinebeck 445-446 

Dutch East India Co 17 

Dutcher, Belden, 281 

Dutcher, Cornelius 280 

Dutcher, Derrick 279 

Dutcher, Irving 269 

Dutcher, John 283 

Dutcher, J. Gerow 402 

Dutcher, John B., 402 

Dutchess County, 

assessment table of precincts of, . . 64 

Bench and Bar of 498-52'7 

boundaries 28, 57 

census of 1714 45 

character of soil of, 32, 56 

civil list of 45 

civil organizations and divisions 

of, 57 

court house in 1788 66 

description of, by Judge Wm. 

Smith 52 

details of settlement of, 55 

divisions into precincts, 60 

division into townships, 64 

divison into wards, 59, 441 

during the Revolution 93-180 

early divisions 33 

early inhabitants, 44, 45, 53 

early settlements 23, 44, 45 54 

election of 1713, in, 58 

erection of towns in 64, 65 

Federal officers of, 68 

first county house and prison, . 65, 66 

first newspaper 350 

first physician, 547 

first settler 44 

freeholders of 1740 in, list of 50 

geology of 28 



_ , PAGE 

Dutchess county, 

in the Rebellion 193-198 

members of assembly 71 

military organizations of 80 

militia 140-170 

mineral and natural deposits, 31, 32 

mountains, 28 

muster rolls, 80-90, 136 

officers of, 1721-1907 77-79 

oldest political divisions, 200 

physicians 540-586; 593-696 

population of 1723 50 

by towns, 1790 55 

principle streams 29-30 

signers and non-signers of the ' 

"Revolutionary Pledge^' 96 

stockraising and dairying, 32 

Supervisors iv^cn 1720 to 1787,. . 59-63 
Supervisors from 1788 to 1909, 
See Supervisors. 

tax roll, of 1718 46-49 

topography 28 

towns comprised in, 1786 64 

Dutchess County Academy, . . . 226, 227 
Dutchess County Agricultural So- 
ciety 483 

Dutchess County Regiment (150th), 195 

at the battle of Gettysburg 196 

casualties of, 197 

discharged from service, 197 

transferred to the army of the 

Cumberland 196 

Dutchess Hat Works 342 

Dutchess Insurance Co., 241 

Dutchess Junction, 317 

Dutchess Manufacturing Co.,. .239, 240 

Dutchess Print Works 468 

Dutchess Tool Works 342 

Dutchess Whaling Company 237 

Dutton, Titus 360, 361 

Dwight, W. B., 32 



Earley, Rev. Terence J., 629, 630 

East Camp 53, 58, 439 

East PishkiU, town of, 292 

boundaries 292 

churches 294-298 

early burials in 297 

early inhabitants, 294 

early settlement of 292 

erection of 65 

first church building in, 295 

first town meeting in 292 

Hopewell Junction, 292, 293 



VIU 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

East Fishkill, town of, 

oldest tombstone inscription in, . . 297 

Supervisors, list of 298 

Eastman, Harvey G 

223, 224, 230, 241, 246 

Eastman College 223, 230 

Eastman Park 223 

Educational institutions. See 
Schools. 

Eldridge, E. Q 506 

Election of 1713 58 

Ellessdie Chapel, 471 

Elliotts, the 289 

Ellsworth, William 355 

Ehn Stock Farm 284 

Elmendorf, NicoU Floyd 522 

Elseffer, Jacob W 513-514 

Elsworth, Edward 241, 247 

Elton, Jan, 39, 437, 438, 439 

Emans, Albert 367, 480 

Emans, James A 292, 294 

Emans, John S., 294 

Emans, Storm 294 

Emigh, Jeremiah, 463 

Emigh, Nicholas 44, 301 

Emigh, Peter 460. 461 

Emigh, William 463 

Emmett, Thomas A 306, 308, 309 

Emott, Judge James 

214,241,242,244, 502 

Emott, Jr., James 222, 502 

Emott, William 242 

Eno, William 416 

Eno, William S., 515 

Erection of Counties 57 

Erection of towns 64 

Eureka Mowing Machine Works, . . . 239 

Everitt, Clear 175, 667 

Everitt, Richard 240, 667 

Eyer, Rev. William J 447 

Factory Woods, The 463 

Fairbairn, Rev. Robert B 434 

Falconer, John, 341 

Pall Kill, the 

29, 30, 202, 208, 219, 236, 253 

Fallon, Dr. James 174 

Farmer, Ferdinand 608, 609, 612 

FarreU, Rev. C. H 635, 636 

Fay, Eliphas 227 

Federal census, 1790 55 

Federal officers, list of, 68 

Fed*al Store 377, 378 

Felous, Rev. J. W 492 

Fenn, Rev. Percy 1 492 



PAGE 

Ferris, Benjamin, 53, 651 

Ferris House 174 

Ferris, John, 292, 480 

Ferris, Mary 257 

Ferris, Reed 173, 391 

Ferry, Colden, 306-310 

Milton 207, 216, 659-664 

Newburgh, 349 

Poughkeepsie, 216, 235 

Fisher's Reach 21, 299 

Fishkill, town of, 

banks 337, 345-347 

barracks at 173, 185 

beacons, 213, 326, 336 

brick indsutry in 343-345 

churches 297, 327-335 

cloudburst at 342 

Colden Ferry Charter 306-310 

country estates 321-323 

description' of, by de Chastellux, . 184 
during the Revolution, 172, 173, 325 

early residents 322 

early settlers 299 

electric light works, 336 

farms of the Verplanck family in, 310 

ferries 305, 306 

first mill in 337 

first white settler 301 

forfeiture act in 299 

Frankfort Store House Associa- 
tion 303-310, 347 

ferries of 305, 306 

freighting prices of, 305 

minutes of annual meeting of 

1763 304 

transcript of meeting in 1781, 

304-305 

fas works 336 
ndian possession of, 300 

industnes 336, 337-342 

Lafayette at, 327, 337 

Matteawan, village of 318 

Banks 346 

churches 330-334 

incorporation of 318 

industries, 319 

newspapers 351 

mountains 28 

newspapers 350-352 

Oil Grounds, The, of, 321 

politics of 1840, in 338, 339 

provost house and prison at, 185 

regiment removed from, 176 

river freighting at 302 

Rombout Cemetery at 326 

soldiers' burial ground, 173 



INDEX— PART I. 



IX 



T,. PAGE 

Fishkill, town of, 

soldiers' monument 326 326 

Supervisors, list of ' 352 

transportation at, 337, 347-350 

tombstone inscriptions in, . . . 300, 328 

the road to 206 

villages in ',',[ ! !3i4-326 

water- works 342 

Fishkill Village [',', 324 

early freighting business at, .315, 316 

early residents of 324, 325 

early railroads 317 

early travel in 315 

fire of 1876 324 

incorporation of 314 

postofBce estabUshed, 314 

water supply 336 

Fishkill, the, 29, 44, 460 

Fishkill Institute for Savings 346 

Fishkill Landing Machine Co., ... . 342 

Fishkill Landing Place 188 

Fishkill mountains 28 

Fishkill and Beekman Plank Road 

Co 317-318 

Fishkill and Matteawan Water Co., 336 

Flagler, Harry H 496 

Flax Culture 188, 354 

Fletcher, Governor, 34, 39, 40 

Fletcher, Rev. Thomas 382 

Floyd, William 94 

Fonda, James H 240 

Fonda, Walter C 240 

Forbus, Alexander, 237 

Forbus, John B 241 

Forts Montgomery and Clinton, cap- 
ture of 174 

Foster, David C. 241 

Fowler, John W., 230 

Fowler, Milton A 351 

Frank's Sons Brewery, V 240 

Frankfort Store Bfouse Associa- 
tion ....303-310 

Freeholders, list of, in 1740 50 

Freer, Jacobus 211 

French and English War 90 

French and Indian War, 90 

Friends, or Quakers, 

denounced as Tories, 174 

enrollment of in 1755, 53 

meetings, 651-658 

"Friends of Constitutional Liberty," 210 

Frink, G. S 384 

B^ost, Solomon B., 237 

Fry, B. H 260 

Fur Trade, 23 



PAGE 

Gaines, Clement C 230 

Gansevoort, Harme 39, 427 

Gardiner, "Awful," 386 

Gardner, Benjamin 344 

Garettson, Rev. Freeborn, 252, 412, 447 

Garner, Thomas 468 

Gamer, William T 468 

Garner & Company, 

25, 316, 420, 468, 469 

Gaylord, George R 195 

Geology 28-32 

German, Nicholas 270 

German refugees 52 

Gibbs, Aletha 358 

Gillies, John 343 

Glenham 323 

Glenham mill 340 

Goring, T, E 470 

Gould, David R, 402 

Government suspends organization 

of new regiments 194 

Gowdy, John, 343 

Graham, Daniel 299 

Graham, David, 346 

Graham, Morris 94, 136 

Grant, Jr., James, 241 

Graveyards: 

Amenia 263 

Dover 278, 284, 285, 290 

Fishkill 297, 300, 326, 328, 331 

La Grange, 364; Pawling 397 

Pine Plains 408 

Poughkeepsie, 202, 218, 220, 249 

Stanford 451, 456 

Union Vale 460, 463 

Washington, 489 

tombstone inscriptions in 

Dover Plains 278, 279 

South Dover, 284; Fishkill,... 300 
Hopewell, 297; La Grange, ... 364 

Stanford 451 

Gray, A. B., 206 

Green Fuel Economizer Co 342 

Green, Rev. George A 335 

Green Haven, 269 

Green, John, 195 

Green, Theron M 402 

"Greenvale," 206 

Gregory, Elnathan 120 

Gregorys, the 280, 281 

Griffin, Jacob, 120 

Griggs, Charles, 345 

Grinnell, Irving 474 

Guernsey, Daniel W 458, 515 

Guernsey, Mrs. Joseph 261 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Guernsey, Stephen G 458 

Guild, H. A •. 351 

Gurnee, Daniel 344 

Haight, Joseph F 402 

Haight, Stephen 490 

Halcyon Hall, 485 

"Half Moon," 17, 427 

Halgin, Robert H., 333 

Halfock, F. W 495 

Hallock, Isaac 274 

Hallock, Samuel, 663 

Hamilton, Alexander 177, 178, 215 

Hams, the 483 

Hammersley, J. Hooker, 500 

Hammond, Dr. Thomas, . .282, 285, 290 

Hammond, Jr., Dr. Thomas 282 

Hammond, William K 344 

Hammond & Freeman 345 

Harlem Valley Brick & Supply Co., 260 

Harloe, William 233, 247 

Harmense, Myndert, 34, 38, 39, 40, 201 

Harrington, Jacob, 288 

Harris, George 274 

Harris Scythe Works 416 

Harris, Seth, 416 

Harris, Rev. Thomas R 434 

Harrison, William Henry 338 

Hart, PhiHp,. 479 

Hartsville 481 

Hasbrook," Alexander 292, 346 

Hasbrouck, Dr. Alfred 543-544 

Hasten, Elnathan 292 

Hatch, Mrs. Frederick W 256 

Haxtun, William E 270 

Hayes, Capt. R. S., 497 

Hayt, Samuel A 318, 325, 346 

Hazen, Col. Moses 610, 611 

Heath, General 185, 186, 187, 195 

Heckwelder, John 24 

Heermance, Hendrickus 439 

Heermance, Jacob 429, 442 

Herrick, Charles B., 518 

Herrick, Timothy 358 

Hewitt, Gideon P., 220 

Hicks, Elias 274, 410, 603 

Higby, Seth 398, 399 

Hiegins, H. W 496 

"High Dutchers," 53, 439 

Highland Hospital, 590 

Hill, Rev. Daniel T 270, 399 

Hill, Hon. David Jayne 399 

Hill,»Edwin 442 

Hilton, Judge, 340 

Hinkley, James W., 245, 246 



PAGE 

Histories, previous : 

Bailey's Historical Sketches of 

Dutchess County .44, 294 

Cook & Benton's Dutchess Coun- 
ty Regiment, 195 

First Book of Supervisors and 

Assessors, 46, 58, 59, 65, 204 

Huntting's History of Little 

Nine Partners, 418 

Morse's Historic Old Rhinebeck,.. 

437, 440-441 
Platt'sjHistory of Poughkeepsie, . 

38, 199 
Reed's History of Amenia, .... 

259, 266 
Smith's Documentary History of 

Rhinebeck 450 

Smith's History of Dutchess 

County, 665, 666 

Van Gieson's First Reformed 

Church of Poughkeepsie 247 

Wilson's Quaker Hill, 54, 393; and 
Preface. 

Hoag, Charles 409, 410 

Hoff, Joseph 422 

Hoffman, Anthony, 95 

Hoffman, Herman, 120 

Hoffman, John T 452 

Hoffmans, the (Red Hook) 428 

Holbrook, Nicholas 381, 382 

HoUey, Luther 280 

HoUiday, Capt. Harrison, 193 

Holmes, Col. James 120 

Hohnes, H. A.,. 403 

Homeopathic Medical Society, 'The 

591-596 

members of 593-596 

Homes: 

Home for the Friendless 256 

Old Ladies' Home 227, 256 

Pringle Memorial Home 257 

Vassar Brothers Home for Aged 

Men 267 

Watts de Peyster Home for In- 
valid Children, 461 

Hone, Philip 319, 340, 341 

Hooker, James 237, 240, 500 

Hopewell Junction 293 

Hopkins, Benjamin 470 

Hopkins, Enos 375, 408 

Hopkins, Gilbert S 470 

Hopkins, Solomon P 470 

Hosack, Dr. Daniel 361 

Hosack, Dr. David 356 

Hosier, Daniel, 364 



INDEX— PART I. 



XI 



PAGE 

Hosier, John 364 

Hospitals 586 

Hotaling, Caleb M 351 

Hotchkiss, Frank A., 384 

Hotels and taverns, early: 

Forbus House 222 

Hyde Park Hotel 356 

Morehouse Tavern,. 182, 183, 191, 289 

Poughkeepsie Hotel 219, 221 

Pride's Tavern, 188 

Red Lion Inn 289 

Rhinebeck Hotel 450 

Sleight Tavern 273 

Thomas Inn 189, 190 

Wing Tavern 279 

House of Industry 257 

Houses, historic: 

Abraham Fort House, 208 

AUard Anthony House 209, 323 

Callendar House, 432 

Chateau of Tivoli 432 

Clinton (Clear Everitt) House, . . 

175, 208, 212, 665-667 

Davies House, 208 

Dutcher House, 289 

Ferris House 174 

A. B. Gray House 206, 209 

Glebe (Fricker) House 251 

Heermance House 439 

John Kane House 395 

Kip House 45, 439 

Mesier Homestead, 467 

Montgomery House, 429 

Motmt Gulian 310 

Noxon House 208 

Rokeby 430-432 

Teller House , 302 

Wharton House, 173 

Howland, Gen. Joseph,. . .323, 333, 346 

Hoyt, Lydig M 358 

Ho3rt, Morgan H 351 

Hoyt, Rev. Sherman, 275 

Hudson, Henry 17, 427 

Journal Extracts 18-23 

Hudson River 

chain obstruction during Revo- 
lution 174, 211 

early names applied to, 23 

exploration of, 17 

Hudson River State Hospital, . 356, 586 

Huf cut, George 282 

Hufcut, Hans 279 

Hufcut, Horace D 282, 290, 518 

Huff, Englebert 295 

Hughes, Christopher 365, 360, 361 

Hufhes, W. H 380 



PAGE 

Hughson, John 466 

Hughson, Dr. Walter 543 

Htdl, J. Frank 239 

Hull, John F 241 

Hull, John 1 382 

Hulme, Peter 522 

Humphrey, Cornelius 272, 423 

Hunt, Freeman, 220 

Hunt, William 390 

Hunter, Robert H 218 

Hunttine, Isaac, 374, 417, 418 

Hustis, Henry H 518 

Huyler, John S., .■ 362 

Hyde, Lemuel 360 

Hyde Park, town of, 353 

boundaries, 353 

census of 1821 355 

churches, . ^ 358-362 

country seats of 356, 358 

early industries 354 

early Quakers 355, 366 

early tavern keepers 355 

erection of, 353 

first election in 355 

first physician of 354 

freighting business 355 

ice-cutting industry, 358 

schools of, 358-362 

Staatsburgh, 357 

streams 353 

Supervisors, list of 362 

Indians, the 24-27 

battle at Magdalen 426 

deeds of 

26, 33-37, 201, 202, 300. 301, 437, 438 

driven from Shekomeko, 27 

evangelization of, 26, 27 

Mohicans, the 24 

River 25 

Shaghticoke 365, 366 

"Six Nations," 426, 427 

Wappingers 24, 26, 26, 300, 326 

Ingham, James 468, 472 

Ingraham, George W 262 

Ingram, Francis 206 

Innis, George 223, 246 

Ira Harris Guard 194 

Iron Foundry, Amenia, 260 

Jackson, Hon. J. L 324, 325 

Jackson, Joseph H 244, 249, 507 

Jans, Anneke 306 

Jay, Frederick 120 



xu 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Jay, John 94, 176, 215, 242 

Jenney, William 227 

iewett, Jacob B., 514 
ogues, Rev. Isaac, 608 
ohnson. Rev. Nehemiah, 398, 454 
ohnson, Samuel W., 475 

Johnston, David, 482 

Jonah, Hannah, 365, 366 

Jonah's Manor, 365 

Jones, Edward, 449 

Jones, Elizabeth, 449 

Jones, Joshua 343 

Jones, Samuel 215 

Jordan, Conrad N., 346 

Judson, John D 442 

Kail Rock Landing, . .205, 207, 219, 234 

Kane, John 391, 392, 395, 396 

Kelly, Hon. William 194, 438, 448 

Kennedy, Mary Lenox, 497 

Kent, James 214, 242, 499 

Kent, William 322, 348 

Ketcham, James 280, 281, 285 

Ketcham, John H 

195, 197, 246, 281, 290 

Ketcham, William M 247 

Ketcham, William S., 281 

Kiersted, Dr. Hans, 442 

Killey, E. B., 221, 244, 245, 286 

Kip, Abraham, 441 

Kip, Hendrick, 39, 45, 438, 439 

Kip, Henry Spies 438 

Kip, Jacob 34, 301, 438, 439 

Kip, John 441 

Knapp, Heinrich, 323 

Knapp, Isaac 298 

Knox, Starr B 470, 473 

Kock, Rev. G. D., or Koock,.409,445,446 

Lafayette, General, 219, 327 

Lakes and ponds : 

Booth'spond, 236 

Green Mountain Lake 389 

Halcyon Lake 406 

Hammersley Lake 389 

Hunn's Lake (Thompson's pond), 

405, 451 

Norton Lake, 389 

Pelton's Pond 236 

Spring Lake, or Long pond 

* 30,272, 426 

Stissing Lake 405 

Sylvan Lake 30, 236, 268 



PAGE 

Lakes and ponds, 

Upton's Lake, 451, 458 

Vassar College Lake 207, 236 

Waraughkameek 38 

Whaley Pond 30, 389, 390 

Winnikee (red mill) Pond 236 

La Grange, town of, 363 

at the outbreak of the Civil War, . 367 

boundaries 363 

churches, 366-367 

during the Revolution, 365 

early industries in, 364 

early settlement and settlers, .... 364 

erection of, 363 

oldest religious organization of, . . 366 
original description of the bounds 

of, 363 

Supervisors, list of, 367-368 

tombstone inscription in 364 

Lamb, Dr. Robert B 591 

Lamont, Col. Daniel S 496 

Landings, 

Carthage (Low Point) 470 

Kail Rock 205, 207, 219, 234 

Long Dock 306, 309, 314, 316, 470 

Lower Fishkill, 303, 305, 314, 470 

Upper Fishkill 306, 314, 470 

Lower, Poughkeepsie, 235 

Main street, Poughkeepsie, . . 234, 235 

Upper, Poughkeepsie 235 

Whale Dock 237, 238, 502 

Lower and Upper, Hyde Park, . . . 355 

Landon, Hon. Francis G 357 

Landon, Jonathan 95 

Land Patents 33-43 

Artsen & Co 34, 39 

Minnisinck (Sanders & Harmense) 

34, 38, 45, 201, 202 
Nine Partners', Great or Lower, 

34, 39, 40, 42, 60, 61, 200, 258, 274 
451, 476 

Little or Upper 

34, 41, 42, 60, 369, 374, 405 

Oblong 34, 38, 40, 42, 43 

Pawling, 39 

Philipse 25 

Poughkeepsie 39 

Rhinebeck and Beekman, 34, 40, 41 

267, 268, 389, 390, 391, 438, 439, 460 

Rombout, 25, 34, 35, 38, 40, 44, 61 

202, 267, 299, 300, 301, 302, 306, 

327, 465, 466. 

Schuyler 34, 38, 202, 427 

Landsman, Casper, 440 

Landsman Kill 30 

Langdill, Rev. Arthur 613 



INDEX— PART I. 



xiu 



PAGE 

Langdon, Sr., Walter 356, 361 

Lasiilck, Peter 44, 201 

Lansing, Gerret, 45, 201 

Lansing, John, 176 

Lansing, Peter 45, 201, 202 

Lansing, W. C 246 

Larissy, Fr. Philip 613 

Lathrop, Dr. William 532, 536 

Lattimer Iron Foundry, 392 

Lavelle, Rev. Francis E 641 

Lawler, Kieran J 522 

Lawrence, John, 274, 398 

Lawrence, Thomas, 306, 309 

Lawsons, the 201 

Lawyers, deceased, list of, 525-526 

present county bar 526-527 

Lee, William Morgan 603 

Lee, William R 524-525 

Legislature meetings during the 
Revolution, 66, 176, 212, 213, 216, 222 

Lenox, James, 471 

Le Roy, Francois 205, 236 

Le Roy, Simeon 205 

Le Roy's bridge 205, 206, 207, 209 

Leutz, Andrew 194 

Lewis, Barent 205 

Lewis, Francis, 94, 357 

Lewis, John N., 426, 433 

Lewis Leonard, 58, 65 

Lewis, Gen. Morgan, 273, 357, 358, 360 

Lewis, Peter, ,. 433 

Lewis, Thomas 433 

Libraries: 

at Dover Plains, 283 

at Matteawan 323 

at MiUbrook, 494 

at Pleasant Valley 421 

at Poughkeepsie 231 

at Quaker Hill 402 

at Rhinebeck, 444 

at South MiUbrook 483 

at Wappinger's Falls 474r-475 

Lithgow ;, 482 

Little Rest, 481 

Livingston, Edward 429, 447 

Livingston, Francis 500 

Livingston, Gilbert 

95, 120, 214, 216, 242, 428, 445 
Livingston, Henry A.,. 66, 211, 219, 241 

Livinfston, Henry B 442, 500, 610 

Livingston, Henry G., 432 

Livingston, Col. James,.. 609, 610, 611 

Livingston, Janet, 135 

Livinlston, Rev. John H., . . . .214, 248 

Livingston, Johnston, 432 

Livingston, Lewis 449 



PAGE 

Livingston Manor,. 41, 52, 57, 190, 439 

Livingston, Margaret 135, 447 

Livingston, Philip, 94 

Livingston, Philip H 432 

Livingston, Robert, 44, 53, 358 

Livingston, Robert G 355, 428 

Livingston, Robert R., 

94, 135, 176, 369, 447 
Livingston,''Rev. Wm. . . .623, 624, 625 

Lomas, Alfred W 351 

Lomas, Joseph 343 

Long Reach, The 21, 38 

Lossine, Benson J., 

233, 238, 244, 270, 286 

Louden, Samuel 172, 350 

Loupe, W. L 384 

Low, Aaron 244 

Low, Isaac 209 

Low Point . . .• 313, 316, 470 

Lown fanJily, the, 240 

Lown, Frank B 498 

Lyall, Rev. John Edward 476, 484 

Lyman, G. K., 245 

Lyndon Hall 229 

Mabbett, Joseph, 487 

Mabbett, Samuel, 487 

Mabbettsville 481 

Mackin, James 314, 346 

MacKinnon, John, 348 

Madison, Charles H • • ■ 256 

Maher, David 281, 283 

Maher, Richard Francis, 278, i8d 

Manufacturies, 234-240; 319, 336,337 
420, 468-470 

Maps: 

Hudson River, showing post road 

between N. Y. and Albany, 48 

Oblong, 42 

Rhinebeck, town of 44* 

Road Maps: 

Dutchess and Putnam Counties, 

inside back cover 
New York to Poughkeepsie, 

671,672, 673 
PoughkeepsietoAlbany,. .^.^.^._ 676 

StratfordtoPoughkeepsie,.^.^.^._ ^^^ 

Rombout Patent ■ ■ • ■ 36 

Marsh, Rev. Joseph 372, 456 

Marshall, Charles C 497 

Marshall, De Witt C. 442 

Marshall, Jarvis 4U 

Marvin, Dr. Nathaniel, ^7d 

Mase, Willard H., 333, 346 



XIV 



INDEX— 'PART I. 



PAGE 

Masonic fraternity 597-607 

Ancient Craft Masonry 597 

Chivalric Masonry 604 

Cryptic Masonry 604 

early history 597-603 

first lodge 599 

Grand Commandery 604, 605 

persecution of in 1826 599 

Provincial Grand Lodge, Modem 

and Ancient, 597, 598 

Royal Arch Masonry 603 

St. John the Evangelist, celebra- 

tionof, 600, 601 

United Grand Lodge of England, 

597, 598, 599, 601, 603 

Amenia Lodge, No. 672 607 

Beacon Lodge, No. 283 605 

Dover Plains Lodge, No. 666 606 

Halcyon Lodge, No. 832 607 

Harlem VaUey Lodge, No. 827, ... 607 

Hendrick Husdon Lodge 607 

King Solomon's Council, No. 31, 

R. andS. M 604 

Monumental Lodge, No. 374 605 

Poughkeepsie Chapter, No. 172 . . 603 
Poughkeepsie Commandery, No. 

43, Knight Templars 604-605 

Poughkeepsie Lodge, No. 266, . . . 605 

Rhinebeck Lodge, No. 432, 605 

Shekomeko Lodge, No. 468 606 

Stissing Lodge, No. 615 606 

Triune Lodge, No. 782 607 

Wappingers Lodge, No. 671 606 

Warren Lodge No. 275 509 

Webotuck Lodge, No. 480 606 

Hasten, Dr. John, 427 

Matteawan Company, 341 

Matteawan Manufacturing Co 342 

Matteawan State Hospital, 588 

Matteawan Village. See Town of 
Fishkill. 

Matthews, Jr., John 195 

Matthews, John H 255 

Mattice, Rev. Abraham 415 

Maxfield, John 205 

McCarty, James C 522 

McConnell, Robert 195 

McDermott Milk Co 284 

McDonald, John 378, 379 

McDonalds, the, 379, 380 

McDougall, General 176 

McKean, Levi 240 

McKinley, Daniel 468 

McKinley , Peter 468 

McLane, H. R 496 



PAGE 

McSweeney, Dr. Edward,.. 620, 627, 628 

McSweeney, Rev. Patrick F 

620,621,622, 627 

McSwiggan, Rev. M. M. J., 627, 628 

McVickar, Rev. John 357, 360, 361 

Mead, James V 345 

Mead, Samuel, 360 

Mead, Samuel H 346 

Medical institutions, 586 

Highland Hospital 590 

Hudson River State Hospital, . . . 586 

Matteawan State Hospital 588 

St. Barnabas Hospital, 589 

Vassar Brothers' Hospital 589 

Medical profession, the 528 

Society of Dutchess county 528 

address by Samuel Bard, 1806,. 

532-533 
alphabetical list of members, . . 

550-585 

early organization, 528 

first physician 547 

historical sketch, 1740-1908,. . . 547 

reorganization 538 

Members of Assembly 71 

Merritt, Douglas, 449 

Merritt, Isaac 237 

Merritt, Dr. J. P., 59* 

Merritt, Wm. Henry, 473 

Merwin, William J f . 403 

Mesiers, the, 466, 467, 472 

Midfield Dairy Farm 283 

Milan, town of, 369 

boundaries 369 

bridges in 371 

churches 372 

description of, in 1824 370 

distribution of the poor of, 371 

early settlers, 369, 370 

enlistments in, 372 

erection of " 369 

first town meeting in 370 

hamlets of 369, 370 

in the Revolution 371, 372 

oldest mill in 370 

Supervisors, list of 372-373 

Miley, John 229 

Militia, 

American Citizen's Corps 193 

Colonial force of 1715 80 

officers and privates 81-90 

Continental Lme 120 

Fourth, or Dutchess Regiment, 

120-134 

Cooper's Rangers 136, 169 

Frear's Regiment 136 



INDEX— PART I. 



XV 



, PAGE 

Militia, 

Harris (Ira) Guard 194 

Minute Men, 137-140 

Morgan Rifles 194 

People's Elsworth Regiment 194 

Ramsey's Col. Regiment 193 

Washington Greys 194 

Second Regt. .officers and pri- 
vates 140-147 

Third Regt. officers and pri- 
vates 147-150 

Fourth Regt. officers, 150 

- Fifth Regt. officers and pri- 
vates 160-154 

Sixth Regt. officers and privates, 

155-164 
Seventh Regt. officers and pri- 
vates 164-170 

Nineteenth Regt 194 

Twentieth 193 

Twenty-first 193 

Thirtieth, (Co. E), 193 

Forty-seventh, 194 

Seventy-fourth (Co. 1.), 193 

One Hundred and twenty-eighth, 

194r-195 
One hundred and fiftieth (Dutch- 
ess Co.) 195-197 

Millard, John H., 522 

Millbrook, See Washington town. 

Miller, George N., 449 

Miller, Horatio 449 

Miller, Mrs. Mary R 444, 449 

Miller, Roswell P 496 

Miller, Sidney G., 384 

Miller, Hon. William Starr 444 

Millerton. See Northeast. 

Millerton Iron Co., 377 

Mills, early grist and saw : 

Clinton, 273; Dover 279 

East Fishkill 294 

Fishkill 302, 319, 337, 338, 339 

La Grange, 364; Milan 370 

Northeast, 377; Pine Plains 417 

Poughkeepsie 202, 235, 236 

Red Hook, 428; Rhinebeck, . 439, 441 

Stanford, 453; Wappinger 467 

Mills, J. Carpenter 351 

Mills, Mrs. Odgen 358 

Milton Ferry,. ., 207, 216, 659-664 

Minerals and natural deposits 

31, 32, 258, 270, 275, 276, 377, 378, 
379, 380, 421, 

Mitchell, Isaac 217, 242 

Montfort, Adrian 367 

Montfort, Charles R 347 



PAGE 

Montfort, Jacob . 295 

Montfort, Peter 294 

Montgomery, Janet (Mrs. Richard) 

,^ , , 135, 276, 429, 447, 448 

Montgomery, John 327 

Montgomery, Gen. Richard 

._ ,„ 95, 134, 135, 429 

Moore, Allen 366 

Moore Henry ' ' 194 

Moore, John '.\ .52^524 

Moore, Stephen 364 

Moore, Dr. William 549 

Moravians, the 26, 27 

Morehouse Tavern, . . . 182, 191, 289, 392 

Morey, Jacob 364 

Morgan, George 247 

Morgan Rifles 194 

Morris, Col. Lewis, 94 

Morrissey, Johyp, 386 

Morschauser, Joseph 226 

Morse, Howard H 437, 440, 450 

Morse, Samuel F. B 222 

Morton, Hon. Levi P 438, 444, 449 

Mosher, Tripp, 487, 488 

Mott, Ebenezer 273 

Mott, Samuel 273 

Mount Ross, 417 

"Mountain Rest," 320 

Mountains : 

Clove, 28; Dennis Hill 28 

Fishkill, 28; Schaghticoke 30 

Schultz 272, 275 

Stissing, 28, 369, 374, 405, 406 

Taconic 28, 31, 258, 375, 384, 385 

Ten Mile Hill, 30; Winchell, 374 

Muntross, John, 466 

Murphy, William A '.' . 269 

Muster, Rolls 136-171 

Myers, Matthew J., 240 

Mylod, John J., 608 



Neeley, Alexander 375, 378 

Neilson, Samuel 625 

Nelson, Homer A., 246, 509-511 

Nelson House. See Part II 

Nelson, R. W 465 

Nelson, Jr. Reuben 364 

Nelson. Richard 243 

Nelson, Thomas 242 

Newbold, Hon. Thomas, 356 

New Hamburgh, . 471 

Newlin, Cjrrus 319, 320 

Newlin, Robert 320, 338, 339 

Newlin mills, 345 



XVI 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Newspapers: 

of Dover, 282 ; of Pishkill, . . . 350, 351 
ofMillbrook, 496; of Millerton, . . 384 

of Pawling 403 

of Poughkeepsie, 212, 213, 214, 216 
217, 219, 221, 222, 238, 241-246 

New York and Sharon Canal, 290 

New York Rubber Co 339, 342 

Nichols, Israel T., 469, 475 

Nichols, Thomas G., 245 

Nicholson, Dr. Clark A 270 

Nilan, Rev. James, . . . 232, 621, 622, 623 
Nine Partners Boarding School, . . . 

487-488, 658 

Ninham, Daniel 25 

Northeast, town of, 374 

boundaries, 375 

Boston Corners "Republic,". ..386-387 

churches, 377, 381-384 

early divisions, 374 

early industries, 378 

early mail delivery in, 378 

early settlements, 376, 377 

fanning mill factory at, 381 

first town meeting in 375 

Millerton, village of 384 

mining operations in 378-379 

natural features of, 375 

ore beds in, 377 

origin of name of 375 

pugilistic contest at, 386-387 

refugees' shelter in 385 

Supervisors, hst of 387-388 

support of the poor of, 376 

town meeting of 1824, 374-375 

Nortl-Jrup, Luther 227 

Noxon, Bartholomew 83, 268 

Noxon, Isaac J 421 

Noxon house, 280 

Oakley, George P 219, 220, 237 

Oakley, Jesse 242 

Oakley, Thomas J 214, 244 

Oakwood Seminary 490 

Odell, Caspar L 521 

O'Donnell, Tom 386 

Old Ladies' Home 256 

Obnstead, Rev. A. F 448, 449 

Ore deposits 

31, 258, 267, 270, 377, 378-380, 463 

O'RiSly, Rev. PhiUp 614, 616 

Osborn, Abner, 270 

Osborn, William H 402 

Osborn, Dr. Cornelius 548-549 



PAGE 

Osborne, Edward B 245 

Osterhout, Laurens 439 

Ostrom, Hendrick 202, 204 

Otis, Hon. John H 273 

Owen, George W 351 

Owen, Jonathan 355 

Paine, Ephriam, 95 

Paine, Dr. Horace M 591 

Paine, P. N 384 

Palatines,... 52, 53, 58, 406, 439, 440 

Palmer, Hon. A. W 264 

Parker, Dr. Edward H 544 

Parks, A. A 246 

Pavone, Rev. Nicholas, 648 

Pawling, town of 

Akin Hall Association of 402 

an early store in, 393 

Bank of 402 

British troops at 91 

boundaries 389 

canal project in 393 

cattle produce in, 392 

churches, 391, 397-402 

circuit members, 1844, of, 400 

early divisions of 389-391 

early industries, 391 

early settlement and settlers, .... 394 

.erection of , 389 

fire department of 403 

fires in, 393, 394, 403 

hamlets of, 394 

library of, 402 

military history of 395 

milk factories in 394 

natural features of 389 

newspapers of 403 

population of, in 1810 392 

Revolutionary associations,. . 173, 174 

roads of 391 

robberies in 396 

Savings Bank of ^ . 402 

schools of, 403 

selling the poor of 393 

Supervisors, list of 404 

tablet to John Kane, in 395, 396 

territorial dispute in, 391 

Washington's headquarters at, . . . 395 

water supply of, 403 

whipping post in 392 

village of, 394 

Pawling, Henry 39 

Pawling, Neiltie 39, 437 

Pearce, Nathan, 120 



INDEX— PART I. 



xvu 



PAGE 

Pearce, Jr., Nathan 396 

Pearce, Capt. William, 396 

Pease, Albert S., 245 

Pelton, Charles M 238 

Pelton, George P., 223 

Pendleton, Edward H., 357 

Pendleton, Nathaniel 357, 360 

People's Elsworth Regiment 194 

Perkins, Edward E 246 

Perry, Charles, 375, 376 

Persons, John 353 

Peters, Abel 273 

Petition for Repeal of Acts 94 

Philipsburgh Manor 390 

Philipse, Adolph 390 

Phillips, Edmund S 518 

Phillips, Hon. Samuel K 346 

Phoenix Horseshoe Company, 239 

Physicians, alphabetical list of,. .550-585 
members of Homeopathic Med. 

Socy 591-596 

Pilgrim, Dr. Charles W 591 

Pine Plains, town of 405 

banksof 416, 417 

boundaries 405 

churches 408-415 

company business of 407 

divisions of 405 

early educational institutions of, . 410 

early mills of 417 

early religious denominations of, . 407 

early settlers of 406 

early stage routes 415 

erection of, 65 

first election in 407 

first postofSce of, 415 

first town meeting in 405 

Hubbell's cabin at 406 

in the Revolution, 406 

natural features of 405 

prosperity of 407 

public library of 416 

retarded settlement of 406 

scythe industry at, 416 

Seymour Smith Academy at 415 

Supervisors, list of 417-418 

Village 412,415, 416 

Place, John 315 

Place, Nehemiah, 314 

Plank Road 317 

Piatt, Edmund 44, 46, 199, 667 

Piatt, Eliphalet 422, 423, 442 

Piatt, Isaac 221, 243, 244 

Piatt, James B 245 

Piatt, John 1 216, 224, 245, 246, 255 

Piatt, Jonas, 214 



PAGE 

Piatt, Samuel 344 

Piatt, William B 442 

Piatt, Zephaniah 

95, 120, 206, 207, 211, 215, 242 

Pleasant Valley, town of, 419 

boundaries 419 

churches 421-424 

early divisions 419 

early settlements and settlers,419, 420 

erection of, 419 

limestone quarry at, 421 

Supervisors, list of 424-425 

Pleasant Valley, village of 420 

incorporated 420, 421 

library of, 421 

manufacturing industries 420 

"Pledge of Asssociation," 210 

"Plum Point,", 391 

PoliticalpartieS, 241-247; 338-339 

Pond, Captr-B. P., 484, 485 

Population, 1723, 50 

and taxable wealth during Revol- 
ution 172 

by towns, 1790, 55 

Post Road (King's) 200, 202, 203, 204 
208, 234, 325, 326, 354, 427 

Potter, Asa 442 

Potter, Paraclete 219, 242 

Poughkeepsie, city of 222 

a steamboat terminal 234 

Adriance Memorial Library of, . . . 231 

Adriance, Piatt & Co 238 

Anchor Bolt & Nut Co 239 

Arnold's Chair factory, 235 

at the outbreak of the Civil War, . 222 

banks 240-241 

Board of Education, first 232 

Board of Public Works created, . . 226 
burning of the first Dutch Church, 249 

Chamber of Commerce,. 225, 239 

Chapinville Wheel Co. 239 

churches and pastors 247-255 

Baptist 253-254 

Catholic, 253, 255, 608-650 

Congregational, 255 

Dutch Reformed, 

205, 207, 213, 214, 247-250 

Episcopal, 250, 251, 252 

Friends, 253 ; Lutheran, 255 

Methodist 252, 253, 255 

Presbjrterian, 250, 254, 255 

Universalist 255 

City Charter, revision of 225, 226 

City Court established 226 

City Hall erected 218 

Committee meeting of 1862 194 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

keepsie, city of, 

erage business at 239 

ravS Separator Works 239 

ocratic mayors of 247 

;hess Insurance Co 241 

:hess Manufacturing Co., .... 239 

man College 223, 230 

man Park 223 

ish biirying-ground 251 

:ka Mowing Machine Co.,. . . . 239 
jT Company incorporated, . . . 235 

landing moved 235 

icial institutions 240-241 

afts built at 172 

church of, 247 

mayor, 222 

k's (V.) Sons Brewery 240 

esting machinery manufac- 

re, 238 

•ew congregations, 255 

e for the Friendless, 256 

ie of Industrjr, 257 

son River Railroad project,.. 221 

poration 222 

stries, 235 

■oundries, 237 

3h synagogue 254 

r landing, 235 

papers, 241-246 

ey s nail factory 235 

Ladies' Home 227, 228, 256 

nix Horseshoe Co., 239 

Hall, 256 

ical parties 241-247 

;le Memorial Home 257 

jerity of 223 

c men of 241-247 

c schools 231 

iting house opened at 194 

lental camp located at, 196 

i 234 

amabas Hospital 257 

iary Pair 223 

id period of growth, 223 

:a Button Works 239 

luilding industry, 238 

ictory 238 

iboats built at 238 

ng industry, 238 

ng and manufacturing in- 

stries 234 

n Rescue Mission 256 

r landing 235 

als, 226-232 

ttage Hill Seminary, 229 



PAGE 

Poughkemsie, city of, schools, 

Dutchess County Academy, . . . 

226,227, 231 

Eastman College, 223, 230 

Female Academy, 229 

Friends' 229 

High 228 

Lancaster 231 

Lyndon Hall, 229 

PubUc 231 

Putnam Hall 230 

Riverview Academy 229 

State and National Law 230 

Vassar College, 217, 223, 233 

Warring, 229 

Vassar Brewery 237, 267 

Vassar Brothers' Home for Aged 

Men 257 

Vassar Brothers' Hospital, 257 

Vassar " Institute, 177, 237, 257 
wagon and carriage manufac- 
ture 238 

water board abolished, 226 

water works 223, 224 

whaling business 237. 238 

Whitehouse shoe factory, 239 

Woman's Christian "Temper- 
ance Union 256 

Women's Union Bible and 

Tract Society, 256 

Young Men's Christian Asso- 
ciation 255 

Young Women's Christion As- 
sociation, 256 

Poughkeepsie, town of 200 

as a covmty seat 203 

boundaries, 200 

British troops at 91 

celebration of Cornwallis' sur- 
render at, 214 

court houses 203, 208, 215, 217 

Continental troops at 176, 212 

de Chastellux's arrival in. 188 

during the Revolution 209 

early bridges of, 205-207 

early divisions of, 200 

early elections in 58, 59 

early roads of 204-207 

early settlement 45, 201 

ferry at 216 

first county house and prison 203 

first home newspaper of, 216 

first land grant 201 

first settlers of 45, 201 

first Post Road act .' 202 



INDEX— PART I. 



XIX 



T> , , PAGE 

Foughkeepsie, town of 

freeholders' meeting, 1717, at, . . . 65 
growth and renown from Revo- 

^ lution 214 

Governor Clinton visits 212 

Legislature sessions at, . . . 

176,212,213,215, 222 
meaning and derivation of name 

of. .••••• 200, 201 

meetmg of 1774in 94 

officers elected in 1720, 59 

ratification of the Constitution at, 

214-216 

river trade increased 208 

Rural Cemetery 202 

sawmill built in 1699 202 

shipbuilding for the American 

navy at 211 

slow growth of until 1740 208 

State. Government removed to, . . 

175, 212 
Supervisors from 1788-1854, .... 669 

Poughkeepsie, village of, 217 

Dutch Burying Ground 218 

early enterprises and industries, . . 220 

English burying ground, 220, 251 

establishment of water supply at, 219 

first fire company in 217 

first telegraph office in 222 

first trustees of 217 

great fire of 1836 in 219 

Improvement Party of, 

219, 220, 221, 229, 237, 502 

incorporation of 203, 217 

Lafayette visits, 218 

locomotive factory at 220, 237 

market in, 218 

postoffice at 218 

real estate boom 220, 221 

water supply of, 217 

Poughkeepsie bridge, 223, 224, 225 

Poughkeepsie Glass Works 237 

Poughkeepsie Iron Co 235 

Poughkeepsie Literary Club, 257 

Poughkeepsie Lyceum Association, 

230 231 

"Poughkeepsie plan," 232^ 620 

Poughkeepsie Society of Natural 

Science, 257 

Poughkeepsie Whaling Co 237 

Poughquag, 269 

Powai, Thomas 309, 349, 660 

Power, Nicholas 217, 242 

Pratt, Maiy Morris 234 

Precinct divisions 61 

Precinct supervisors, 1742-'87 62-64 

Precincts, relative wealth of 64 



PAGE 

Prendergast, James 92 

Prendergast, Mehitabel Wing,. ..91, 92 

Prendergast, William 91, 92, 391 

Preston, Ebenezer, 279 

Preston, Martin 279 

Preston mill 279 

Prin^le Memorial Home, 257 

Provincial Congresses 95, 120, 171 

Provincial Convention, 94, 95 

deputies, 1775 67 

Pruyn, Hon. John V. L., 433 

Pulling, Abram 298 

Pulver, Alanson, 375 

Pulver, J. W 384 

Putnam Hall School, 230 

Putnam, Gen. Israel, 175, 211 

Quaker Hill, 53, 9*i, 173, 174, 274, 389 
392, 394, 396, 397, 402 

community in 1771 54 

Hospital 174 

Quakers. See Friends. 

Quit-rents 34, 376 

Quitman, Dr. F. H 409, 447 



Railroads : 

Boston, Hartford & Erie 

317,345, 350 

Central New England 224, 225 

Clove Branch 268 

Dutchess and Columbia, 

316,324,334,344, 350 

Harlem 290, 316, 374, 378, 393 

Hudson River,.221, 316, 341, 343, 349 

Newburgh, Dutchess & Conn 

330,350,415,478, 494 

New York & New England, 

226,320,343,344, 350 

New York Central 403, 465 

New York, New Haven & Hart- 
ford, 225, 350 

Poughkeepsie & Eastern 

223 224 225 458 

Ramsdell, Homer,309, 316, 345, 348, 349 

Rankin, James 348 

Rankin, Robert 6., 322, 339, 341 

Ranney, Thomas S., 243 

Ratification of the Constitution, . . . 

176, 214r-216 

Ranch, Christian H., 26 

Reardon, James 494 

Red Hook, town of 426 

Annandale College, 433 

boundaries, 426 



XX 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Red Hook, town of, 

British troops at 428, 429 

churches 433, 434-435 

country estates 429-432 

early settlers, 428 

erection of, 426 

Indian battle at Magdalen, . . . 426-427 

millsof 427, 428 

origin of name, 427 

Red Hook village, 426 

Supervisors, list of, 436 

villages of 426 

Red Lion'inn 289 

Redmond, Geraldyn 433 

Reed, Newton, 259, 263, 266 

Regiments. See Militia. 

Remke, Abraham 408 

Renwick, Jr., James, 233 

Representatives in Colonial Assem- 
bly 67 

Representatives in Congress 68 

R.equirer, Jacob 353 

■"Revolutionary Pledge," 95 

signers and non-signers 96-119 

Revolutionary War 93, 180 

Reynolds, Edward G 283 

Reynolds, Israel 405, 415 

Rhinebeck, town of, 437 

banksof, 442 

boundaries, 437 

churches 441, 444-449 

early mills, 439, 440, 441 

early settlements, 45 

early settlers, 439, 440 

erection of, 437 

ferry service established, .... 441, 442 

first land deed 437 

map of 442 

origin of name 440 

Rhmecliii Memorial Btiilding, . . . 444 

schools, 444 

Supervisors, list of 449-450 

territorial limits 437 

Rhinebeck, village of 442 

Academy, 444 

banks, 442 

churches 445, 446-449 

fire of 1864 442 

hotel 450 

incorporation of 442 

Starr Institute 444 

Ricart, Emery 415 

Richey, Rev. Thomas 434 

Rider, John P 335 

Ring, L 360 

Riordan, Rev. Michael 618, 619 



PAGE 

Ritter, Fred W 351 

Rivers and streams : 

Casper creek, 29, 39, 201, 202, 209, 236 

Clove Kill 460 

Crom Elbow Creek 29, 30, 39 

40, 353 476 

Croton River 29, 389 

Esopus creek, 40 

Fair Kill, The 

29, 30, 202, 208, 219, 236, 253 

Fishkill, The 29, 44, 460 

Harlem River 290 

Hudson River, 

17, 44, 57, 190, 200, 203, 205, 290 
Landsman KiU, 29, 30, 437, 438, 441 

Quassaick creek, 307 

Rhinebeck creek, 437, 438 

RoeliflE Jansen's Kill 29, 57, 406 

Saw Kill, The, 29, 30, 38, 426, 428 

Sawyer's creek 3% 

Shekomeko creek, 40S 

SpackenKill 209, 236 

Stony creek 426, 428 

Swanip River 29, 278, 290, 389 

Ten Mile River 

29, 30, 182, 258, 278, 290 

Wappingers creek, 29, 32, 38, 201, 20i 

205, 206, 209, 363, 405, 419, 45i 

452, 465, 467, 469 I 

Wassaic creek 30, 25$ 

Webatuck creek, 30 

Riverview Academy, 229 

Rives, Reginald, 181 

Road map of Dutchess and Putnam 

Counties.., Inside back cover 

Roads, ^e post r Odd &nd turnpikes 

Roberts, Mrs. Abigail H 456, 462 

Roberts, Rev. Philetus, 275, 457 

Roberts, R. E 227 

Robinson, Col. Beverly, 299 

Rockefeller, John D 234 

Rockwell & Son 341 

Rocky Glen Cotton Mills 34& 

Rogers, Archibald, 356 

Rogers, Silas, 452 

Rombout, Francis, 34, 300, 301, 302 

,Roosa, Adria, 437 

Roosevelt, Isaac 177 ! 

Roosevelt, J. R 356 

Roosevelt, Mrs. James 356 

Roosevelt, John A 356 

Rosa, Arie 39, 204, 437, 438, 439 

Rothery File Works, 341 

Rothery, John 341 

Routh, Martha 488 



INDEX— PART I. 



XXI 



PAGE 

Rowe, William A 408 

Rowes, the 369, 372 

Roy, James S., 475 

Rudd, Zebulon ', 241 

Ruggles, Charles H., 245 

Rymphs, the, 357 

Rysdyck, Rev. Isaac,. 248, 296, 328, 471 

Sacchi, Gust. A 380 

Sackett, Leonard, B 516 

Sackett, Nathaniel 95, 171 

Sackett, Capt. Richard 

41, 42, 53, 58, 204, 258 

Sague, Jr., Horace 403 

Sague, John K., 247 

St. Barnabas Hospital, 589 

St. Stephen's College, 433 

Sanders, Henry M 234 

Sanders, Robert, 34, 38, 39 

Sands, William 243 

Sanford, Robert 522 

Sargent, Henry Winthrop, 321, 322, 333 

Sargent Industrial School 319 

Sargent, Winthrop, 334 

Saunters, Stephen, 343 

Saw Kill The,. ..29, 30, 38, 426, 428 

Sayre, Rev. William N 275, 411, 412 

Schell, Augustus 500 

Schell, W^ter W 500 

Schenck, Abraham H 338 

Schenck, Gysbert 95 

Schenck, Henry, 319 

Schenck, Dr .John P 319 

Schenck, Peter A 319 

Schenck, Dr. Peter D 472 

Schenck, Peter H 319, 340. 341, 347 

Schenck, Samuel B., 341 

Schofield, Fredmck 323 

Schofield, John S., 195 

Schofield, Lebeus, 324 

Schofield, Miles 323 

Schools, 

of Ameoia 261, 262 

of Dover Plains 282, 283 

of Pishkill 319, 321 

of Hyde Park, 358, 359 

of Pawling 403 

of Pine Palins, 410 

of Poughkeepsie 223, 226-233 

of Red Hods 433-434 

of Rhinebeck, 444 

of Stanford, 457 ; of Union Vale, . 464 

of Washington 

485, 487-488, 489, 490, 493-494 

Schoonmaker, Edward, 206 



PAGE 

Schoonmaker, Hendrickus 248 

Schram, William, 244 

Schryver, John T 442, 448 

Schultz, David H 275 

Schultz, Theodore A.,; . . .275, 601, 602 

Schurrie, Johannes 466 

Schuyler, John, 466 

Schuyler, Col. Peter, 

38, 41, 202, 427, 437, 438 

Schuyler, Gen. Philip 94, 174 

Schuyler, Mrs. Van Rensseleer 395 

Scoles, Richard J., 494 

Scoute, Simon 202 

Seabury, Rev. SamUel, 250, 329 

Seamless Clothing Mfg. Co., 341 

Sebring, Jacob 470 

Selleck, Alonzo, F 361 

Seneca Button Works 239 

Settlements, pioqfier, 44r-56 

Seymour, Rev .George P 433 

S^rmour Smith' Academy 415 

Shadboldt, Israel 273 

Shapparoon lake, 287 

Sheafe, Mrs. John Fisher 472 

Sheahan, Rev, Joseph F 625 

Sheehan, Dennis 475 

Sheehan, Nichols, 475 

Sheffield Farms Slosson Decker Co., 260 

Shekomeko mission , . 26, 27 

Shaw, Henry W., 222 

Shaw, S. B., 282 

Sheldon, Collins 519 

Sheldon, Wilson B 292 

Shelton, Dr. P. W 473 

Sherman's March 197 

Shermans, the 397 

Sherrill, Hunting, 360 

Sherwood, Congressman 458 

Sherwood, H. B 372 

Sherwood, Mrs. Laura 395 

Shields, James 469 

Slavery, 45, 55, 344, 346, 482 

Sleight, Edgar 483 

Sleight, Henry 273 

Sleight, Henry D 364 

Sleight James, 364 

Slocum, Charles H 269 

Smeedes, Jan, 45, 202 

Smith, Alfred B 195, 246, 256, 516 

Smith, Deliverance, 422 

Smith, Judge Isaac 280 

Smith, Capt. James 193, 194 

Smith, Hon. John T 315, 336, 346 

Smith, Lewis N 372 

Smith, Melancton, 

95, 120, 176, 177, 178-, 215, 422 



XXIV 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Van Benthuysen, Barent 427 

Van Buren, Martin 245, 452 

Van Buren, Smith T 323, 334 

Van Camp, Jacob, 279 

Van Cleef, J. Spencer 515 

Van Cortlandt, Gertrude 302 

Van Cortlandt, Stephanus, 

34, 301, 302, 466 

Vandeburgh, Edgar M 480 

Van Den Bogert, Jacobus 65, 247 

Van Den Bogert, Mjmdert 204, 247 

Van Denburgh, Capt. Peter, 82, 83, 84 

Vanderbilt, P. W 356 

Vanderburgh, Col 269 

VanderBurgh, Henry, 59 

Vandewater, A. J 318 

Van Dyke, Henry, 251 

Van Gieson, Rev. A. P 

177,216,247, 250 

Van Keuren, Benjamin 205 

Van Keuren, Edward, . 246 

246 
202 
207 
247 
83 
193 
466 
327 
346 
295 



202, 204, 



Van Kleeck, Albert, 
Van Kleeck, Baltus, 
Van Kleeck, Barendt, 65|, 
Van Kleeck, Johannes,. . 
Van Kleeck, Louwerens, 

Van Kleeck, Theodore,. 

Van Rensselaer, Stephen, 428, 

Van Schie, Rev. Cornelius, .... 247, 

Van Steenburgh, J. E 325, 

Van Vlackren, Aaron 293, 

Van Vlackren, Tunis 294 

Van Vliet, George S 276 

Van VUet, William H., 342, 344 

Van Voorhis, EUas 328 

Van Wagner, Mrs. Susan 362 

Van Wyck, Cornelius 295, 303 

Van Wyck, Dr. Theodorus 

293, 303, 304, 364 

Varick, Henry D., 241, 505 

Varick, John R 206 

Varick, Richard, 177 

Varick, Dr. Richard A 542 

Vas, Rev. Petrus 247, 445 

Vassar Brewery, 237, 257 

Vassar Brothers' Home for Aged 

Men 257 

Vassar Brothers' Hospital, .... 257, 589 

Vassar Brothers' Institute, 177, 257 

Vassar College 217, 223, 233 

Vassar, John Guy 

233, 234, 237, 254, 257 

Vassaf, Matthew, 

220, 221, 223, 229, 233, 237, 241, 253 

Vassar, Jr., Matthew, 

233, 237, 246, 254, 257 



PAGE 

Vaughn's Raid 211 

Velie. See VieU. 

Velie, Baltus 364, 366, 367 

VeUe, John C 421 

VeHe, Peter 247 

Verbank Station 463 

Verplanck, Anne, 466 

Verplanck, Aryentie 311' 

Verplanck Brick Co 345 

Verplanck, Daniel C, 312, 330 

Verplanck, Gulian 

34, 36, 300, 301, 302, 310, 313, 466 

Verplanck, Gulian C, 313 

Verplanck, James deLancey, 313 

Verplanck, Mary 466 

Verplanck, Samuel, 

295, 310, 311, 312, 322., 473 

Verplanck, William E.,.. . .310, 313, 475 

Verplanck, William S 

313, 314, 345, 346, 473 

Ver Valin, Gideon, 466 

Ver Valin, Isaack, 364 

Viele, Amout C 

26, 37, 38, 44, 61, 201, 301 
Villages: 

Amenia, 260; Dover Plains, . .279-286 

Pishkill, 324; Hyde Park 354 

Hopewell Junction 292 

Matteawan, 318; Millbrook 491 

Millerton 384 

Pawling, 394 

Pine Plains, 412, 415, 416 

Pleasant Valley, 419; Red Hook, 426 

Rhinebeck, 442; Staatsburgh, . . . 357 

TivoH-Madalin 426 

Wappingers Falls, 466 

Vincent, Charles 287 

Vincent, Edwin 287 

Vosburg, Jacob 202 

Vosburgh. Peter H 351 

Vradenburgh, Jacob 439 



Wackerhagen, Rev. A 408 

Wager, Ambrose 514 

Waldo, Samuel 284, 288, 289, 454 

Walsen, Godfrey 53 

Walsh, Charles 403 

Wanzer, Mrs. Phebe T., 402 

Wappinger, town of 465 

boundaries, 465 

churches 471-474 

early settlement and settlers, 466, 466 

erection of 466 

floods of 1819 and 1841 467 



INDEX— PART I. 



XXV 



Vn PAGE 

Wappinger, town of, 

^«\oi 467-470 

smpbuilding industry of 467 

oupervisors, list of, 475 

Wappingers creek, 29, 32, 38, 201, 202 

205, 206, 209, 368, 405, 419 

™ . 451, 452, 465, 467, 469 

Wappmgers Falls, viUage of 465 

banks 475 

Clinton Co , , 469 

Dutchess Print Works '.'. 468 

electric railway 466 

first board of trustees 465 

Franklindale Cotton Co., 468 

Grinnell Library Association, 474r-475 

Independent Comb Co., 469 

industries 468-470 

Stuart Foundry 469 

Sweet, Orr & Co 469-470 

Wappingers tribe,. .24, 26, 34, 300, 325 

Ward, Rev. Henry 400, 401, 471 

Ward, Joshua 420, 423 

Ward Supervisors, 1720-'37, list of,. 60 

Warner, J onathan 228, 256 

Warring, Charles B 229 

Washington, Gen. George, 

173, 187, 192, 289, 337, 395 

Washington Greys 194 

Washington Hollow 483 

Washington, town of, 476 

almhouse, 480 

churches 481-486, 489 

during the Revolution 479-480 

erection of 477 

industries, 477 

libraries 483, 494 

location of, 476 

Millbrook, village of, 491 

bank 494 

churches 491-493 

Club, 494 

early settlement and settlers, . . 486 

fire company, 496 

gas plant 495 

Golf Club 494 

incorporation of 491 

jail, . 495 

library 483, 494 

postoffice 496 

prominent inhabitants 496, 497 

Round Table 496 

schools 493-494 

W. C. T. U 495 

natural features 477, 478 

origin of name 477 

roads 478 



PAGE 

Washington, town of, 

schools, 485, 487-488, 490, 493-494 

streams — water power 478, 479 

Supervisors, list of 497 

villages of 481-483 

Webatuck 287 

Webster, Daniel 245 

Weed, Daniel R 344 

Weeks, James 120 

Weeks, James H., 505 

Welch, Simon 442 

West Camp 53 

Westbrook, Rev. Cornelius 330 

Weston, W. H 337 

Weston, Weldon F 337 

Whalen, Thomas P 283 

"Wharton House," 173 

Wheaton, Charles,. . . ^246, 482, 604, 509 
Wheaton, Rev. HomS', . . .414, 424, 482 

Wheaton, Isaac S.,. . . 482, 504, 509 

Wheeler, Eben 376, 408 

Wheeler, Dr. William 532 

Wheeler, William H 194 

Whipple, Frank E 241 

White, Dr. Bartow 340 

White, Ezra, 230 

White, Dr. Lewis H., 326, 536, 538, 543 

Whitefield, George 263 

Whitehead, Rev. Charles B 

249,295, 296 

Whitehouse, John O. 245, 246 

Whiteihan, Hendrick 429 

Whiteman, Jacob, 429 

Whitney, Eugene S 337, 342 

Whittemore, Samuel 321, 322 

Wiccopee 320 

Wickes, Edward 195 

Wicks, Capt. David 355 

Wilber, Charles S 351 

Wilber, Theron 414 

Wilkinson, Arthur, 193 

Wilkinson, George, 483 

Wilkinson, John 363, 483 

Wilkinson, Robert F 505 

Wilkinson, WaUam 505 

Willetts, Deborah 410, 489 

WiUetts, Jacob 410, 488, 489, 490 

WiUiams, Gerome, 515 

Williams, James L 521 

Williams, William D 273 

Williams, William P 358 

Willson & Eaton Co 260 

Wilson, Billy, 386 

Wilson, Daniel, 429 

Wilson, James (Hyde Park), 355 

Wilson, James (Red Hook) 429 



XXVI 



INDEX— PART I. 



PAGE 

Wilson, John, 429 

Wilson, Robert 429 

Wilson, Warren H., 54 

Wiltse, Capt. George, 347 

Wiltse, James, 305 

Wiltse, Martin, 305, 306 

Wiltse, Jr., Martin, 

305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 347 

Wiltse & Son, Martin 347 

Wiltsie, Johannes 295 

Winans, James 208 

Winans, Leonard, 456 

Winchell, Aaron E 416 

Winchell, Jaines, '. 381 

Wing, Jackson 279 

Wing, John D.,. 490, 491, 496 

WingTavem 279 

Wingdale 287 

Winslow, Mrs. John F 254 

Winter, Matthew 417 

Wintrineham, C. V 489 

Wisner, Henry, 94 



PAGE 

Wodell, Silas, 516-517 

Wolcott, Charles M., 322, 339, 341 

Woodin, William R., 195, 519 

Woolhiser, James H., 351 

Woolsey, Capt. CM 659 

Woolsey, Richard, 660 

Women's Christian Temperance 

Union, 256 

Women's Union Bible and Tract So- 
ciety, 256 

Wright, D. G., 229 

Yates, Robert 176 

Yelverton, Gale 248 

Young Men's Christian Association, 256 
Young Women's Christian Associa- 
tion 256 

Zabriskie, Capt. Andrew C, 433 

Zinzendorf , Count 26 

Ziegenfuss, Rev. Henry L 251, 414 



INDEX-PART II. 



PAGE 

Adriance, John P 683 

Akin, Albert John 684 

Akin or Aiken Family 684 

Albro, William Clark 684 

Aldridge, Thomas 685 

Ambler, John P 685 

Anderson, William R 685 

Andrews, Minot D 686 

Andrews, Robert Wesley, M. D 686 

Angell, Milton H., M. D 687 

Arnold, Charles W. H 687 

Badeau, William H 687 

Baker, Amos T., M. D 688 

Baker, W. H 688 

BaU, John B 688 

Banks, Dr. James Lenox 688 

Barker, Harry C 689 

Barnes, Oliver Weldon 689 

Barnes, Richard H 690 

Barrett, E. P 691 

Barrett, R. R 691 

Barry, David P 691 

Bartlett, WilUam H 692 

Bingham, Isaac E 692 

Blackburn, A. H 692 

Blair, James 692 

Bodenstein, John George 693 

Brinckerhoffl, Theodore 693 

Brown, John W 694 

Budd, William D 694 

Butts, Allison 694 

Carman, Isaac P 694 

Case, Otis Jameson, M. D 695 

Case, Walter R., M. D 695 

Cass, Robert 695 

Chaffee, James Stuart 696 

Chanler, Lewis Stuyvesant 696 

Clapp, Clinton W 697 

Clark, Henry D 698 

Clark, Col. Henry P 698 

Coddington, George H., M. D 698 



«-i ■..,,. PAGE 

Conger, Edward A 699 

Conklin, Frederick L 699 

Conklin, William James, M. D 699 

Cookingham, Elias 700 

Corlies, Jacob 700 

Cornell, Isaag M., M. D 701 

Cronk, J. M., M. D 701 

Curtiss, Milton E. 702 

Daughton, Joseph A 702 

Dayley, Anna G. Winslow 703 

Dean, Robert E 703 

DeLaval Separator Company 703 

De La Vergne, Alexander 704 

De Peyster, Col. Johnston L 704 

Devine, Wright 705 

DeWint, John Peter 705 

Donnelly, John J 706 

Dorland, Cjrrenus P 706 

Doughty, J-oseph H 706 

■ Doughty, Robert W 706 

Drake, Clarence J 706 

DuBois, John C 707 

duBois, Dr. Theodore Weld 707 

Dugan, Daniel A. 708 

Dugan, John Peter 708 

Dutcher, Irving. 709 

Dutcher, John Bowdish 709 

Dutchess Fire Insurance Co 710 

Dutchess Manufacturing Co. ..'.... 710 
Dutchess Tool Company 710 

Elseffer, Jacob W 711 

Emerson, Thomas 711 

Eno, Frank 711 

Parrington, Walter 712 

Pinton, George R 712 

First National Bank of Amenia . . . 712 

Pishkill Landing Machine Co 713 

Fleming, John B 713 

Fowler, Benjamin Maltby 713 

Frost, Jacob Z 713 



XXVUl 



INDEX— PART 11. 



PAGE 

Gardenier, Samuel H 713 

Garrison genealogy 714 

Gindra, Conrad C 714 

Goring, Edward Morris 714 

Goring, Myatt E., P. D 716 

Goring, Thomas Edward 715 

Graham, LeGrand 717 

Graham, Robert Grant 717 

Green, Theron M 718 

Grubb, John B 718 

Guernsey, Egbert, M. D., L.L. D. . 718 

Guernsey, Homer W 719 

Guernsey, Stephen Gano 720 

Hackett, John 720 

Haight, Adelbert 721 

Haight, Albert 721 

Haight, Andreas ; 722 

Haight, J. Coriielius 722 

HaU, Dr. Asahel 723 

Ham, Eugene 724 

Ham, John M 724 

Hammond, Benjamin 725 

Hanna, John A 725 

Harris, Harry C 725 

Harris, Isham G., M. D 726 

Harrison, Almon M 726 

Hasbrook, Captain William 729 

Hasbrouck, Dr. Alfred 726 

Hasbrouck, Frank 728 

Hasbrouck, Oscar 729 

Hawley, F. Reed 729 

Hebard, Newton 729 

Hedges, John W 730 

Herrick, Timothy 730 

Hicks, Willet 730 

Hine, George M 731 

Hinsdale, Jacob S 731 

Hoffman, Nicholas 731 

Hopkins, Charles A 732 

Horan, Joseph F 732 

Hornbeck, Fred C 732 

Horton, Charles W 732 

Howland, Gen. Joseph 733 

Hughes, J. L 733 

Hughes, Miles 734 

Hufi, J. Frank 734 

Hurd, Robert 735 

Husted, Chester 735 

Husted, Edwin B 735 

Johnstone or Johnson Family 736 

Keech, John R 737 

Keine, Bernard 737 



PAGE 

Kelly, Frank H 737 

Kelly, John H 737 

Kelly, John T 738 

Ketcham, Gen. John H 738 

Ketcham, William S 741 

Kidder, George W 741 

Kieman, John P 742 

Knapp, George M 742 

Ladue, Eugene M 742 

Ladue, W. Ward 742 

Lamoree, George 742 

Lary, William G 743 

Lattin' Lount 743 

Leahey, William J 743 

Lee, Frederick W 743 

Lent, Davis C 743 

Linehan, Jerry 744. 

Lown, Frank B 744 

Lynch, Michael J 744 

McCambridge, James, M. D 744 

Mack, John E 745 

Mackenzie, D. H., M. D 745 

Maher Family 745 

Maroney, Archibald M 746 

Masten, George E 746 

Mayer, Edward D 746 

Meade, Morris Philip 746 

Meyer, James G 747 

Millard, Walter P 747 

Moore, Alfred 748 

Morgan, Frederick N 749 

Morschauser, Joseph 749 

Mullen, James H 750 

Mullen, J. W 750 

Murphy, WiUiam A 750 

Musselman, Ezra 751 

Nagengast, George 751 

Nelson, Horatio 752 

Nelson House 752 

New York Rubber Company 752 

O'Connell, Daniel 753 

O'Farrell, John V 753 

Ormsbee, Frank S 753 

Otis, Dr. John Haviland 754 

Overocker, George 754 

Owsley, Henry P., M. D 754 

Palmer, Charles B 755 

Perkins, Edward E 755 

Phillips, Edward Schofield 755 

Phillips, Jarvis 756 



INDEX— PART II. 



zxt 



„ PAGE 

Phillips, Samuel K 756 

Pilgrim, Charles W., M. D 767 

Piatt, William Barnes 757 

Poucher, J. Wilson, M. D 758 

Poughkeepsie Glass Works 758 

Rapelje, Adrian C 759 

Rapelje, Lawrence Cortelyou 759 

Reed, Thomas 760 

Reynolds, Allen S 761 

Reynolds, William Thacher 761 

Rider, John P 762 

Rikert, R. Raymond 762 

Roy, James 763 

Roy, James S 763 

Roy, William K 764 

Ryan, John J 764 

Sadlier, James E., M. D 764 

Sague, John K 765 

Schenck, John Peter, M. D 766 

Schouten, Richard A 766 

Schrauth, Jacob 767 

Scott, Alfred B 767 

Seward, William 767 

Sheehy, William 768 

Slater, L. Lawson 768 

Sleight Family 768 

Slocum, Charles H 769 

Smillie, William C 769 

Smith, Isaac 769 

Smith, John T 770 

Spratt, George V. L 771 

Spross, Charles Gilbert 771 

Storm, W. J 772 

Stoutenburgh, Walter Herrick 772 

Sweet, Orr & Company 772 

Taber, George K 773 

Tompkins, Lewis 774 



PAG 

Tompkins, Ralph S 77 

Townsend, John E 77 

Traver Family 77 

Traver, William t 77 

Travis, Everett Hustis 77 

TumbuU, H. B 77 

TuthiU, Robert K., M. D 77 

Van Cleef , Henry HoweU Ti 

Van de Bogart, Daniel 77 

Vanderburgh, Dr. Federal 7'i 

Vanderwater, Holmes 7f 

Van Dyke Family 7J 

Van Keuren, Garret 7{ 

Van Vliet Family 7J 

Van Wagner, Walter 7J 

Vigeant, J. L, M. D 7{ 

Vosburgh, Peter«H 7i 

Walker, Daniel L 7i 

Wanzer, Charles F 7i 

Warren, John S 7! 

Weaver, Fred Bain, M. D 7i 

Welch, Eari S 7! 

Weston, Weldon F 7i 

Wettereau, William N 7i 

Whalen, Michael J 71 

Whalen, Thomas Francis 7! 

White, Howell, M. D 7i 

Wilber, Henry C, M. D 7J 

Williams, George H 7J 

Williams, James L 71 

Willson & Eaton Company 7i 

Winchester, Henry N 71 

Wing, Jackson 7i 

Wing, Sheldon 71 

Wolcott, Charles M 7! 

Wright, Charles W 7! 

Wright, Lewis H 7! 

Zabriskie. Captain Andrew C 7( 



INDEX. 



ILLUSTRATIONS AND PORTRAITS. 



PAGE 

Albro, William C 684 

Ashton, Rev. Amos T 353 

Astor, Col. John Jacob 437 

Badeau, W. H 168 

Barculo, Seward 70 

Barnard, Joseph F 32 

Barnes, Oliver Weldon 334 

Bayley, Gtry Carleton, M. D 528 

Beekman, Henry 80 

Beekman, Henry Jr 80 

Benson, Egbert 437 

Blackburn, A. H 344 

Briody, Rev. John H 620 

Brown, Derrick 597 

Budd, W. D 192 

Butts, Allison 522 

Clapp, Clinton W 465 

Clark, Dr. H. F 256 

Cleaveland, Dr. J. M 56 

Clinton House 216 

Conklin, Dr. W. J 558 

Coshire, Hannah 365 

Court House 240 

Curtiss, Milton E 328 

Daly, Rev. Patrick 608 

de Peyster, Col. J. L 86 

De Wint, John Peter 300 

Dutch Church, Fishkill 102 

Elseffer, Jacob W 434 

Finton, George R 582 

Frankfort Stove, Signatures 305 

Friends, Meeting House 486 

Goring, Edward M 138 

Goring, Thomson E 468 

Guernsey, Egbert M. D 96 

Hackett, John 516 

Haight, A. V 224 

Ham, John M 480 

Hammond, Benjamin 725 

Hanna, John A.. 290 

Harris, Isham, G. M. D 566 

Hasbrouck, Alfred, M. D 636 

Hasbrouck, Frank Frontispiece 

fleermance House 448 

Herrick, Timothy 362 

Hine, George M 208 



PAGE 

Hinsdale, Jacob S 410 

Hopkins, Charles A 296 

Hudson River State Hospital 574 

Ketcham, Gen. John H 66 

Lamoree, George 420 

Lewis, Gen. Morgan 80 

Livingston, Chancellor 80 

Livingston, Edward 80 

Livingston House 232 

Lown, Frank H. 498 

McCormack, Rev. D. J 638 

Mack, John E 236 

Maher, Rev. Joseph A 638 

Maher, Richard F 278 

Map of Dutchess and Putnam;Coun- 

ties Inside back cover 

Map of Hudson River 48 

Maps of Post Roads 671-680 

Map of Rhinebeck 443 

Matteawan State Hospital 588 

Mesier Mansion 470 

Meyer, James G. 340 

Millard, Walter P 474 

Montgomery, Gen. Richard 80 

Morehouse Tavern 182 

Morschauser, Joseph 504 

Morton, Levi P 437 

Mount Gulian Fishkill 60 

Mylod, John J 614 

Oblong Meeting House 400 

Oblong Patent, Diagram 42 

O'Farrell, John V * 753 

Phillips, Samuel K 510 

Pilgrim, Charles W., M. D 542 

Piatt, John 1 108 

Poucher, J. Wilson, M. D 550 

Radcliffe, Jacob 437 

Rapelje, L. C 294 

Reed, Thomas 440 

Rhinebeck Hotel 450 

Rider, John P 146 

Rombout Patent, Map of 36 

Sargent, Henry Winthrop 160 

Schell, Robert 437 

Schenck, John Peter, M. D , 178 

Schuyler, Col. P. J 437 



xxxu 



INDEX. 



FACE 

Schouten, Richard A.. , 358 

Slevin, Rev. Charles 638 

Sloctim, Charles H 268 

Smith, John T 322 

Spratt, George V. L 262 

Stone Church, Dover 282 

Teller House, Matteawan 174 

Tompkins, Lewis 316 

Townsend, John E 368 

Trinity Church, Fishkill 114 

Tuthin, Robert K, M. D 122 

Van de Bogart, Daniel 92 



PAGE 

Van Kleeck House 202 

Veiplanck, William S 310 

View of Hudson River 22 

Wanzer, Charles P 783 

Weston, Weldon F 350 

Wharton House, Fishkill 130 

Wheaton, Charles 76 

Williams, George H 246 

Wing, Sheldon 286 

Wolcott, Charles M 152 

Zabriskie, Andrew C 428 



