


A ' -- -p 



V 







•<- s «p 'V <<* ^ * 

N A "3/ <V C \ A / 

Do 4-t- \° q. 



V 



^ 



</> V 






O 

-\r- V ' ^ A V 

J. V a > 

- 



A 



J*- 



A 






X°°- 



^ 



£ '^ 









L ^ 



= "W " 








DOCU MENTS 



RELATING TO THE 



COLONIAL HISTORY 



By Truster 



State of New Jersey, 



VOLUME 



Marriage Records, 1665-1800 



Edited, with an Historical Introduction on the 
Early Marriage Laws of New Jersey, and the 
Precedents on which they were Founded, 

By WILLIAM NELSON. 



PATERSON, N. J.: 
The Press Printing and Publishing Co., 269 Main Si ei 

1900. 



76886 



WlTMDRAWNi 



**tf Htitj LitfftAKY 

" 1 1 1 ur n rUTWinW ii i n ai i ', i • 

It is norifideBSSlffy*to expaffaTFOT'Ule interest and import- 
ance of the contents of this volume. The lawyer will often 
turn to these marriage records to solve obscure questions of 
title to land. The historian will find here much information 
throwing light on obsolete laws and customs of the past. The 
student of sociology will discover many odd facts bearing on 
questions of race, heredity, social usages and other problems 
affecting the development of society. To the genealogist of 
course the book will be invaluable. 

This work had its beginning in a resolve to print the man- 
uscript index, in the office of the Secretary of State at Trenton, 
to the marriage bonds on file, and the records of marriage li- 
censes, in that office. The origin of these bonds and of these 
licenses seemed to deserve explanation, out of which grew the 
Historical Introduction on the Early Marriage Law of New 
Jersey, which follows. In order to expand the volume to a 
suitable size it was concluded to add the other marriage rec- 
ords which will be found succeeding those in the Secretary of 
State's office. 

These exhaust the extant marriage records prior to iSoi, for 
the counties of Bergen, Hudson and Essex, so far as the editor 
has been able to learn. The early Dutch churches as a rule 
were scrupulously careful to keep and preserve in the chinch 
archives registers of baptisms and marriages. The churches 
of other denominations not only were not so particular, but 
when the records were made they were often regarded as the 
private property of the pastors, and were carried away by 
them on their removal to other charges. ■ 



The first Reformed (Dutch) church 
that at Bergen, dating back to 1660. 
are well preserved, and are reproduce 



npj^Wj (Jersey was 
Its mtfrKSgiVftiebrds 

d down to i So i, in 






') c 



VI PREFACE. 

this volume. This was in 1800 the only church within the 
present Hudson county. 

Bergen county had a number of churches in 1S00, as fol- 
lows : Hackensack, established in 16S6; its marriage records 
are well kept and are given herewith. Schraalenburgh, 1724 ; 
printed here. Ponds (Oakland), 1710; records destroyed about 
1SS0, by fire. Paramus, 1725 ; no marriage records have been 
preserved before 1S00. English Neighborhood (nowLeonia), 
1770; no records prior to 1S12. There were two or three Lu- 
theran churches in the Saddle River valley, some of them dat- 
ing well back toward 1700, and there may be early marriage 
records kept by their pastors, but the editor has not been able 
to find them. There was a French Reformed church near 
Hackensack before 1700, but its records are not known to ex- 
ist. 

In Essex county there were these churches previous to 1S00, 
in the chronological order given: First Presbyterian, of New- 
ark, 1667; Reformed (Dutch), at Second River (Belleville), 
1700; Orange Presbyterian, about 1719; Reformed (Dutch), 
at Fairfield, 1720; Trinity (Episcopal), of Newark, about 
1743; Christ (Episcopal), Belleville, about 1755; Lyons 
Farms Baptist, 1769; Caldwell Presbyterian, about 17S0; 
Bloomfield Presbyterian, 1798- The writer has been unable to 
discover any marriage records of these churches except the in- 
complete registers of the Belleville Reformed church, and 
those of the Lyons Farms Baptist church. All the records of 
the First Presbyterian church existing at the time of the Revo- 
lution are understood to have been lost or destroyed in that 
troublous period, and the writer has been informed that the 
church possesses no marriage records earlier than 18^0. The 
records of the Fairfield church are believed to have been de- 
stroyed in a fire which consumed the parsonage about 187^- 
The records of Trinity church in the eighteenth century were ex- 
amined some years since by the writer, who found them to be 
very fragmentary, with no marriage registers among them. 
The session records of the First Presbyterian church of Orange 
are understood to have been destroyed by fire in 1802. Those 
in existence begin January 30, 1S03. 

It is a monotonous history of disaster to church records thus 



PREFACE. 



enumerated— "destroyed by fire," and emphasizes the import- 
ance of a work like this, which multiplies and so preserves 
such records beyond the chance of destruction. By a singular 
irony of fate, however, a large collection of copies of other 
church records, which had been procured during a long period 
of years by the editor with infinite labor and much expense, 
for a second volume like this, went the way of so many origin- 
als, in a single night, in the great Paterson fire, February 8-9, 
1902. If time and opportunity permit perhaps the effort to 
gather another volume of such material may be renewed. But 
vita brevis est .' 

In this connection the work of the Holland Society, in New 
York, and of the Genealogical Society of Pennsylvania is wor- 
thy of commendation. The former has caused copies to be 
made of all the records of the old Reformed Dutch churches in 
New Jersey, and has published those of the Hackensack and 
Schraalenburgh churches to 1800. It is expected that others 
will follow. The latter Society, organized so late as 1S92, has 
procured copies of the records of a large number of churches 
of various denominations in the southern part of New Jersey, 
and has them bound in stout quarto volumes, well indexed, 
which are preserved in the fireproof rooms of the Historical So- 
ciety of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia. It is intended to pub- 
lish shortly the records of St. Mary's Church at Burlington, 
which dates back to 1704, and which numbered among its 
members many of the most prominent men in New Jersey, 
in the Provincial era. These records were copied for the 
New Tersey Historical Society, but for the purpose of publi- 
cation were placed at the disposal of the sister Pennsylvania 

Society. 

The following records of New Jersey churches have been 

published : 

Belleville Reformed (Dutch) —baptisms, births, marriages 
and membership, 1794-1827. Proceedings N. J. Historical 
Society, Third Series, I., 17S-196; II., 65-72, 131-144, ' 77~ 

185. 

Bergen Reformed (Dutch) — marriages, baptisms, deaths, 
1665-1S50. Winfield's Land Titles of Hudson County, 
1., 329-419. 8°. New York, 1S72. 



Vili PREFACE. 

Elizabeth — Inscriptions on Tombstones and Monuments in 
the Burying Grounds of the First Presbyterian Church and St. 
John's Church, 1664-1S92. New Haven, Conn., 1893. S° Pp 

355- 

Hackensack Reformed (Dutch) — marriages, baptisms, com- 
municants, officers, :686-iSoi. Collections Holland Society, 
Vol. I., pp. 349. 8° New York, 1S91. 

V- Hanover (now Whippany) Presbyterian Church — com- 
municants, marriages and baptisms, 1 746-1 796. Morristown, 
1S93. S^> Pp. 32. 

Inscriptions on the Tombstones and Monuments in the 
Graveyards at Whippany and Hanover. Morristown, 1894. 

8° Pp. 93- 

Lyons Farms Baptist — proceedings, baptisms, marriages, 
1 769-1 801. Proceedings N. J. Historical Society, Third 
Series, I., 162-177; IJ -> 57 _6 4' ll 9- l 3°' 15S-16S. 

Monmouth County — Tombstone Inscriptions Presbyterian 
Burying Ground, Middletown ; Hendrickson Burying Ground, 
Middletown ; Tallman Burying Ground on Pumpkin Point, 
Shrewsbury ; Baptist Church Burying Ground, Middletown ; 
Topanemus Burying Ground, Marlboro ; Christ Church (Epis- 
copal) Graveyard, Middletown; Golden Burying Ground, 
Middletown ; the Ancient Lippit or Taylor Burying Ground, 
Middletown ; the Hartshorne Burying Ground, Middletown — 
in the Town Book of Old Middletown, 8° [Freehold, 1SS3], 
pp. 39-S3- The Quaker Records of Shrewsbury, 1674-1731, 
pp. 55-66; some baptisms, 1659-173S, pp. 66-70. 

Old Tennent Church, Freehold — History of the Church, by 
the Rev. Frank R. Symmes. Freehold, 1S97. S° Pp. 144. 
Baptismal records, 1735-1760, and early burials in neighboring 
cemeteries, pp. 1 18-143. 

Morristown — Bill of Mortality, being a register of all the 
deaths in the Presbyterian and Baptist congregations, 1768- 
1S06. Morristown, 1806. S° Pp. 112 (actually 116). 

Record of the First Presbyterian Church of Morristown. 
History and Records of the Trustees and Session, 1742-1SS2, 
pp. 240. 192, 16S. Combined Registers, of births, marriages, 



PREFACE. 



deaths and communicants, 1742-1885, pp.328. Morristown, 
1SS1-1SS5. Large 80. 

Newton Township— Friends' records of Marriages at Burl- 
ington, Salem, Newton (now in Camden county), Haddon- 
field, Chester (Moorestown) , Evesham, and Woodbury Creek— 
particularly of members of Newton families— are given in 
Sketches of the First Immigrant Settlers of Newton Town- 
ship, Old Gloucester County, West New Jersey, by John 
Clement. Camden, 1877, pp. 387-411. 

Orange Presbyterian— baptisms, 1756-62, 1765-1784. In 
History of the Oranges, by Stephen Wickes, M. D., Newark, 
1892. 

Passaic Reformed (Dutch), formerly the Acquackanonk— 
the records have been published in part in a parish periodical. 
Paterson— History of the Old Dutch Church at Totowa 
(now the First Reformed, Paterson), r755- lS3 7- B Y Wil " 
liam Nelson. Baptismal Register (in the original Dutch), 
1756-1S0S. Paterson, 1S92. 8° Pp. 170. 

Second Reformed— the registers, in substance, are given in 
a recent history of the church. 

Preakness Reformed (Dutch) — the records of baptisms, 
1831-1902; marriages, 1842-1902, deaths, 1837-1902, and 
tombstone inscriptions in neighboring burying grounds, pp. 
252-315, in a History of the Church, by the pastor, the Rev. 
George W. Labaw. New York, 1902. S° Pp. 344. 

Schraalenburgh Reformed (Dutch)— Records of baptisms, 
marriages, communicants and officers, 1 724-1 S01. Collec- 
tions Holland Society, Vol. II., pp. 3S7. 8° New York, 1S91 . 
Church records of baptisms and marriages have a quasi- 
public character, especially as they are required by statute, and 
in view of this fact there has been legislation in some quarters 
making it the duty of the churches to provide safe receptacles 
for such records, to protect them against loss by fire, damp, or 
other exposure. In England, Ireland and Scotland the 
churches must either make such provision, or deposit their rec- 
ords in the Public Record Office, at London, Dublin or Edin- 
burgh, respectively. In Massachusetts, the Public Record 



X PREFACE. 

Commissioner has been impressing on the church authorities 
the importance of protecting their records, with much success. 
A word as to the Index to Marriage Bonds and Licenses. 
The bonds were printed blanks, which were filled in by the 
officers of the locality where the parties lived, so that there is 
no standard of handwriting by which the names can be deci- 
phered, and as for the signatures, no man is compelled to write 
his name legibly. So there may easily be errors in the index. 
Moreover, the chirography of the index itself is not exactly of 
the copperplate order, and so the difficulty of getting the 
names of the licensees correctly into print has been considera- 
ble. In cases of doubt reference was had to the originals, and 
the expert skill of Alexander II. Rickey, the former Assistant 
Secretary of State, or of John R. B. Smith, the present Assist- 
ant Secretary, was called into requisition, and always placed at 
the editor's service with unfailing readiness and courtesy. 



E R RATA. 



The names printed as Stiles, from Cape May county, on 
pages 359-360, and 3S4-3S5, should be Stites. 

There is an error in the foot-note on page 592. Susan 
Kean was a daughter of Philip Van Brugh Livingston, a broth- 
er of Governor William Livingston ; she was born April 5, 
1759; married John Kean, September 27, 17S6; he died in 
1 795. Governor Livingston's daughter Susannah was born 
174S011749; married Judge John Cleves Symmes, Septem- 
ber 10, 1794. 



CONTENTS. 



Preface ........ y 

The Early Marriage Laws of New Jersey, and the Precedents on 
which they were founded : 
I. Introduction. Primitive Marriage Customs, ix. Roman Marriage 

Law, ix. Ecclesiastical Regulation of Marriages, xii. 
II. Formative Influences as to the Law of Marriage in New Jersey. 
1. The Dutch Law of Marriage, xviii. II. The Swedes, xxvii. III. 
Marriage Rites in England, xxxiv. IV. Scottish Marriages, xlviii. 
V. New England Marriage Customs, Ivii. VI. Friends' Marriage 
Customs, lxi. VII. Early New York and Pennsylvania Marriage 
Laws, lxix. 

III. Marriage in New Jersey. The Sovereign Power in the Colony, 
lxxi. Marriage Licenses by Gov. Carteret, Ixxvi. Earliest Marriage 
Laws in New Jersey, lxxviii. Some Early Divorces, lxxix. Second 
Marriages, lxxxi. More Colonial Marriage Laws, lxxxiii. Some 
Burlington Marriages, 1680-1684, lxxxv. Protecting Unwary Maid- 
ens, lxxxvii. An Ante-Nuptial Contract, 1686, lxxxviii. A Mar- 
riage that was a Failure, xc. The Colonial Practice as to Marriage 
Licenses, xci. A Marriage License in 1695, xciii. Lord Cornbury's 
Instructions, xciv. The Laws of England Applicable to the Colo- 
nies, xciv. Some Peculiar Marriage Customs, xcvi. A Word as to 
"Bundling," xcviii. r Ihe Marriage Act of 1719. xcviii. The Prac- 
tice Regarding Marriage Licenses, cv. Prof. Kalm's Description of 
the Practice, cvi. A Swedish Criticism, cviii. Hostility to the Mar- 
riage License System, ex. Objections of the Episcopal Clergy of 
New Jersey, cxii. Bishop White, of Pennsylvania, on Marriage 
Licenses, cxiii. Decay of the License System, cxvi. The Marriage 
Act of 1795, cxvi. Later Legislation, exxi. Divorces by the Leg- 
islature, exxiii. Divorces by the Court of Chancer}', exxiv. 



Index to Marriage Bonds and Marriage Records in the office 

of the Secretary of State at Trenton, 1 

Hackensack Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Records, 1695- 

1800, - - - - 467 

Schraalenburgh Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Records, 

1724 1801, . - - 515 



Xll CONTENTS. 

Bergen County Clerk's Marriage Records, 1795-1800, - - 553 

Bergen Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Eecords, 1664-1801, 555 

Essex County Clerk's Marriage Records, 1795-1801, - - 582 

Lyons Farms Baptist Church Marriage Records, 1795-1800, - 599 
Second River Reformed (Dutch) Church Makriage Records, 1730- 

1774, 1794-1800, - - - 605 

Christ Church, New Brunswick, Marriage Records, 1758-1778, - 620 
New Brunswick Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Records, 

1794-1799, - - - 625 

Middlesex County Clerk's Marriage Records, 1795-1800, - - 629 

Scotch Plains Baptist Church Marriage Records, 1758-1761, - 641 
Chesterfield (Burlington County) Friends' Monthly Meeting 

Marriage Records, 1686-1800, - - - - - 650 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Fac simile of a Marriage Bond, 1768, - - - Front 

Fac simile of a Marriage Bond, 1772, - - Opposite page 1 



THE 



Early Marriage Laws 



OF 



NEW JERSEY, 



AND THE 



Influences Bearing upon their Formation. 



By WILLIAM NELSON. 



The Marriage Ceremony. 



I. INTRODUCTION. 

PRIMITIVE MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 

The earliest writings in relation to marriage indicate that 
the bride was captured from another tribe, or was purchased, 
either by gifts to her tribe or her parents, or to herself. 1 Under 
such customs there would be little or no ceremony accompany- 
ing the transaction, and the records are silent as to the exist- 
ence of any special forms. The Old Testament contains many 
accounts of marriages, but in no instance refers to any particu- 
lar usage that was observed. Homer shows that marriage 
was merely a matter of capture or purchase, without any cer- 
emony. 2 F,rom that wonderful collection of ancient folk- 
lore, the Arabian Nights, we get the same impression. The 
folk-lore of other peoples, ante-dating their historic period, is 
invariably silent as to the performance of any marriage ritual. 
This universal recognition of marriage without any fixed 
formula or ceremony, antedating, as it does, any existing 
municipal or canonical law on the subject, may be regarded as 
the universal common law of marriage, based upon the actual 
fact of continuous, public cohabitation as husband and wife. 
As Grotius puts it : " We find Marriage (taken naturally) to 
be nothing else, but such co-habitation of a man with a 
woman, as placeth the Woman, as it were, under the eye (that 
is) under the safeguard of the Man." 

ROMAN MARRIAGE LAW. 

For the evolution of the law in relation to marriage, we 

i The most recent investigations of anthropologists do nut bear out the claim 
of M' Lennan (•' Primitive Marriage ") thai this was the universal, or even the 
mosl general, practice in prehistoric times, or anion- the most primitive peo 
lib--,. ..r in all savage tribes. See "Ancienl Society," by I.. 11 Morgan, New 
York, 1878, Chap. V; Westermarck's "History of Marriage','' London, 1900. A 
discussion of tins phase of the subject is. however, foreign to the purpose of this 
writing. 

i Homer's Iliad. Hook ix. 



X ROMAN MARRIAGE LAW. 

are accustomed to look to the Roman law, and its gradual de- 
velopment into the modern municipal, civil and canonical law 
of marriage. 

Among the Romans no special ceremony was required to 
establish the relation. It was enough that a man and a 
woman, to whose union there was no legal impediment, from 
nearness of kin or from any other cause, lived together as hus- 
band and wife, giving themselves out as such : the law recog- 
nized the consent of the parties thus expressed as sufficient to 
constitute the legal obligation of matrimony. There were, 
however, formalities specially designed and frequently used for 
this object : 

1. The confarreatio, a religious rite; 

2. The co-emptio, a higher form of civil marriage; and 
3 The usus, the lower form of civil marriage. 

I . Confarreatio was solemnized in the presence of the Pon- 
tifex Maximus or the Flamen Dialis (priest of Jove) and ten 
witnesses. The pontiff offered a sacrifice of an ox, or of 
fruits, in the presence of the attending witnesses. The con- 
tracting parties were seated on the same sheepskin. Certain 
customary forms of words were uttered, and a salt cake of far 
or rice was presented as an offering, and tasted by the couple. 
From this the ceremony had its name, confarreatio, from far- 
reus, i. e.,farrc?ts pant's, cake of meal or flour. This rice cake 
indicated the ancient food of Italy, and served as an emblem of 
their mystic union of mind and body. Or, it may be more 
correct to say that this was a trace of an ancient usage, by which 
the wite, partaking of the food of her husband's tribe, became 
adopted into the tribe, to some extent, while remaining under 
the tutelage or guardianship of her husband : l as the Romans 

i When the Navajos [of Arizona and New Mexico] desire to marry, "they sit 
down on opposite sides of a basket, made to hold water, filled with atole or some 
other food, and partake of it. This simple proceeding makes them husband and 
wife." We have the like in the old Roman form of confarreatio— marriage con- 
stituted by jointly eating a cake. These indications that the earliest marriage 
ceremony was simply a formal commencement of living together, imply a preced- 
ing i ime when the living together began informally.— Pi'inciples of Sociology, i>y 
Herbert Spencer. New York. 1880, I.. 633. '-It is manifest that monogamy lias 
long been growing innate in the civilized man "— Ibid., 704. But may not this 
communion in eating have had a ceremonial signification as a propitiatory sacri- 
fice in the tribal god.- 



ROMAN MARRIAGE LAW. \i 

expressed it, covenire in manum viri — to come under the hand 
of her husband. Her position was thus much the same, in 
fact, as later under the English common law. 

2. Co-entptiu was the solemn binding of the wedding 
couple to each other, by giving and taking a piece of money. 
The wife fulfilled the co-emption by purchasing, with three 
pieces of copper, a just introduction to her husband's house 
and household duties. Co-emptio was a sort of symbolic pur- 
chase of the wife by the husband, from the family to which she 
belonged, per czs et libram, in the presence of five witnesses, 
and a sixth as libripens, or balance-holder. The precise words 
and actions used in the co-emptio are not known, but doubt- 
less they resembled those used in the form of sale called nian- 
cipatio. The effect of this ceremony was the same as in the 
confarreatio, in bringing the woman under the hand or power 
of the husband. This was the more frequent marriage custom 
among the Romans, and was still in use in the time of Gains, 
but gradually disappeared. 

3. C/sus, the third and lowest form of marriage, was with- 
out any ceremony, being founded, as the word implies, on pre- 
scription, by the woman co-habiting with the man as her hus- 
band for a whole year, without having been absent from his 
house for three whole nights in succession. The uninterrupted 
possession of a wife for one year gave the husband the same 
rights he would have acquired at the outset if married with 
confarreatio or co-emptio. The privilege reserved to the wife 
of defeating the usus and avoiding the husband's power by a 
three nigh:s' absence in each year was expressly granted by the 
Twelve Tables. 1 From being thus constantly evaded usus 
gradually declined, and although Cicero alluded to it as still 
subsisting in his day, Gains, two centuries later, describes it as 
obsolete. 

The Roman principle was that the consent of the parties 
was required, not only for contracting marriage, but for con- 
tinuing it, and that hence it could be terminated at any time by 

1 The existence of this marriage custom, and of the trinoctium, can hardly 
have dated back to the fifth century B.C.. and this particular provision of the 
Twelve Tables is probably at least a century later. See La Storia di Roma, by 
EttorePais, Rome. 1893, Vol. I. 



Xll ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. 

either party, by the simple announcement of the fact. In the 
case of the confarreatio, however, a religious rite, called diffar- 
eatio, was requisite to dissolve the obligation. The result was 
that the freer form of marriage was resorted to — what might 
be called the common law form — dispensing with all rites and 
ceremonies, and this prevailed in the time of Justinian. This 
practice, of course, did away with the husband's control over 
the person and property of his wife, and secured to her great 
independence as regards both. 1 

ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. 

While it is not unlikely that the Christian church looked 
with great disfavor upon the increasing laxity of the marriage 
relation in the Roman Empire, it does not appear that any at- 
tempt was made by the church to assert or to exercise any au- 
thority in the matter. "Marriage was celebrated in the presence 
of the priests," we are told, " and was confirmed by some ob- 
lation," in the first three centuries of the new era, 2 but this was 
apparently a survival of the pagan custom. In the false de- 
cretals (said to be unknown to all the ancient fathers, to all 
the popes, and all the ecclesiastical authorities that wrote be- 
fore the ninth century), a letter attributed to Pope Eva restus 
relates to clandestine marriage, and several ceremonies con- 
nected with that "sacrament," all of which by no means agreed 
with the avowals of Evarestus. 3 St. Ambrose, cir. 3S0, held 
that "it is the actual consent of the parties, that makes mar- 
riage, though it were never consummated." 4 Pope Nicholas, 

1 Maine's Ancient Law, p. 148. 

Introduction to Roman Law, by James Hadle.v, New York. 1876. pp. 255, 138-143. 

Early History of Institutions, by Sir Henry Maine. N. Y., 1875, pp. 310-315. 

Gibbon's Rome, Chap. XLIV; Harper's ed., N. Y., 1852. IV., 315 7. 

Justinian's Institutes, Lib. I.. Tit. x. 

Pandects. Libri XXIII, XXIV, XXV. Code, Lib. v. 

Studies in Roman Law, by Lord Mackenzie. Edinburgh and London, 1870, pp. 
97-99. 

Grotius on War and Peace. London, 1682. Book II.. pp. 101-112. 

The Rights of the Clergy of that Part of Great Britain, call'd England, by 
Wm. Nelson, of the Middle Temple. Esq., London, 1732. p. 116. 

Studies in History and Jurisprudence, by James Bryce, New York and London, 
1901, pp 786-793. 

Dr. M. Winternitz, on Indo-European Marriage Customs, Journal of Interna- 
tional Folk-Lore Congress, London. 1892, pp. 273-289. 

- Du Pin's Ecclesiastical History, London, 1696-9, I.. 182. 

•; lb., I., 176. 4 lb., 212. 



ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. X1 11 

A. I). 858-867, directed that after the betrothing the priest 
ought to cause the persons to come into the church with their 
offerings, and there give them his benediction. But it was 
still held that ''consent, according to the laws, might suffice ; 
if that he wanting, the rest signifies nothing." 1 Numerous 
canons concerning marriage were prescribed during the ninth 
century, showing the disposition of the church to regulate the 
matter, but it does not appear that any special form or ceremo- 
ny was prescribed or suggested." The Emperor Leo the Phil- 
osopher, A. D. S86, declared ecclesiastical benediction neces- 
sary to marriage, but his constitution was in force only in the 
Eastern Empire. In the History of Gregory of Tours, mar- 
riage is treated as a civil contract. 3 In 944 King Edward of Eng- 
land held an assembly of prelates and lords, in which he made 
laws for the regulating of marriage solemnities. 4 This was a qua- 
si recognition of the rights of the clergy in considering so impor- 
tant a subject, but it also seems to indicate that he regarded it 
as a matter for civil regulation. At the Council of Rouen, A. 
D. 1072, it was decided that "no marriages shall be solemnized 
privately, nor after meals ; but that the bridegroom and bride 
being fasting shall be blessed by a priest in like manner fasting, 
and that before he proceed to marry them, inquiry shall be 
made, wdiether the parties be in relation in the seventh degree 
of consanguinity." 5 Here it is plainly indicated that the cere- 
mony was celebrated by a priest. Ivo, Bishop of Chartres, 
who died Dec. 23, 1 1 15, wrote 2S7 letters, which are published. 
One of them (cxxiii) refers to a priest who had made use of 
other ceremonies and words "than are prescribed in the form 
of marriage.'" 5 The annals of the church are increasingly full 
of orders, canons, discussions and controversies on the subject, 
but are singularly lacking in particulars as to the actual relig- 
ious ceremonies observed at marriages. Particularly is there 
manifest a growing hostility to clandestine marriages, by which 
are obviously meant any contracted without the authority of 

) lb.. VII., 177. 2 lb.. VII.. 115. 116, 125, 126, 128, 131 8, 183-4. 

:; Mackenzie's Roman Law, 1870, p. 10."). 

•4 Du Pin, VIII.. 63; Pollock and Maitland's Hist, of English Law. 2d ed., I.. 397. 

J lb., IX.. 117. 6Ib„ X., 12. 



XIV ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. 

the church. In the thirteenth century such marriages were for- 
bidden in some ecclesiastical jurisdictions. Pope Innocent 
III., 119S-1216, was greatly interested in the subject, and 
wrote many letters on various points that were submitted to 
him regarding marriage and divorce. 1 "What punishment 
ought to be inflicted on those priests who celebrate marriages 
during Lent? The priests ought to be punished, but the mar- 
riages are lawful," was the decision of Manuel Charitopula, 
Patriarch of Constantinople, A. D. 1221-1226. 2 This again 
shows that it was quite usual, at least, to have marriages cele- 
brated by the priests The fourth John Lateran council, A. 
D. 1215, prohibited (51st canon) clandestine marriages, and 
ordered that the priests should publish the banns in the church- 
es, and prescribed penalties for those countenancing or author- 
izing "insidious or clandestine marriages." 3 The Council of 
Chateau-Gonthier, held by the Archbishop of Tours, A. D. 
1 23 1, prohibited under pain of excommunication the contract- 
ing of marriages until after the banns had been published "in 
the usual manner," that so "an encouragement to marry may 
be granted and given in the face of the congregation." 4 The 
Council of Bourdeaux, in 1262, decreed that those who con- 
tracted clandestine marriages, both ministers and witnesses, 
should be excommunicated and suspended by officio and benefi- 
cio, and that "those marriages shall be reckoned clandestine, 
which are not contracted (celebrated) by the proper curate or 
pastor of the husband or the wife, with the consent of the oth- 
er curate."'' In the fourteenth century numerous councils in 
Europe and England pronounced against clandestine marria- 
ges, without the publication of banns, and in some instances 
decreed the excommunication of "all persons who procured 
them, or were present at them."' 3 Clandestine marriages, and 
the obligation of publishing banns of intended matrimony, 
were the subjects of decrees by various local councils in the 
fifteenth century. 7 The fact of this continuous legislation by 
the church, century after century, indicates that civil marriages 
were very generally in vogue, if, indeed, they were not the 

1 lb., XL. passim. 2 lb., XL, 86. 8 lb., XI., 101. 4 lb.. XL., 108. 

■"• IV).. XL, ll!». fi lb., XII.. 93-5, 97, Ill), 111. 7 lb.. XIII., 113-114. 



ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. XV 

rule; but it is also evident that the jurisdiction of the church 
was gradually and steadily extending over the subject, and that 
ecclesiastical forms were coming into use, and especially the 
practice of public ceremonies, by the priest, "in the face of the 
church" or congregation. The Council of Trent, 1=537-1564, 
took a decisive step on November 11, 1563, in anathematizing 
those who should teach that marriage was not one of the seven 
sacraments 1 instituted by Jesus Christ, and declared that after 
that date all marriages not contracted in the presence of a priest 
and two or three witnesses should be void. 2 It also provided 
that "Before the consummation of the marriage, three publi- 
cations of banns must be made in church, so that if there be 
any impediment, it may be more easily shown ; unless the or- 
dinary judge should deem it expedient to omit the said banns, 
which is, therefore, recommended to his good care." 3 The 
Dean of Sorbonne in opposing the decree quaintly argued that 
the first marriage, between Adam and Eve, which was the pat- 
tern for all others, was contracted privately, without witnesses 4 
This, then, was the canon law throughout Western Europe, 
wherever the sway of the Roman church was recognized. 
The spread of the Reformation hindered the acceptance of the 
canon in Sweden, in the Protestant states of Germany, in Hol- 
land, and largely in England and Scotland, although it was 
later accepted by the English church, according to eminent au- 
thorities. Aside from the dogma that marriage was a sacra- 



1 John Calvin, it is said, was elected or at least proposed as a delegate or rep- 
resentative to the Council of Trent, in 1546, but refused to attend. He says that 
matrimony was first held to lie a sacrament in the time of Gregory. — Calvin's "In- 
stitution of the Christian Religion," London. 1634. Book iv.. Cap. lit. Sec 34. p 73(1. 
"By calling it a sacrament the priests drew to themselves the hearing of causes 
of matrimony, for it was a spiritual matter, which profane judges might not med- 
dle with." Calvin wished marriages to be celebrated with great solemnity: he 
directed the bridal party ■•to proceed to the church without the beating of drums 
or music, but seriously, as became Christians, as soon as the bells ceased; and 
the ceremony was to be performed before the sermon, in the presence of the 
whole congregation."— Life and Times of John Calvin, by Paul Henry, New York. 
1854, I.. 472. 

- Studies in Roman Law. with Comparative Views of the Laws of France, Eng- 
land, and Scotland, by Lord Mackenzie, Edinburgh and London. 1870, p. 105; His- 
tory of the Counc.il of Trent, by L. F. Bungener. New York. 1855, pp. xxviii. 4si. 

3 Van Leeuwen's Roman- Dutch Law. p. 103. 

4 Mackenzie, as cited, 105. 



XVI ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGES. 

ment, the insistment that the ceremony should take place in 
public, before the congregation, by a priest, and in the pres- 
ence of two witnesses, and only after the publication of the 
banns, undoubtedly commended itself to the clergy of all 
countries, and to right-thinking persons generally. 

Running all through the church regulations on the subject of 
marriage is manifest a constant disposition to recognize the 
binding force of the marriage contract, or betrothal — probably 
a trace of the Roman respect for mutual obligations, 1 of what- 
ever kind. A contract or engagement of marriage was regard- 
ed as having almost the binding force of a marriage itself. 
This suggests a survival of the idea that the mutual contract be- 
tween the parties actually constituted the marriage, and the func- 
tion of the Roman pontifex, or later of the priest or the church, 
was merely to sanctify or sanction the union by its blessing, 
or by other ceremonies, added to from time to time. When 
Henry VIII. of England had been married twenty years, and 
wished a new wife, he suddenly bethought him that his spouse 
had been previously engaged to his older brother, and although 
her betrothed died before marriage, nevertheless that contract 
constituted him virtually her husband, whereby she became as 
a sister to Henry VIII., whose marriage to her was therefore 
incestuous. And of course the royal monarch found many 
learned schoolmen, ecclesiastics and others, to argue in his fa- 
vor, and to adduce countless citations from the fathers of the 
church to support his and their contentions, many of which are 
set forth at great length in the Appendix to Bishop Burnet's 
History of the Reformation in England. Illustrations of the 
importance attached to contracts of marriage will be found 
further on in these pages, especially among those people most 
accustomed to the Roman, and later to the Roman-Dutch law. 
The history of the Christian, and especially of the Roman 
church, indicates a steadily-growing disposition to elevate the 
character of the marriage tie by throwing about it the regis of 
its authority ; by discountenancing private marriages ; by en- 
couraging, by urging, and finally by commanding that all mar- 

1 Juvenal, in Satire vi., speaks <>f the convention (the first overture), the pac- 
tum (contract), ami the sponsalia (betrothing). 



ECCLESIASTICAL REGULATION OF MARRIAGE. XV11 

ria^es should be celebrated publicly, by its authority alone, and 
by its ministers. Its recogirtion of the sacredness of private 
contracts, even without subsequent consummation, weakened 

the force of its contentions to some extent. 

Consistent with its position regarding the sacredness of the 
marriage tie was its attitude, expressed in the seventh canon of 
the decree concerning matrimony and divorce, adopted by the 
Council of Trent, that marriage, being a sacrament, was in- 
dissoluble, for any cause whatsoever. In practice, however, 
it was permitted to annul a marriage, when it could be shown 
that it had been improperly or unlawfully contracted. As this 
was a difficult and expensive process, it was available only by 
the rich and powerful. 1 

Such was the sentiment of the strongest and most repre- 
sentative Christian body in the world, in the middle of the six- 
teenth century, as crvstalized into the enduring decree of the 
Council of Trent. It has been steadily adhered to by that 
church, and its influence has been felt ever since throughout 
Western Christendom, for the conservation of the sacredness 
of the marriage tie. 

II. FORMATIVE INFLUENCES AS TO THE LAW 
OF MARRIAGE IN NEW JERSEY. 

In the settlement of New Jersey four nationalities were 
prominent and influential in this chronological order: 
I. The Dutch. 
II. The Swedes. 

III. The English. 

IV. The Scotch. 

Moreover, the views of the English settlers were modified 
by the fact that many of them were 
V. New Englanders : or 
VI. (Quakers; or 
VII. Settlers from New York or Pennsylvania. 
All of these were Protestants, and hence dissenters from 
the dogmas promulgated by the Council of Trent; and al- 
though agreeing in the main on the subject of marriage and 

i Hist, of the Council of Trent, as cited, p. 120. 



XViii DUTCH LAW OF MARRIAGE. 

divorce, approached the matter on different lines, as we shall 
proceed to show. 

I. The Dutch Law of Marriage. 
The system of jurisprudence prevailing in Holland in the 
sixteenth century was a highly-artificial modification of the ad- 
mirable Roman system, and was known as the Roman-Dutch 

Law. 

Grotius recognizes the fact that in Holland, as in other 
countries, "in olden times marriage was contracted without 
much ceremony ; in some places by mere cohabitation (concu- 
bitus) with the knowledge of the nearest relations on both 
sides." This, however, frequently proved troublesome and 
dangerous, as it sometimes happened that persons contracted 
marriages in violation of former promises, or within the pro- 
scribed degrees of blood or affinity, or without the previous 
consent of those who should have been consulted in the matter. 
In order to obviate all this, the States, in 1580, adopted certain 
regulations (a Political Ordinance) on the subject, which also 
agreed with the ecclesiastical law. The essential requisites 
thus prescribed were as follows : 

All persons who desired to marry must appear before the 
court of justice or the minister of the church of their place of 
abode, where they had had their last fixed residence for a year 
and a day, and there request the publication of the banns on 
three successive Sundays or market-days, in the church, or court- 
house (or other place where the court was held), so that those 
who wished to raise any objections might do so in the mean- 
time, on pain of forfeiting their right to object. It was under- 
stood that "the three publications of the banns being simply to 
protect the rights of a third party, and that marrying in the 
church was but a mere outward ceremony, by way of public 
confirmation," that provision could be dispensed with, with 
"the previous consent of the Government, after inquiry into 
the circumstances ; the third party, however, retaining his right, 
if any, so far as the three publications of. banns were con- 
cerned." It was regarded as uncertain whether the ordinary 
(or ecclesiastical) judge could remit the banns, as authorized 
by the Council of Trent, Holland being a Protestant country, 



DUTCH LAW OF MARRIAGE. \j\ 

especially as the Political Ordinance provided (Art. 3) for the 
punishment of those who violated the regulations therein pre- 
scribed, and ignored the jurisdiction of the ordinary in the prem- 
ises. The law was very strict on these points, so much so that 
if there were the least deviation therefrom the transaction was 
not regarded as a marriage ; without prejudice, however, to the 
right of anyone, acquired by previous promise of marriage, to 
prosecute the same at law. Such promise had to be as clearly 
proved as any other contract, without the defendant being bound 
on the mere accusation of the plaintiff to clear himself on oath. 
On the other hand, a marriage in the church or before the civil 
authorities, completed as above, had its full force, so that all 
rights arising out of the marriage vested and took effect at once, 
although not followed by concubitus ; as was understood of a 
newly-married couple who, on their way home from their wed- 
ding, were both drowned. 

Other wholesome provisions of the same Ordinance were 
to the effect that no banns should be granted to young men un- 
der the age of twenty-five, or to young women under the age of 
twenty, until proof given of the voluntary consent of the pa- 
rents, or the survivor of them, such consent being of the es- 
sence of the marriage ; so that a marriage contracted without 
the parents' consent was per se void. If the parties were of 
the ages specified, the parents were obliged to give their con- 
sent, or to show r good and lawful grounds for their refusal. To 
that end they could be summoned before the consistory of the 
church, or the civil authorities, to state their reasons. If they 
did not appear their silence was considered as consent; if they 
did appear and their reasons were not held to be good and law- 
ful, the banns were granted. Then, if no objection was made 
in the meantime, the petitioners could and must be married in 
church, or before the court of justice, in a lawful and public 
manner. The consent of guardians or relatives (other than 
parents) was not requisite. 1 

The power of annulling or dissolving marriages or mar- 
riage contracts was reserved to the civil authority. 

1 Grotius" Dutch Jurisprudence. I.. Cap. v., Sees. 16-17, pp. 23-24 : Van Leeu- 
wen's Roman-Dutch Law, I.. Cap. xix. pp. 100-104. 107: Lord Stair's Institutes of 
Scottish Law. L, 27. 



XX A NEW NETHERLAND MARRIAGE CONTRACT. 

The Political Ordinance of 15S0 was in line with the laws 
and customs of Holland from time immemorial, particularly in 
so far as it recognized the civil power in the regulation of mar- 
riages. Hence, the Hollanders who came to New Netherland 
brought with them the manners and customs of the Vaderland, 
as crystalized into statutes, the law being sufficiently elastic 
to be readily adapted to novel conditions in the New World. 

The earliest recorded instance of a marriage contract in 
New Netherland is that of Jan Jacobsen and Maritje Pieters, 
found in the New York Colonial Manuscripts, Vol. I., page 
153, for the translation of which the writer is indebted to the 
courtesy of the late George R. Howell, Archivist of New York. 
It bears date, fifteenth of August, 1639, and reads thus: 

In the name of God, amen. Be it known unto all men that on the 15th of August 
in the year 1639, before me Cornelius van Tienhoven : Secretary residing in New 
Netherland on the behalf of tin 1 Incorporated West India Company, and the un- 
dersigned witnesses, appeared the worthy Jan Jacobsen from Vrelant. future 
bridegroom, assisted by Maritje Peters from Copenhagen, his future bride, on 
the other part, and they the appearers declared that they had mutually resolved, 
engaged and agreed to enter together the holy state of matrimony, and that under 
the following nuptial contract, praying the Almighty God that his divine Majesty 
would lie pleased to bless their future marriage and let it redound to his honor. 

First, in regard to the property which he, the bridegroom, shall leave behind, 
in case he come to die, whether movable or immovable, or such as may rightly 
belong to him, it shall belong in free propriety to Marritje Peters aforesaid, with- 
out any of Jan Jacobsen's blood relations having any claim thereto. On the 
other hand if Marritje Peters, the future bride, first happen to die. Jan Jacobsen 
shall, in like manner, own all her means and goods, whether movable or immov- 
able, in free propriety, without his giving any account thereof to any of her 
blood relations. Provided always that he, the bridegroom, or she. the bride, 
aforesaid, whichever of them both come to live the longest;, shall not possess the 
property longer than to the day of his or her death, and then be partitioned and 
divided by the brothers or lawful heirs of him. the bridegroom, and Teuntje Jeu- 
riaens of Amsterdam, or Jacob Bronc, her present husband, as heirs of Maritje 
Pieters aforesaid, each the just half. 

Thus done and executed in the presence of the undersigned witnesses in Fort 
Amsterdam, this day and year aforesaid. 

This is the -j— mark of 
Jan Jacobsen above named. 

This is the M mark of 
Marritje Peters above named. 
1 llaes van Elsant, witness. Harmanus A. Booghardij, witness. 

The earliest recorded marriage, and which antedates the 
Records of the Dutch Church in New York, is that of Thomas 
de Conine and Marritje Frans van Betts, and bears date 22 
September, 1639. It is found in N. Y. Colonial Manuscripts, 



NEW NETIIERLAND MARRIAGE CONTRACTS. XXI 

Vol IV., p. 50, and is as follows (we give both the original 
and translation, as furnished by Mr. Howell) : 

<>i» 22 Septem (1639) 

Ter vergaderinge syn gecompaereert on verscheenen torn as de Conine en 
Marritjen frans van beets de welcke versochten wettelyck in houelycken stael 
br\ esl ichl te « orden. 

Soo syn de vooren persoonen op haer versocta up dato in heyligen houvvelychen 
staet bevesticht ter vergaderinge-int fort Amstm. 

Translation. 

Thomas de ('..nine and Marritje Frans van Beets appeared in court and re- 
quested m be legally united in marriage. 

The above named persons are therefore this day at their request united in 
holy wedlock in court at Fort Amstm. 

The importance of a marriage contract was recognized by 
the authorities of New Amsterdam in a proceeding brought 
before the Burgomasters and Schepens, February 24, 1653, by 
Peter Kock, an unmarried burgher and inhabitant of that city, 
against Annetie Cornelissen van Vorst, spinster, living at Ahas- 
imus (now a part of Jersey City). Jacob Stoffelsen, stepfather 
of defendant, appeared before the court and the litigants handed 
in some writings, presenting their respective sides of the case. 
The court ordered copies to be furnished to the parties, and that 
defendant appear in person, which she did March 10, and put in 
her answer. Various pleadings were presented to the court 
from time to time, and that body finding the subject too grave 
for their decision, referred it, on Feb. 19, 1654, to the Director 
and Council of New Netherland. They remitted the matter, 
May 4, 16^4, to the Burgomasters and Schepens, with their 
solemn decision that "suit having been entered, judgment must 
follow, and if either party, after the decision, feel aggrieved by 
the judgment of the Burgomasters and Schepens, such person 
may appeal to the Supreme Council." The case was now re- 
ferred to a committee of three, who reported two weeks later: 
that a marriage contract or an oral promise of marriage had 
been mutually entered into between the parties, and in confirm- 
ation thereof certain gifts and presents were made by the de- 
fendant; but in consequence of certain misbehavior (on his 
part?) the defendant was in no wise disposed to marry said 
Fieter Kock, and proved by two witnesses that Pieter had re- 
leased her, with promise to give her a written acquittal to that 
effect. The Court thereupon adjudged : that the promise of 



XXlt MARRIAGE BANNS IN NEW NETHERLAND. 

marriage having been made and given before the Eyes of God, 
should remain in force, so that neither plaintiff nor defendant 
should be at liberty, without the knowledge and approbation of 
the magistrates and the other one of the interested parties, to 
enter into matrimony with any other person, man or woman. 
And by way of encouraging a reconciliation, the Court further 
adjudged : "that all the presents made in confirmation of the 
promise of marriage should remain in the possession of defend- 
ant, until the parties, with the pleasure, good will, content- 
ment and inclination of both, shall marry together or with the 
knowledge of the magistrates release each other." 1 

There having appeared a tendency to ignore the law of Hol- 
land requiring the publication of the banns in the place of dom- 
icile of the parties, the Director and Council of New Nether- 
land passed an Ordinance, January 19, 1654, regulating the 
publication of Banns of Matrimony, as follows: 

The Director General and Council of New Netherland, 

To all who hear or see these presents read. Greeting, Make known. 

That we understand and are certainly informed by the report of our liscal and 
others as well as by letters from Grawsena dated 18 January. 1654, that the Mag 
istrates there have presumed and undertaken publickly to post notices of Mar- 
riage in regard to persons both of whom are, and for a long time have been domicil- 
iated in and about this city of Xew Amsterdam, far beyond the district of the afore- 
said village, and whereas such is in direct contradiction to both the Civil and Ec- 
clesiastical Law of the United KetTwrlands, which not only the abovementioned 
Magistrates of Graofsend but also all other Colonies within this Province are by 
contract and oath bound to observe: Therefore, the abovementioned Director 
General and Council order and notify the aforesaid Magistrates of Graveseucl and 
all others within this Province, to annul such posting of intentions of Marriage, 
and on sight hereof to withdraw the same, and in all cases to proceed with and 
confirm no such Marriages, either privately or publickly. before and until such 
persons, according to bethvrUvnd style, have entered and received their bans and 
proclamations of marriage where they are dwelling and have resided the last 
year. 

Thus done in the Assembly of the Director and Council of Xew Xetlierland, 
this 19 January, A. D. 1654, Xcir Amsterdam.^ 

An instance of the violation of the law of Holland requir- 
ing the publication of the banns in the place of domicile of the 
parties was brought to the attention of the New Amsterdam 
authorities on January 26, 1654, when 

Cornelis van Tienhoven as Sellout of this City appeared in Court and made an 
ex officio complaint of the illegal proceedings of the Court of Gravesend in setting 

1 Records of New Amsterdam, I., 54, 57, 61. 64, 76, 80, 97, 143, 154, 167, 192, 197; 
Wintield's Hudson County, 428-30. 

- Laws and Ordinances of New Netherland, page 152. 



MARRIAGE BANNS IN NEW NETHERLAND. xxiii 

up and affixing the bans of matrimony between Johan van Beeck and Maria Ver- 
leth, both of whom have their domicil in and about this City, and which bans 
arc not published, in accordance with correct practice of the ecclesiastical and 

civil order, in this City, so that the aforesaid pro( lings greatly lend to the in 

fringement on the good policy of our Fatherland and the privilege and jurisdic- 
tion of this City, and prepare a way. whereby hereafter some suns and daughters, 
unwilling to obey their parents and guardians, will contrary to their wishes, se 
cretly go and get. married in such villages or elsewhere; he requests, that the 
Court give heed hereunto and take such action, as their Worships shall deem 
proper, to maintain jurisdiction and prevent unlawful marriages. 

Thereupon this courteous note was dispatched, February 9, 
1654, to the Court at Gravesend : 

Kind Friends: Whereas by petition presented to our Court this day by Johan- 
nes van Beeck. he requests, that his bans with Maria. Verleth may be entered and 
properly proclaimed here, and we have understood that the said parties have pre- 
viously made proclamation of their bans through your Court at Gravesend. which 
(under correction) is contrary to the style and laws of our Fatherland, it is our 
request to your Honbie Court, in case such a circumstance should hereafter occur, 
that we may be informed thereof in order to prevent all improprieties, which we 
on our part engage to do in like manner, especially as it is usual, according to the 
custom of our Fatherland, that everyone shall have three publications at the 
place where his domicile is and then he may go and be married where he pleases. 

Arent van Hattem. 
New Amsterdam. 

While these formal proceedings were going on with great 
deliberation the young people became impatient, and on Feb- 
ruary 16, 1654. appeared in Court and " prayed most earnestly 
that a disposal may be made of the petition and remonstrance 
concerning the marriage between said van Beeck and Mary 
Verlet, presented to the Court." 

Three days later Johannes van Beeck requested as before, 
kk that action may be had on his petition, offering furthermore, 
if necessary, to affirm under oath what he has stated in his pe- 
tition respecting the private conversation with Hon bh Petrus 
Stuyvesant." 

"The Court having seen and examined the petition, presented on the 10th and 
16th last, regarding the marriage bans of Johan van Beeck and Maria Verleth, it 
is noted 

1st. Who in the beginning instituted marriage; also what the Apostle of the 
Gentiles teaches about it. 

2d. The age res],, attained by Joh. van Beeck and Maria Verleth. 

3d. The consent of the girl's parents. 

4th. The distance and remoteness of this place from the Fatherland and the 
quarrels between Holland and England. 

5th. The danger that in such circumstances a long delay might disclose mat- 
ters between these ^ung people, which would bring disgrace to both families. 

'Tis true, that our Theologians correctly say that we must not tolerate or per- 
mit lesser sins, in order thereby to avoid greater ones. Therefore we think (with 
due submission), that by a proper solemnization of marriage the lesser ami g rea 1 - 



XXIV MARRIAGE BANNS IN NEW NETHERI.AM). 

er sins are prevented, for the Apostle to the Hebrews calls the marriage-bed hon- 
orable and the Court opines, that the proper ecclesiastical proclamations of the 
aforesaid young people ought to be made at the earliest opportunity, to be follow- 
ed by their marriage. 

The would-be bridegroom did not care a fig for the theol- 
ogical or moral disquisition, and two weeks later '• advertised 
by a poster, that his marriage, contracted not only without his 
father's knowledge, but contrary to his express prohibition to 
marry abroad, had been declared lawful and proper by a reso- 
lution of the Burgomasters and Schepens of this City of New 
Am" 1 ." Of this resolution it seems the Director General and 
Council were ignorant, and they therefore requested ''an authen- 
tic copy thereof and at the same time in writing the reasons, why 
said resolution was not communicated to us and approbation 
thereof applied for, according to the Instructions given to the 
Inferior Court of this City." 

A curious sequel to this tempest in a teapot appears in the 
following entry, under date of Febiuary S, 1656: 

Maria Verleth vs. Joost van Beeck. Pltf. demands her letters, deposited yes- 
terday with the Secretary. Deft, maintains, as the marriage between Jonhannes 
van Beeck (now deceased), and Maria Verleth is not yet declared legal, the let- 
ters arc not hers, until the marriage be legalized But if the marriage be declared 
lawful by the Court. Supreme Council and Consistory, he consents she should 
have them. He desires them now only as his legal right and requests that guar- 
dians he appointed. Maria Verleth declares, that not being a Burgher here, but 
a stranger, an inhabitant and Burgher of Hartford in New England, she is not 
bound to accept guardians here. She requests quick dispatch, unless the Couit 
will declare her marriage either lawful or unlawful. 

Inasmuch as the Court has never been informed, that the marriage between 
Johan van Beeck and Maria Verleth is declared illegal, but on the contrary, this 
Court has by order of Febr. 1!>, 1654, considered that respect must be paid to the 
proclamation of the church and consequently to the marriage tie between said 
young people, they cannot then pronounce the marriage illegal.' 

Other irregularities concerning marriage were aimed at in 
the following 

Ordinance of the Director General and Council of New Netherland to oblige 
parties to Marry after tin' publication of their Bans, passed 15 Jauuary. 1658. 

Whereas the Director General and Council of Hew Ketherland not only are in- 
formed, but have even seen and remarked, that some persons, after the proclama- 
tion and publication, for the third time, of their Bans or Intentions of Marriage, 
do not proceed further with the solemnization of their Marriage as they ought, 
but postpone it from time to time, not only weeks, but some months, which is di- 
rectly contrary to, and in contravention of the good order and custom of our Fath- 
erland, wherein being willing to provide, in order to prevent the mischiefs and 
irregularities which will flow therefrom; 

Therefore the Director General and Council aforesaid do hereby Ordain that 
all published persons, after three proclamations have been made and no lawful 

i New Amsterdam Records. I., 155, 159, 163, nil, 173; II., 36. 



DIVORCES IN NEW XETHERLAND. XXV 

impediment occurs, shall cause their Marriages to be solemnized within one 
month at furthest, after the last proclamation, or within that time, appear and 
show cause where they ought, for refusing: and that on pain of forfeiting Ten 
guilders for the first week after the expiral ion ol the aforesaid month, and for the 
succeeding weeks 20 guilders for each week, until they have made known the rea- 
sons fur refusing. 

Furthermore, no Man and Woman shall be at liberty to keep house as married 
persons, before and until they are lawfully married, on pain of forfeiting One hun- 
dred guilders, more or less, as their quality shall be found to warrant, and all 
such persons may he amerced anew therefor every month by the Officer, accord- 
ing to the order and the custom of our Fatherland. i 

The Burgomasters and Schepens of New Amsterdam, sit- 
ting as a court, frequently exercised jurisdiction in divorce 
cases. It does not appeal that such cases were regarded as com- 
ing within the authority of the church. A few extracts will 

suffice : 

November 4, 1659.— Nicolas Velthuysen is asked by the Court, why he has 
turned his wife out of the house and why he will not live with her? He answers, 
he has not done so, but gave her a blow, because she took his money, that he had 
laid away in his chest, - - Aaltye (Lubberts)2 denies having taken the 

money. Nicolas replying says, that he gave her child money to buy one thin- or 
another to eat, as the child would not eat what was put on the table and what 
they ate; he requested separation from bed and board. Whereupon he is told, 
his wife is pregnant by him and the child will require maintenance. Answering 
he offers to maintain the child, when it comes, and to send her home a fat hog of 
100 pounds weight two skepels of wheat, one skepel of maize and then nothing 
more. He is asked, if he cannot resolve to live again in love with his wife, and 
answers, his inclination and will do not tend that way. and he has no disposition 
towards her. — — Nicolas Velthuysen and his wife having been heard in 
Court, it is decided, whereas Nicolas cannot resolve to live any more in love with 
her, he shall provisionally supply her with one fat hog, 2 skepels of wheat and one 
of maize, according to his own offer for her support, and further disposition shall 
be made for the maintenance of her and her child by him. 3 

December 9. 1659.— The Schout, Nicasius de Sille. requests by petition divorce 
and separation of marriage, in such manner as the law allows, between himself 
and his wife Catharina Croegers on account of her unbecoming and careless life, 
both by her wasting of property without his knowledge and her habitual public 
drunkenness. Decision: Regard being had to the position of the petitioner, he is 
referred to the Director General and Council. * 

June 22. 1665.— Lodowyck Pos(t v his wife and daughter, wife of Arent Juriansen 
Lautsman, entering, said Lautsman's wife requests to be divorced from her bus 
band, as she cannot keep house with him. Decreed to postpone the matter until 
next Court day. when said Lautsman is to be heard, and Lodowyck Pos is allowed 
to retain his daughter during that time. 

June if. 1665.— Lodowyck Pos and his daughter Beletje, wife of Arent Lauts- 
man. appear; said Beletje producing a remonstrance, wherein she demands that 

t Laws and Ordinances of New Netherland. page 328. 

2 He had married Aaltye Bickers, or Lubbers, widow, in June, 1659. tive months 
before this proceeding. 

3 New Amsterdam Records. III.. 73. 

4 New Amsterdam Records, III., 90. 

c 



XXVI DIVORCES IN NEW NETHERLAND. 

she be not obliged to go back to her husband; whereupon it is apostilled: Copy 
hereof is on request ordered to be given to party to answer in writing next Court 
day and to appear himself in person, and Arent requests copy of whatever papers 
his wife may file. Decision: Petitioner's request is granted 

July 4. 1665. —Lodowyck Pos vs. Arent Lautsman. Pltf. complaining as father 
of Beletje Lodowycx. maketh known the unchristian and insufferable treatment 
and behaviour of deft, tovrardssaid Beletje. deft's lawful wife, exhibiting divers at- 
testations, etc.. and demanding that deft, shall be condemned in such penalty as the 
Magistrates may deem proper, and further that his said daughter Beletje Jacobsen 
be not constrained to return again to her husband against her will. Deft, answer- 
ing denies, that he has improperly treated his wife, but says, they had some differen- 
ces, whereof said Lodowek Pos and his wife were the principal causes, exhibiting 
a declaration to that effect, requesting that his wife be obliged again to return to 
him and he promising to live henceforth with her as man and wife ought to do. 
Pltf. replying says, that he has now been three times before the Court concerning 
improper treatment of his daughter by the deft., who each time promised amend- 
ment, but never kept his promise: therefore he persists in his suit. The Deputy 
Mayor and Aldermen having heard the debates of parties on both sides— post- 
pone the decision of the Court to next Court day and meanwhile their Worships 
shall authorize some honorable and fitting per.soti to reconcile, if possible, the 
parties to love and friendship -if not. to report. 

July 11, 1665 —Arent Lautsman communicates by petition in substance, that he 
and his wife were, pursuant to order of July (, with Rev. Ministers D« Johannes 
Megapolensis and D« Samuel Drie.sius, but that his wife's parents would not come 
to any agreement nor listen or submit to the advice of the Ministers. He requests 
therefore, that the Court would please to order his wife to return to him, as he no 
longer could live without a wife, again promUing to live with her as an honest 
man ought to do. Whereupon Arent's wife appearing, assisted by her father, and 
the request having been read to her, She was asked, if for this time she would not 
go with her husband on the promise of amendment given by him: she answers: 
No, as he had already repeatedly promised the same, but never kept it. The 

Mayor and Aldermen, , declare, they had contributed all in their power, as 

well through the clergymen as otherwise, to reconcile the parties in love and 
friendship, but all in vain, and whereas by divers declarations it is sufficiently ap- 
parent, that the parents. Lodowyck Pos and his wife, are the chief and principal 
cause of the trouble, which has arisen between the parties, they therefore order 
the said Lodowyck Pos not to detain the above named Beletje, wife of Arent 
Lautsman, in his house beyond 14 days, within which time parties "shall have to 
be reconciled to each other or in default thereof they must again make joint ap- 
plication to the Court; and further said Arent Lautsman is hereby notified, that 
if again anj complaints should lie made of his improper behaviour, then he shall 
be delivered over to the Governor Ceneral for punishment, whether by separa- 
tion from bed and board, imprisonment or otherwise, as his Honour shall deem 
proper as an example to other evil householders. 

July 25, 1665.--The petition of Arent Lautsman was read and considered, 
making complaint, that his wife still evinces her unwillingness, contrary to the 
last judgment of the nth inst., to come home to him; also that his father-in law, 
Lod. Pos, is entertaining her contrary to said judgment, and requesting the Court 
to order and constrain the said Pos not to entertain his wife any longer and 
order her to return home to the petitioner; the Mayor and Aldermen direct, that 
the matter be placed in the hands of the jury. The aforesaid judgment of the 
11th together with the other papers having been considered by the jury, they de- 
cide that Beletje Lodowycks, wife of said Lautsman. shall return to her husband 
and that Lodowyck Pos shall no longer harbour her without the consent of her 



MARRIAGE IN NEW NETHERLAND. XXV11 

husband, or allow others to harbour her, and he is to pay costs in this case. The 
Court approves the jury's verdict.1 

As in the case of the young couple who went from New 
Amsterdam to Gravesend to have their banns proclaimed, ap- 
parently to avoid anticipated objections, — so young lovers re- 
sorted to other expedients to evade the salutary restrictions 
framed to secure due deliberation and protection in entering 
the marriage state. Witness this somewhat complicated 

affair : 

February 23, 1674.— The Fiscal, pltf. vs. Ralph Doxy. deft. Pltf. alleges that 
Deft, did on the 5th inst enter, in an unlawful manner, into the married state 
with Mary van Harris, making use for that purpose of a forged certificate and 
that Deft, has still a wife alive residing in New England: therefore concludes, 
that the Deft ought to be conveyed to the place, where justice is usually exe- 
cuted, severely whipped and furthermore banished the country forever, with 
costs. 

Deft, denies ever having been married to a woman before; acknowledges his 
guilt as regards the forged certificate, says that through love for Mary Harris he 
had allowed it to be executed by a certain Englishman, now gone to Barbadoes 
and prays forgiveness. 

Whereas parties, on both sides, expect further proofs, the case is continued to 
next Court day. 

March 1, 1674.— Same case. The Govr General and Council of New Netherland 
having read and considered the papers, etc., declare the marriage of Deft, with 
Mary van Harris to be unlawful, as it was solemnized by Jacobus Fabricius [a 
Lutheran minister], who had no legal power so to act, and without his engage- 
ment having been published three times according to the laws and customs of 
the government; but finding the charge against him of having a second wife in 
New England unfounded, he is therefore permitted to confirm himself in wed- 
lock with said Mary, according to the laws; in regard to the forged certificate, 
exhibited to Fabricius, he is pardoned for this on his promise of improvement 
and request for forgiveness; finally they condemn the defendant in costs. 2 

II. The Swedes. 

In the early times in Sweden " a purchase concluded with 
the father or the nearest relative (though it was rather a sym- 
bolical expression for contract generally), was the legal form 
of matrimony, and made the children legitimately born (lag- 
fodda). The legally married spouse, as distinguished from 
the woman who had been seduced or stolen away in war, was 
said to be won 'by gifts and speech' (medh mundok medh 
mseli — Law of West Gothland, Arf. B. f. 7), or was, as in 
Homer, bought with presents (mundi-keypt). The gods took 
to themselves wives after the same fashion. Thor's hammer, 

1 New Amsterdam Records, V., 262, 263, 271, 275, 282. 
- N. Y. Colonial Documents. II., 691. 



XXV111 LAW OF NEW SWEDEN. 

laid upon the knee of the veiled bride, inaugurated her into 
her new destiny." 1 

In 1 614 a compilation of laws was made in Sweden for the 
direction of the whole kingdom, deficiencies in the code being 
supplied or explained by the aid of the civil law. It was this 
compila:ion that governed the Swedes first seeking the shores 
of the New World. 

By the charter of the Swedish West India (or .Southern) 
Company, granted by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, 
on the application of William Usselinx, the grant being dated 
December 21, 1624, and the company incorporated June 14, 
1626, it was provided that the company should be authorized 
to "accommodate differences between the citizens of the coun- 
try and the natives, .... and preserve everything in good 
condition and under good order." 2 

This was the germ of a European system of government on 
the shores of the Delaware. Doubtless the officers of the 
Company were expected to conform to the laws and customs 
of Sweden, but doubtless, also, there was a tacit understand- 
ing that in new surroundings justice must be administered in a 
rude way, as required by circumstances. The civil law pre- 
vailed in the home country, except as modified by the compila- 
tion of 1614. In religious customs the Augsburg Confession 
was the basis of ecclesiastical law and usages. But neither the 
civil law, nor the statutes nor even the tk Unaltered Augsburg 
Confession" could always be made to fit the novel situations 
in the little colony on the Delaware. 

In granting permission, January 24, 1640, to a colony of 
Hollanders to settle in New Sweden, Sweden gave them 
u the right of exercising in their district high and low justice, 
of founding there cities, villages, and communities, with a 
certain police, statutes, and ordinances, to appoint magistrates 
and officers. . . . The "statutes and ordinances which they in- 

1 History of the Swedes, by Erie Gustave Geijer. London, p. 31. 

2 Hazard's Annals of Pennsylvania. 1850, p. 20; A Short Description of the 
Province of New Sweden, etc., by Thomas Campanius Holm (Memoirs Hist. Soc. 
of Pennsylvania. III.). 63-64; Hist, of the Colony of New Sweden, by Carl. K. S. 
Sprinchorn, Stockholm, 1878; Acrelius' New Sweden, 20; Bancroft's Hist. U. S., 
II. (ed. 1846), 284. 



LAWS OF NEW SWEDEN. XXIX 

tend to establish, to be communicated to the governor for ap- 
probation and confirmation, in order to discuss and execute 
with him in all which may most contribute to the advantage 
and welfare of the whole country." " As regards religion, we 
are willing to permit that, besides the Augsburg Confessiun, 
the exercise of the pretended reformed religion may be estab- 
lished and observed in that country, in such manner, however, 
that those who profess the one or the other religion live in 
peace, abstaining from every useless dispute, from all scandal 
and all abuse." 1 

When Queen Christina appointed, August 16, 1642, John 
Printz to be governor of New Sweden, she instructed him " to 
render justice without distinction, so that there shall be injury 
to no one. If any person behave himself grossly, he must pun- 
ish him in a convenient manner. . . . But above all, whatever 
regards the political government and administration of justice, 
must be done in the name of her majesty. Detailed and per- 
fect instruction cannot be given, therefore it is left to the dis- 
cretion of the governor, according to circumstances." All con- 
troversies were to be decided by the laws, customs and usages 
of Sweden, and in other things he was to " adopt and follow 
the laudable customs, habits and usages of Sweden." "Above 
all things, the governor must .... take proper care that 
divine service be zealously performed according to the unaltered 
Augsburg Confession, the Council of Upsala, and the cere- 
monies of the Swedish church, having care that all men, and 
especially the young, be well instructed in the articles of their 
Christian faith, and that a good church discipline be duly ex- 
ercised and maintained. "- 

In the articles of capitulation between John Rysingh, 
Director of New Sweden, and Peter Stuyvesant, Director-Gen- 
eral of New Netherland, September 25, 1655, it was provided 
that those who chose to remain should ■' have the liberty of 
adhering to their own Augsburg Confession." 3 

1 Hazard's Annals, 52-53. 

2 Acrelius's New Sweden. 30-40: Hazard's Annals, 63-68. 

3 Hazard's Annals, 188; Acrclias's New Sweden, 77: History of New Nether- 
land, by E. B. O'Callagban, New York, 1855, II., 288-290. 



XXX MARRIAGE CONTRACTS AMONG THE SWEDES. 

The Augsburg Confession, which embodied Luther's 
views, and the Catechism, explanatory thereof, did not recog- 
nize marriage as a sacrament, and while the Lutherans were 
quite strenuous in requiring the publication of banns, and the 
performing of the marriage ceremony by a clergyman, they 
nevertheless admitted the validity of civil marriage. 

As observed above, Director-General Stuyvesant guaran- 
teed the Swedes on the Delaware their "liberty of the Augs- 
burg Confession." Their local officers were also retained, and 
even the English conquerors continued the Swedish officers for 
a time. 1 We have no instances of marriages, etc., under the 
Swedish rule, but there is no doubt that Swedish customs pre- 
vailed in that region to a considerable extent until well on into 
the eighteenth century. 2 The sanctity of marriage contracts 
was recognized by the Swedes as well as by the Dutch, and 
the latter enforced the same on all occasions. Here is an in- 
stance : 

To-day. date as below, appeared before me. A. Hudde. Secretary at Fort Casi- 
mir on the South-River, appointed by the Honbie Mr. Peter Stuyvesant and High 
Council, residing at the Manhattans, in presence of the undersigned witnesses, 
the worthy Jan Picolet. a native of Bruylet in France with the maiden Catrine 
Jans, bom in Elsenburgh in Sweden. Together ami each for him or herself they 
have made, of their free, preconsidered and unbiased will and deliberate opinion, 
a promise of marriage, under the condition that on account of special reasons the 
marriage solemnization should lie delayed, until a preacher came here. And Jan 
Picolet promises faithfully to Catrine Jans to keep the aforesaid engagement un- 
broken, likewise Catrine Jans promises in the same manner to adhere steadily, firm- 
ly ami inviolably to the promise of marriage made to Jan Picolet, to which end we. 
the engaged, submit ourselves, each individually, to such punishment, as is ordered 
by law for convicted adulterers, if one of us or both should retract the foregoing 
promise or violate or break it. We bind us. for the vindication and satisfaction 
of justice, to keep ourselves pure and undefiled in our engagement, until the com- 
plete consummation of the marriage, as decency and the laws of our magistrates 
require it. We declare, by signing this, that we. for further confirmation of this 
our foregoing promise, place our persons, goods, movable or immovable, now be- 
longing or hereafter coming to us. all under the control of the pertinent laws. In 
at testation of the truth we have signed this without reservation or deceit. 

Done at Fort Casimir, this 24th of February of this Year 1656 on the South- 
River of New-Netherland. 

Jan Nicolet 

her 

Catrine — |— Jans 

mark 

i N. Y. Hist. Soc. Collections, First Series. I., ^36. 

2Kalmsays: ' Before the English settled here, they (the Swedes) followed 
wholly the customs of Old Sweden."— Travels, II., 123. In some of the New 
Jersey villages as late as 1749, "not a single Englishman, or people of any other 
nation," lived in them.— lb.. II.. ltis. 



MARRIAGE CONTRACTS AMONG THE SWEDES. XXXI 

On the 24th of the following May the contracted couple ap- 
pear before the Council, when Jan requests in writing and ver- 
bally, that he might be discharged from his promise of mar- 
riage, made to the aforesaid Catrine Jans on January 24, 1656, 
and that the samp be declared null and void. He had asked 
her, he said, " with serious intention, upon honor and faith, to 
be his wife, and that he did not know else, but that she was a 
virtuous girl." About a month after, to. his direct question, 
she assured him to that effect, and lt they would have been 
married if a preacher had been at hand." It subsequently be- 
came evident that she was not as she pretended to be. Catrine 
then confessed to the Council that in the fall of 1655 she had 
been engaged to a soldier, who was responsible for her condi- 
tion. The Commissaries adjudged that she had gone "[outside 
of her first betrothal, from which she had not been released, 
neither by the death of the bridegroom nor by other lawful rea- 
sons, and had by her second betrothal deceived the plaintiff, 
contrary to the written law," and they gave judgment that the 
aforesaid Picolet be released from his betrothal and marriage 
contract aforesaid and they declared the same null, ineffectual, 
of no value and as if the same had never been made, passed, 
written nor signed." They moreover condemned Catrine to 
appear in Fort Casimir, and there, before the Council, to re- 
lease the plaintiff and with bent knees to ask the pardon of 
God and justice and promise henceforth to behave as a virtu- 
ous woman." 

On June 1 6th the couple once more appeared before the 
Council, and having heard the above judgment, " the parties, 
giving each other the right hand, discharged one the other 
legally before the Council of the promise of marriage." 1 

The strict observance of the rule as to the publication of the 

banns in what was formerly New Sweden is illustrated by these 

citations : 

December 29. 16">5.— Appears Toms Broen. as father and guardian of his daugh 
ter. Jannetje Tomas, and consents to the marriage between her and Willem 

1 N. Y. Col. Docs.. XII., 141-146. On November 25 following. Lawrence Pieters, 
bachelor, from Leyden. about 23 years old. and the tickle Catrine Jans, from 
Gottenburg. about 19 years old, appeared before the Council and announced their 
desire to enter into matrimony. They were confirmed in marriage by the Coun- 
cil on December 24. " after proclamation of the banns on the previous Sunday."— 
N. Y. Col. Docs., ATI.. 154, 156. 



XXXli MARRIAGE CUSTOMS IN NEW SWEDEN. 

Mauri ts here present and requests that their legal bans might be published; the 
names being, of the bridegroom Willem Maurits. bachelor, from Walle Schier, 
about 33 years old, of the bride Jannetje Tomas spinster, born in New-Nether- 
land. about 16 years old. Witness Stuyte Andries.i 

July 7. 1656.— Desiring to enter into matrimony Jacob Crabbe. bachelor, born in 
Amsterdam, and Geertruy Jacopsen from Immenes, widow of the late Roeloff de 
Haes, ask to have their matter attended to and declare besides, that they have no 
engagement with any body else.- 

The Swedish Lutheran clergymen found it difficult to com- 
ply with the regulations of the Dutch rulers, and probably did 
so with an ill grace, that was resented by the new government. 
A curious case was that of the Rev. Laers Caerlsen (Lokenius), 
who was brought before the court at Altena, April 14, 1662. 
From the proceedings it appeared that his wife had eloped in 
September, 1661. As he had "several children and a large 
house-hold, and so was in need of another wife, and thought that 
all that was necessary was to find one," and although "pursuant 
to the laws of our Fatherland he ought to have first asked and 
obtained a decree of divorce from the superior authority," he 
had not only waived that formality but had married himself to 
another woman. He protested that in this matter he "had 
proceeded lawfully therein and consent was given. I have fol- 
lowed the same custom, which others have followed here, who 
have not been called up on that account. I declare on my 
conscience, that it was not done with any bad intention ; had I 
known, that this self-marriage would be thus interpreted, I 
would have willingly submitted to the usages of the Reformed 
church, which were not known to me." 3 During the period of 
his suspension Director-General Stuyvesant granted him a 
divorce and validated the second marriage, after which Mr. 
Laers was again invested with his gown. 

Again, in 1674 , another Lutheran minister, the Rev. Jaco- 
bus Fabricius, was suspended from his ministerial functions for 
one year, by the Governor-General and his Council, tor hav- 
ing married a couple " without having lawful authority thereto 
and without publication of the bans." 4 

1 N. Y. Col. Docs., XII., 137. 

2 Ibid., XII., 149. 

3 Ibid.. XII.. 366-7; Acrelius's New Sweden, 101. 

3 N. Y. Cc»l. Docs.. XII.. 512. For other notices of Mr Fabricius, see Acrelius's 
New Sweden, 177-180; Penn. Col. Records. I.. 3-18. 



MARRIAGE CUSTOMS IN NEW SWEDEN. XXX111 

June 4-5, 167S, at New Castle. — Mr. Walter Wharton, a 
Justice of the Peace, was presented "for marrying himselfe 
or being married directly contrary to the Knowne Lawes of 
England & alsoe contrary to the Lawes and customes of this 
place and Province." 1 

June 30, 1679, Whoorekill. — Complaint was made to Gov. 
Andros regarding the conduct of Capt. John Ayrev, a local 
Magistrate, president of the Court, and this pathetic incident 
was related, disproving the sarcastic incredulity of Rosalind : 

" HeeTooke vpon himselfe to Marry the widdow Clament to 
one Bryant Rowles, without publiquecation nothwithstanding 
she was out aske at Least a Month to another man, namly 
Edward Cocke; The which when the said Cocke hard that she 
was marryed to another man said that it would be his death 
And presently went home fell sick and in forty eight hours 
dyed ; he left it on his death that her marrying was the cause 
of his dyeing." 

Furthermore, it was alleged of Capt. Aurey : 

" Hee took upon him to grant a Licence to Marry Daniel 
Browne to Sussan Garland widdow, without any publiqueation, 
which Marrige was effected, notwithstanding it is Generally 
knowne or at Least the said Daniel confesses that he knows no 
other but that he haue a wife living in England." 2 

The following simply-worded entry in the record of Holy 
Trinity (Old Swedes) Church, Wilmington, Del., by the re- 
tiring pastor, Ericus Biorck, in 1713, gives a picture of a mar- 
riage in those early times, which was doubtless a type of sim- 
ilar occasions in the region formerly known as " New 
Sweden," and a suggestion, as well, of the changing customs : 

•'The fourth Sunday after Easter the 3d of May, as with the 
church, Christ's prepared spiritual bride, so did Magister Hes- 
sellius enter matrimony with Jonas Walraven's daughter Vir- 
gin Sarah Walraven, which after three times publishing took 
place in Christina church, the above named Sunday when I 
preached the marriage sermon over them from J"ohn 3rd Chap., 
29th verse: He that hath the, Bride, is the Bridegroom, etc., 
and Mr. Sandall, from Wicacoe, performed all the rest with 

1 N. Y. Col. Docs., XII., 596. 2 ibid., XII., 624. 



XXXI V MARRIAGE CUSTOMS IN NEW SWEDEN. 

the speech to the bride at the house and the marriage cere- 
mony, etc., which I would not do on account of my love for 
and adherence to the customs of my Fatherland and its old cus- 
toms which I see are being done away with, such as crowning 
the bride, etc., through the introduction of these English cus- 
toms." 1 

A few weeks later (May 30), at a meeting of the same con* 
gregation it was enjoined upon them, as to 

" Regulating espousals and marriages that they are not al- 
lowable according to church law before mature age, and not 
without consent of parents, and must be without compulsion 
or secrecy, and not before being well instructed in Christian 
doctrines."" 

By the middle of the century, as the country became more 
generally settled by people of English descent, there was 
much falling away from the quaint Swedish customs, espec- 
ially among the young people, as will be noted hereafter. 

III. Marriage Rites in England. 

Sundry provisions in the Anglo-Saxon statutes, frequent al- 
lusions in early English literature, and passages in the prayer 
book, appear to indicate that the earliest marriages in England 
were by capture, consented to or condoned by the bride ; or 
more generally by purchase, sanctioned by the village or 
gens, the bride's father selling or giving the bride, 3 and perhaps 
in later times performing some sort of ceremony on the occa- 
sion. 4 In the language of the old prayer book of the time of 
Edward VI. : 

1 Records of Holy Trinity Church, 1890. 153. 2 Ibid., 178. 

3 In "The History of English Haw before the time of Edward I.." by Sir Fred- 
erick Pollock and Frederick William Maitland, Cambridge. 1899. II.. 365, a some- 
what different view is taken : " When light begins to fall upon the Anglo-Saxon 
betrothal, it is not a cash transaction by which the bride's kinsmen receive a 
price in return for rights over their kinswoman: rather we must say that the 
bridegroom covenants with them that he will make a settlement upon his future 
wife. He declares, and he gives security for. the morning-gift which she shall 
receive if she 'chooses his will' and the dower that she shall enjoy if she outlives 
him." This practice, however, indicates an earlier custom of simple bride- 
purchase, as stated above in the text. 

4 It is not unlikely that this practice in a public place is the real origin of the 
tradition attaching to the singular group or circle of stones called "The Wed- 
ding," described in Camden's Britannia. London 1695 col. 81. 



EARLY MARRIAGE CUSTOMS IN ENGLAND. XXXV 

I M. take thee N. . for my wife, 

to have and to hold* 

from this day forwards 

for better, for worse, 

for richer, for poorer, 

in sickness and in health. 

to love and to cherish, 

till death us do part. 

and thereto I plight thee my troth. 

With this rynge I the wed 

And this sold and silver I the geveS 

and with my body I the worshipe, 

and with all my worldely cathel* I the endowe. 

In that quaint satire on "the degeneracy of the times" — 
theme ever-old, and ever-new — published in London, in 1604 
(reprinted in 1S44), entitled "A Piece of Friar Bacons 
Brazenheads Prophesie," the writer tells us : 

When I was but a boye 

.... When wooers met, 

It was a sport to see 
How soone the match was set. 
How well they did agree: 
When that the father gave the Childe, 
And then the mother sat and smilde. 

Dr. Lushington, in the House of Commons, March 17, 
1S35, thus explained the history and principles of the law of 
England in regard to marriage : " By the ancient law of this 
country as to marriages, the marriage was good, if celebrated 
in the presence of two witnesses, though without the interfer- 
ence of a priest. But then came the decision of the Council of 
Trent, rendering the solemnization by a priest necessary. At 
the Reformation we refused to accept the provision of the 
Council of Trent ; and, in consequence, the question was re- 
duced to this state — that a marriage by civil contract was valid ; 
but, there was this extraordinary anomaly in the law, that the 
practice of some of our Civil Courts required, in certain in- 
stances, and for some purposes, that the marriage should be 
celebrated in a particular form. It turned out that a marriage 
by civil contract was valid for some purposes, while for others 

1 Habendum el tenendum— words essential to a conveyance. 
i Words of the present tense - verba aeprccxenti. 

3 Evidence of bride-purchase, with the ring, and gold and silver. 

4 Cathel.or catel: goods, property, possessions, treasure, or money.— Halliwell'x 
Dictionary of Archaic and I'roriucial Words, 10th ed., London, 1881, I., 235. 



XXXVI PUBLISHING OF THE BANNS. 

— such as the descent of real property to the heirs of the mar- 
riage — it was invalid. Thus, a man in the presence of wit- 
nesses, accepting a woman for his wife, per verba presenti, 
the marriage was valid for some purposes ; but for others, to 
make it valid, it was necessary that it should be celebrated 
in facie ecclesiiV. This was the state of the law until the 
passage of the marriage act in 1 7S4-" 

In the prayer book, of Edward VI. (1553), it is ordered : 
" First the banns must be asked three several Sundays or 
holy days, in the service time, the people being present, after 
the accustomed manner.'''' 

The old ballad of Robin Hood and Allen a Dale refers to 
the same ancient custom : 

That shall not be. the bishop he said, 

For thy word shall not stand; 
They shall be three times askt in the church, 

As the law is of our land. 

The rule was that the banns, or intention of marriage, 
should be published, or " called out," in facie ecclesice, or in 
front of, or before, the church ; in other words, in the most 
public place in the village, to ascertain if the proposed mar- 
riage met with the approval of the people — apparently a sur- 
vival of an earlier custom, when the consent of the bride's gens 
was requisite, to permit of her surrender to another gens or 
tribe. The rule was still further modified in time, by having 
the banns "' called out" from the pulpit, before the congrega- 
tion, and, as education became more general, by simply post- 
ing the notices of intended marriage on, or at, the church door, 
which might be construed as a compliance with the ancient 
custom of publishing the banns in facie ecclesicc. Various 
ceremonies " at the church door," as of espousals, 1 dowry and 
the like, have been regarded as relics of a pagan sacrificial cere- 
mony ; and the marriage at the altar, within the church, is 
thought to be a trace of a primitive sacrifice at the domestic 
altar. Certain it is, that the church was many centuries in se- 
curing an influential part in the celebration of marriages in 

1 A case of espousals at the church door was tried in I25J. See N. Y. Gen. and 
Biog. Record. III., 89. 



EARLY WEDDINGS IN ENGLAND. XXXV11 

England. 1 One of the earliest descriptions of a church wed- 
ding in England is this, from Chaucer: 

I trow it were to longe yow to tarie. 

If I yow tolde of every scrit and bond, 

By which that sche was feoffed in his lond; 

Or for to herken of hir riche array. 

But finally y-comen is that day. 

That to the chirche bothe ben thay went. 

For to receyve the holy sacrement. 

Forth comth the preest, with stoole about his necke. 

And bad hir be like Sarra and Rebecke 

In wisdom and in trouth of mariage; 

And sayd his orisouns. as is usage, 

And crouched hem, and bad ( rod shuld hem blesse 

And made al secur ynough with holinesse. 

Thus ben they wedded with solempnite.2 

Another account of a wedding that actually took place sixty 
or seventy years later than the date of the Canterbury Tales, is 
described with an interesting minuteness in depositions made 
July 6, 1472, in which it is related that in 145 1 or 1452, Sir 
William Plumpton and Joan Wintringham were privately 
married one morning before sunrise, in the parish church at 
Knaresburgh, by John Brown, perpetual vicar of that parish. 

"Very early in the morning of the said Friday came the said 
Sir William and Joan to the parish church of Knaresburgh, 

and, they standing at the door of the chancel of the said 

church within the said church, the aforesaid John Brown came 
from the high altar in his vestments and solempnized marriage 
between them in the presence of the deponent, the said Sir 
William taking the said Joan with his right hand and repeat- 
ing after the vicar, Here I take the Jhennett to my wed- 
ded wife to hold and and to have, att bed and ait bord, for 
farer or lather, for better for worse, in sichnesse and in hele, 

1 "In the seventh century in England the church was making her voice heard 
about marriage." "By the middle of the twelfth century ... it was law in 
England that marriage appertained to the spiritual forum." "In 1200 Archbishop 
Hubert Walter . . . published in a council at Lambeth a constitution which 
declared that no marriage was to be celebrated until after a triple publication of 
the church's ban." "At the Lateran Council of 1215 Innocent III. extended over 
the whole of Western Christendom the custom that had hitherto obtained in 
some countries, of • publishing the banns of marriage.'" -History of the English 
Law. by Pollock and Maitland, as cited, II., 366. 367. 370: Thrupp's "Anglo-Sax- 
on Home," 50-57; Palgrave's Hist, of the English Commonwealth, II.. exxxvi. 

2 Chaucer's Marchaundes Tale, 453-465 [Chaucer's Works, edited by Richard 
Morris, London, 1882, Vol. II., 332]. 



XXXV111 MARRIAGE CONTRACTS IN ENGLAND. 

to dede us depart, and thereto I plight the ?uy trouth, and 
the said Joan making like response incessantly to the said Sir 
William — that the said vicar, having concluded the ceremony 
in the usual form, said the mass of the Holy Trinity in a low 
voice in the hearing of the deponent." 

A vivid touch of realism is imparted to the narrative by 
the additional information that " Sir William was clad in a 
garment of green checkery, and Joan in one of a red colour," 
she also having on ''a grey hood." 1 

Although the church through hundreds of years was contin- 
ually seeking to gain entire control of the marriage ceremony, 
nevertheless marriage was still regarded as primarily a civil 
contract, until the passage of the Marriage Act of 26 Geo. II. , 
and the ecclesiastical ceremony was largely subsidiary to the 
civil contract or espousals, which often preceded the actual mar- 
riage by a considerable period. A pre contract of this kind 
was, till 32 Hen. VIII., and again after 2 and 3 Edvv. VI., 
considered an impediment to marriage with any other person. 

In the early Chancery proceedings, formerly in the Tower 
of London, there are numerous bills of complaint grounded on 
alleged contracts of marriage, some of which date back as far as 
1452. In these proceedings, however, the plaintiffs seek only 
to recover the actual losses and disbursements, without making 
any claim for blighted affections. 

Maister Walter Leinster, Doctour of Phisik, complains of 
Maister Richard Narborough, Doctor of Law Sivill, for that 
he in the moneth of May in the ix. yere of the reigne of the 
Kyng oure soveraigne Lord (Edward IV.) affianced one Lucy 
Brampston, the daughter-in-lawe of the said plaintiff, to have 
her to wife, and immediately thereafter informed her that he 
would " depart over the see unto Patlowe, there to applye his 
stodye for the space of ij yeres," at the end of which time he 
promised to return to England and to " espouse the said Lucy 
according to the law of Holy Churche," at the same time es- 
pecially desiring the plaintiff to maintain the said Lucy and a 

1 Plumpton Correspondence. A series of Letters, chiefly domestick, written 
in the reigns of Edward IV. Richard III. Henry VII. and Henry VIII. London, 
printed for the Camden Society, 1839, pp. lxxvi-lxxvii. 



AN OLD BREACH OF PROMISE SUIT. XXXIX 

maidservant to attend upon her, providing them with meat, 
drink, clothing, and all things necessary, until his return from 
beyond the sea, when he promised faithfully to repay the 
plaintiff all the costs and charges which he had incurred in 
that behalf. lie did not return for ten years, and then refused 
either to marry Lucy, or to reimburse the plaintiff, ki to the 
greate perell and jopardy of soule of the same Maister 
Richard." The complainant therefoie brought suit: 
For bedde and boorde for Lucy and hir mayde by the space of 
x. yere by his agrement and special desire, paying by y w eek 
iijs. iiijd. for them twayne cxxx marks 

Item: For hir arayment yerely delivered to hir, to buy gownys. 

kirtells, smokkis. &c. xx - l *- 

Item: For arayment of air servaude yerely delivered xiiijs. iiijd. x. marks 

Item: For necessary expences made uppon hir in tyme of hir 
sore and gret sekenes caused thrugh his onkyndnes and 
chaungeablenes. ful hard to escape with lyiffe. as al the eun- 
trey knowith wel; and as yet apperith on her. for evir sith 
she hath ben sekele thrugh sorowe and pensyffenes whiche 
she toke for his newfanglesi xiijli. xiijs. iiijd. 

The feudal laws, which gave the lord the control of the 
marriage of his ward, were manifestly opposed to the church's 
claim over marriages. True, the law of Normandy was to 
the effect that " if a woman be in wardship, when she shall 
be of an age to marry, she ought to marry by the consent and 
license of her lord, and by the counsel and consent of her rela- 
tions and friends, according to what the nobleness of her line- 
age and the value of her fief shall require." But within a short 
period after the Norman conquest the English lords asserted 
absolute control over their wards, male as well as female, an 
abuse so notorious that it called for restrictive enactments, as 
Henry I., cap. I, cited in Bracton ; Magna Charta- ; the Stat- 
ute of Merton, 20 Hen. III.; 1 Westminster, cap. 22; 2 
Westminster, cap. 35. This control of wards and their estates 
by the feudal lords continued for centuries, despite adverse en- 
actments. A remarkable instance of this happened so lately 
as the time of Charles I., in the case of the earl, afterwards first 
cluke of Ormond. "A long suit had subsisted between the 
lady Preston, grand-daughter and heiress at law of Thomas 
earl of Ormond, and her cousin, the heir male of the family, 

1 The Antiquary. IV. (London, Nov. lsSD. 186 V. No decision is recorded. 

2 Particularly articles vi. vli and viii. 



xl CONTROL OVER MARRIAGE BY THE FEUDAL LORDS. 

for that part of the estate her grandfather had entailed to go 
with the title. At length the relations on hoth sides thought 
the best expedient to end this intricate dispute, was by uniting 
the young relations, who likewise had conceivecLa strong affec- 
tion for each other ; yet, although the king approved highly 
thereof, did the earl of Warwick, who was grantee of the 
young lady's wardship, extort ten thousand pounds before he 
would consent to a marriage on every account so desirable." 1 

The primary interest of the lords in asserting control over 
the marriage of their wards must have interfered not a little 
with the church's claims to a supremacy in all that pertained 
to the marriage ceremony. It was evidently to the advan- 
tage of the feudal lords likewise to attach great importance to 
the idea that marriage was a civil contract. Not so much in 
their interest was the underlying principle, recognized in Eng- 
land from the earliest times, that consent by and between the 
parties was of the very essence of a valid marriage. 2 This, 
again, was a recognition of the idea that marriage was a civil 
contract, between the two parties most interested, which not 
even the church could lawfully abrogate. 3 Herein was the 
basis of what has always been known as the English " common 
law marriage." ''If a man and woman agreed forthwith (per 
verba de prcesenti) to take each other as husband and wife, it 
was a good marriage by the common law. 4 " In general, 

1 Lectures on the Constitution and Laws of England, etc., by Francis Siough- 
ton Sullivan. LL. D. Second Edition. London: M, DCC, LXXVI. pp. 129-133. 
And see Co. Litt.. 7S-79. 

2 "Marriage being a divine Institution, to which only a full and free Consent of 
the Mind is necessary."— Moor, 170. 

3 It was held by the sclioolmen to whom Henry VIII. referred the question, in 
1530: "A Marriage is compleated by the Marriage Contract, though it be never 
Consummated." " Since Marriage was a Sacrament of the Church, its Essence 
could only consist in the Contract; .... so Marriage is compleat, though its 
effect never follow." The canonists did not agree to this, regarding the consum- 
mation as essential.— Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of Eny- 
iaitd, I., 100. 

* Co. Lit. 3-1 a; Dy. 369, a. R. ; 6 Mod. 155; Sal. 437; Carth. 99. So if a contract 
per verba defuturo be afterwards executed by consummation. Semb. Sal. 438; 2 
Comyns's Digest, ed. 1793, 68. "The Dutchesse of Barr was married in a closet, 
without a Masse, by words onely of the Present tense, as I believe. I have read in 
the Historie of Thuanus." See letter of the Lord Keeper to the Duke of Buck- 
ngham. 22 March 1622. given in "Cabala. Mysteries of State, in Letters of the 
great Ministers to K. James and K. Charles," London, 1654, 106. See Pollock and 
Maitland, as cited, II., 368. 371. 



THE ENGLISH CHURCH'S CONTROL OVER MARRIAGES. xli 

common reputation, and cohabitation as man and wife, or the 
acknowledgment of the parties, may be admitted as evidence 
of marriage in the temporal courts." 1 " This Marriage is not 
a meer Nullity, because by the Law of Nature the Contract is 
binding; and though the positive Law of Man ordains Mar- 
riage to be made by a Priest, yet that Law only makes this 
Marriage irregular, but not void, unless the positive Law of 
Man had expressly ordained it to be void." 2 

The authority of the church in the celebration of marriages 
was first generally recognized in the time of Innocent III. 3 The 
canon law was introduced in England in the reign of Henry 
I., and was gradually extended in its power and scope as the 
influence of the church became more firmly established. The 
canons of the Church of England threw many safeguards 
about the ordinance, prohibiting marriages without publishing 
the banns, or without a license, under heavy penalties. 4 The 
privilege of granting licenses dispensing with the publishing 
of the banns for three Sundays, and other requisites of the 
canon law, was highly prized by the church, and especially by 
the Pope and his prelates. One of the first acts of Henry VIII. 
and his Parliament, after his breaking away from Rome, was 
to deprive the Pope of any power in relation to marriages in 
England, 5 by the enactment of a statute (25 Hen. VIII. , A. D. 

i Comb. 202; Cowps 232,241; Rep. 877; Espin. Ni. Pr. Cases. 213: 7 Bacon's 
Abridg. 571. 

2 Cases cited in William Nelson's Abridgement ol the Common Law of Eng- 
land, London. 1726, II., 1163. 

3 •■ Before the time of Pope Innocent III. there was no solemnization of mar- 
riage in the church: but the man came to the house where the woman inhabited 
and led her home to his own house, which was all the ceremony then used."— 
Moor. 170. 

i Rubrick, Canons 62. 63. 101, 102. 104; 2 Burn's Ece. Law. 427. "These Cations 
were made in Convocation, and confirmed by Letters Patent, and are become Part 
of the Law of the Land, for the Government of the Church."— The Rights of the 
Clergy, etc., by, Wm. Nelson, London, 1732, 416-422. 

' s .\s the clergy wore formerly the only educated persons, they arrogated to 
themselves the legal profession in all its branches. As to the practice temp. 
Hen. II., see Pollock and Maitland, I.. 125-131. Later the claims of the clergy 
were much broader. The English Parliament in the sixteenth century objected 
particularly to these two provisions of the canon law: " All manner of Causes, 
whatsoever they be. Spiritual or Temporal, ought to be determined and judged 
by the Clergy." " Whosoever teacheth or thinketh of the Sacraments otherwise 
than the See of Rome doth teach and observe, and all they that the same See 
D 



Xlll THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY VS. THE POPE. 

1534, cap. 21), which contained these among other provisions : 

III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That neither your 
Highness, your Heirs nor Successors. Kings of this Realm, nor any your Sub- 
jects of this Realm, nor of any other your Dominions, shall from henceforth sue 
to the said Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, or to the See of Rome, or to any 
Person or Persons having or pretending any Authority by the same, for Licences, 
Dispensations. Compositions. Faculties. Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies, or any 
other Instruments or Writings of what Kind. Name. Nature or Quality soever 
they be of, for any Cause or Matter, for which any Licence, Dispensation. Com- 
position. Faculty, Grant. Rescript. Delegacy. Instrument, or other Writing, here- 
tofore hath been used and accustomed to be had and obtained at the See of Rome, 
or by Authority thereof, or of any Prelates of this Realm: (2) nor for any manner 
of Licences. Dispensations. Compositions, Faculties. Grants, Rescripts, Delega- 
cies, or any other Instruments or Writings that in Causes of Necessity may law- 
fully be granted without offending of the Holy Scripture and Laws of God; (3) 
but that from henceforth every such Licence, Dispensation. Composition. Fac- 
ulty. Grant, Rescript. Delegacy. Instrument and other Writing afore named and 
mentioned, necessary for your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, and your and 
their People and Subjects, upon the due Examinations of the Causes and Quali- 
ties of the Persons procuring such Dispensations. Licences, Compositions. Fac- 
ulties. Grants. Rescripts, Delegacies. Instruments or other Writings, shall be 
granted, had or obtained, from Time to Time, within this your Realm, and other 
Dominions, and not elsewhere, (4) in Manner and form following, and none other- 
wise; thai is in say, The Archbishop of Canterbury for the Time being, and his 
Successors, shall have power and Authority, from Time to Time, by their Discre- 
tion, to give, grant and dispose, by an Instrument under the Seal of the said Arch- 
bishop, unto your Majesty, and to your Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, 
as well all manner such Licences, Dispensations. Compositions, Faculties, Grants, 
Rescripts, Delegacies, Instruments and all other Writings, for Causes not being 
contrary or repugnant to the Holy Scriptures and Laws of God, as heretofore hath 
been used and accustomed to be had and obtained by your Highness, or any your 
most noble Progenitors, or any of your or their Subjects, at the See of Rome, or 
any Person or Persons by authority of the same; (5) and all other Licences. Dis- 
pensations. Faculties. Compositions. Grants. Rescripts. Delegacies. Instruments, 
and other Writings, in, for and upon all such Causes and Matters as shall be 
convenient and necessary to lie had, for the Honour and Surety of your Highness, 
your Heirs and Successors and the Wealth and Profit of this your Realm: (6) so 
that the said Archbishop or any of his Successors, in no manner wise shall grant 
any Dispensation. Licence, Rescript, or any other Writing afore rehearsed, or any 
Cause or Matter repugnant to the Law of Almighty God. 

IV. Be it also enacted by Authority aforesaid. That the said Archbishop and 
his Successors, after good and due Examination, by them had, of the Causes and 
Qualities of the Persons procuring such Licences Dispensations. Compositions, 
Faculties. Delegacies, Rescripts. Instruments or other Writings shall have full 
Power and Authority by themselves, or by their sufficient and substantial Com- 
missary or Deputy, by their Discretions, from Time to Time, to grant and dis- 
pose, by any Instrument under the Name and Seal of the said Archbishop, as well 
to any of your Subjects, as to the Subjects of your Heirs and Successors, 

doth judge Hereticks, be Excommunicate." The clergy in general held that of 
the seven sacraments then generally recognized, matrimony was the only one ex- 
pressly mentioned in scripture. — Burners History of the Kpfurmatiun of Oie 
Churchof England, L, 116, 262, 263, 330; Collections. 203, 206-7. And see ''The 
Constitutional History of England." by William Stubbs. Oxford. 1880, III.. 351, 
372, 374, 379. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY VS. THE I'Ol'E. \liii 

all manner Licences, Dispensations, Faculties. Compositions, Delegacies, Re- 
scripts. Instruments or other Writings for any such Cause or Matters, whereof 
heretofore such Licences, Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Delegacies. 
Rescripts, Instruments or Writings, have been accustomed to be had at the See 
of Rome or by the Authority thereof, or of any Prelate of this Realm. 

V. And that the said Archbishop and his Commissary, shall not grant any other 
Licence. Dispensation. Composition. Faculty, Writing or Instrument, in cases u-.i- 
wont, and not accustomed to be had or obtained at the Court of Rome, nor by Au- 
thority thereof, nor by any Prelate of this Realm, until your Grace, your Heirs 
and Successors, or your or their Council shall be first advertised thereof, and de- 
termine whether such Licence. Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, or other 
Writings in such Cases unwont and not accustomed to be dispensed withal, or ob- 
tained, shall commonly pass as other Dispensations. Faculties, or other Writings, 
shall or no; (.') upon Pain that the Grantors of every such Licence, Dispensa- 
tion, or Writing, in such Cases unwont. contrary to this Act shall make Fine at the 
Will and Pleasure of your Grace, your Heirs and Successors; (3) and if it be 
thought and determined by your Grace, your Heirs or Successors, or your or 
their Council, that Dispensations, Faculties. Licences, or other Writings, in any 
such case unwont, shall pass, then the said Archbishop or his Commissary, hav- 
ing Licence of your Highness, your Heirs or Successors for the same, by your or 
their Bill assigned., shall dispense with them accordingly i 

The somewhat belated scruples of Henry VIII., as to the 

validity of his marriage to Catharine of Arragon, because she 

had been espoused to his elder brother more than a score of 

years before, having been appeased by the annulment of the 

marriage, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding 

the denunciation of Rome, after a variety of new matrimonial 

ventures 2 the exigencies of his crown and the interests of his 

1 Statutes at Large, London, 1770, II., 193-5. And see Burnet's Hist, of the 
Reformation. I., 144. The fees attached to the various services of the clergy 
formed a lucrative source of wealth to the church. The fee for a marriage license, 
at first 4s.. by the middle of the eighteenth century was about £1, 5s., and of 
course more could be exacted, according to the urgency of the prospective bride- 
groom. The cupidity of the clergy led to many abuses and scandals. John Eve- 
lyn notes in his diary : "[1695] 14th [July] No sermon at church ; but after pray- 
ers, the names of the parishioners were read, in order to gather the tax of 4s. for 
marriages, burials. &c. a very imprudent tax, especially this reading the names, 
so that most went out of the church." The clergy found it profitable often to 
ignore the law requiring the publication of banns or a license, and permitted mar- 
riages to lie performed in their churches or chapels without either, by strolling 
ministers, having no benefices or settled habitations; and marriages were also 
celebrated by parsons in prison, without licenses. These irregular practices 
were prohibited under severe penalties in 1688 by act of 1 W. & M., cap. 35; in 
1696, by act of 7 and 8 William III., cap. 35; in 1711 by act of 10 Anne. cap. 19, sec. 
176: and in 1753 by act of 26 Geo. II.. cap. 33. See Statutes at Large. III., 358. 634: 
IV., 563; VII.. 5 '5. An interesting description of the manner in which the law 
was very generally disregarded by the English clergy, from the highest, to the low- 
est, is given in a little pamphlet printed in 1691, and reprinted in the Harleian 
Miscellany, London, 1810, IX., 500-507. 

2 His fourth marriage, to Anne of Cleves. in 1540. was celebrated '-publicly, with 
great pomp, in the face of the church." writes Richard Hilles to Henry Bullinger. 



xllV LEGITIMIZATION OF ISSUE OF CERTAIN MARRIAGES. 

subjects demanded the legitimization of the issue of marriages 
made despite previous contracts, and accordingly a new stat- 
ute (32 Hen. VIII., A. D., 1540, cop. 3S) was enacted, " For 
Marriages to stand notwithstanding Precontracts," as follows: 

Whereas heretofore the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome hath always 
entangled and troubled the meer Jurisdiction and regal Power of this Realm of 
England, and also unquieted much the Subjects of the same, by his usurped 
Power in them, as by making that unlawful which by God's Word is lawful, both 
in Marriages and in other Things, ds hereafter shall appear more at length, and 
till now of late in our Sovereign Lord's Time, which is otherwise by Learning 
taught than his Predecessors in Times past of long Time have been, hath so con- 
tinued the same, whereof yet some Sparks be left, which hereafter might kindle 
a great Fire, and so remaining, his Power not to seem utterly extinct: 

II. Therefore it is thought most convenient to the King's Highness, his Lords 
Spiritual and Temporal, with the Commons of this Realm, assembled in this pres- 
ent Parliament, That two Things specially for this Time be with Diligence pro- 
vide! for, whereby many nconveniences have ensued, and many more mought 
ensue and follow: (2) as whore heretofore divers and many Persons, after Ion- 
continuance together in Matrimony, without any Allegation of either of the 
Parties, or any other at their Marriage, why the same Matrimony should not be 
good, just and lawful, and after the same Matrimony solemnized and consummate 
by carnal Knowledge, and also sometime Fruit of Children ensued of the same 
Marriage, have nevertheless, by an unjust law of the Bishop of Rome, which is, 
That upon Pretence of a former Contract made, and not consummate by carnal 
Copulation (for Proof whereof two Witnesses by that Law were only required) 
been divorced and separated, contrary to God's Law. and so the true Matrimony. 
both solemnized in the face of the Church and consummate with bodily Knowl- 
edge, and confirmed also with the Fruit of Children had between them, clearly 
frustrate and dissolved ; (3) Further also, by reason of other Prohibitions than 
God's Law admitteth, for their Lucre by the Courl invented, the Dispensations 
whereof they always reserved to themselves, as in Kindred or Affinity between 
Cousin-German. -s. and so to third and fourth Degree, carnal Knowledge of any 
of the same Kin. or Affinity before such outward Degrees, which else were lawful. 
and be not prohibited by Cod's Law; (4) and all because they would get the Money 
by it. and keep a Reputation to their usurped Jurisdiction, whereby not only 
much Discord between lawful married Persons hath (contrary to God's Ordinance) 
arisen, much Debate and Suit at Law. with Wrongful Vexations, and great Dam- 
age of the innocent Party hath been procured, and many just Marriages brought 
in doubt and Danger of undoing, and also many Times undone, and lawful heirs 
disinherited, whereof there had never else, but for his vain-glorious Usurpation. 
been moved by such Question, since Freedom in them was given us by God's 
Law, which oughl to bemost sure and certain: (5) but notwithstanding. Marriages 
have been brought into such an Iucertainty thereby, that no Marriage could be so 
surely knit and bounden. but it should lie in either of the Parties Power and Ar- 
biter, casting away the fear of God, by Means and < !ompasses to prove a Pre con- 
tract, a Kindred and Alliance, or a Carnal Knowledge, to defeat the same, and so 
under the Pretence of these Allegations afore rehearsed, to live all the Days of 
their Lives in detestable Adultery, to the utter Destruction of their own Souls, 
and the Provocation of the terrible wrath of God upon the Places where such 
Abominations were- used and suffered; (6) Be it therefore enacted by the King 
our Sovereign Lord, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, in this 

in 1541, shortly after the event. See '-Original Letters relative to the English 
Reformation.'' etc, 1537-1558. Parker Society Publications, Cambridge, 1846. 201. 



EVIL RESULTS OF THIS LEGISLATION. xlv 

present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same. That from the first 
Day of the Month of July next coming in the Year of our Lord God 1540, all and 
every such Marriage as within this Church of England shall be contracted 
between lawful Persons, (as by this Act we declare all Persons to be lawful, that 
be not prohibited by God's Law to Marry); (7) such Marriages being contracted 
and solemnized in the Face of the Church, and consummate with bodily Know] 
edge, or Fruit of Children or Child beiny had therein between the Parties so mar- 
ried, shall be by the Authority of this present Parliament aforesaid deemed, 
judged and taken to be lawful, good, just and indissoluble, notwithstanding any 
Pre contract or Pre contracts of Matrimony not consummate with bodily Knowl- 
edge, which either of the Parties so married or both shall have made with any 
other Person or Persons before the Time of contracting that Marriage which is 
solemnized and consummate, or whereof such Fruit is ensued, or may ensue, as 
afore, and notwithstanding any Dispensation, Prescription. Law, or other Thing 
granted or confirmed by Act, or otherwise: (8) and that no Reservation or Prohi- 
bition, God's Law except, shall trouble or impeach any Marriage without the 
Levitical Degrees; (9) and that no Person, of what Estate, Degree or Condition 
soever he or she be. shall, after the brst Day of the said Month of July aforesaid, 
be admitted in any of the Spiritual Courts within this the King's Realm, or any 
of his Grace's other Lands and Dominions, to any Process, Plea or Allegation, 
contrary to this aforesaid Act. J 

This statute was repealed in 154S (2 and 3 Edw. VI., cap. 

33), the repealing act naively setting forth as the reason 

thereof: 

Sithence the Time of which Act, although the same was godly meant, the Un- 
ruliness of Man hath ungodly abused the same, and divers Inconveniences (intol- 
erable in manner to Christian Ears and Eyes) followed thereupon. Women and 
Men breaking their own Promises and Faiths made by the one unto the other, so 
set upon Sensuality and Pleasure that if after the Contract of Matrimony they 
might have whom they more favoured and desired, they could tie content by Light- 
ness of their Nature to overturn all that they had done afore, and not afraid in 
Manner, even from the very Church Door and Marriage-Feast, the Man to take 
another Spouse, and the Espoused to take another Husband, more for bodily Lust 
and carnal Knowledge, than for Surety of Faith and Truth, or having God in their 
good Remembrance, contemning many Times also the Commandment of the Eccle- 
siastical Judge, forbidding the parties having made the Contract to attempt to 
do anything in Prejudice to the same:- 

An act passed in 1604 (2 Jac. I., cap. 11) made bigamy 
by any person living in England or Wales, a felony, punish- 
able by death, the penalty to be enforced in any country 
where the offender might be apprehended. The act was not 
to extend, however, to any person or persons whose husband 
or wife should be "-continually remaining beyond the seas 
by the space of seven years together, in any parts within Irs 
majesty's dominions, the one of them not knowing the other 
to be living within that time;" nor to persons lawfully di- 

1 Statutes at Lart-'e, London, 1770. II.. 298. And see Burnet's Hist, of the Ref- 
ormation in England. I.. 283. 

2 Statutes ;it Large, London. 1770, II., 422. 



xlvi THE COMMONWEALTH'S MARRIAGE LAW. 

vorced, or whose marriage should have heen annulled ; nor 
to any person who had married within the age of consent. 1 

One of the earliest acts of the Commonwealth Parliament 
was to deal a blow at the supremacy of the church, in its most 
intimate relations with the people, by providing that marriages 
should be celebrated only by a justice of the peace. The ex- 
cellent existing provisions of the canons and of the statutes for 
the publication of banns were preserved, and a careful system 
was prescribed for keeping a register of births, marriages and 
burials. 2 This was the protest of England's Puritans and other 
dissenters against the Roman dogma that marriage was a sac- 
rament, that could be celebrated only under the sanction of the 
church. Milton and other leaders in the Commonwealth in- 
sisted that it was a civil contract, and this legislation was the 
outcome. 

The act (passed August 24, 1653) provides: 

Be it Enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, That whosoever 
shall agree to be married within the Commonwealth of England, after the Nine 
and twentieth day of September, in the year One thousand six hundred fifty 
three, shall (one and twenty days at least before such intended Marriage) deliver in 
writing, or cause to !»■ so delivered unto the Register (hereafter appointed by this 
Act) for the respecl ive Parish where each party to be married liveth. the names 
surnames, additions, and places of aboad of the parties so to be married, and of 
their Parents, Guardians or Overseers: All which the said Register shall publish 
or cause to be published, three several Lords-days then next following, at the 
close of the morning Exercise, in the publique Meeting-place commonly called 
the Church or Chappel ; or (if the parties so to be married shall desire it) in the 
Market-place next to said Church or Chappel: on three Market-days in three sev- 
eral weeks next following, between the hours of eleven and two; which be- 
ing so performed, the Register shall (upon request of the parties concerned) 
make a true Certificate of the due performance thereof, without which Certifi- 
cate, the persons herein after authorized shall not proceed in such marriage: And 
if any Exception .shall lie made against the said intended Marriage, the Register 
shall also insert the same, with the name of the person making such Exception, 
and their place of aboad, in the said Certificate of Publication. 

And it is further Enacted, That all such persons so intending to be married, 
shall come before some Justice of Peace within and of the same County, City or 
Town Corporate where publication shall be made as aforesaid: and shall bring a 
Certificate of the said publication and shall make sufficient proof of the consent 
of their Parents or Guardians, if either of the said parties shall be under the age 
of One and twenty years: And the said Justice shall examine by witnesses upon 
Oath, or otherways (as he shall see cause) concerning the truth of the Certificate, 
and due performance of all the premises; and also of any exception made or aris- 
ing : And (if there appear no reasonable cause to the contrary) the Marriage shall 
proceed in this manner: 

1 Statutes at Large, London. 1770, III.. 0. 

2 No registration of this kind was required by the canon law. and no such sys- 
tem was known before the Reformation. 



THE COMMONWEALTH'S MARRIAGE LAW. xlvii 

The Man to be married, taking the Woman to be married by the hand, shall 
plainly and distinctly pronounce these words: 

I A. B. do here in the presence of God the searcher of all hearts, lake thee C. I), 
for my wedded Wife, and do also in the presence of God. and before these wit- 
nesses, promise to be unto thee a loving and faithful Husband. 

And then the Woman, taking the Man by the hand, shall plainly and distinctly 
pronounce these words: 

I C. D. do here in the presence of dud. the searcher of all hearts, take thee A. 
B. for my wedded Husband, and do also in the presence of God. and before these 
witnesses, promise to be unto thee a loving, faithful and obedient Wife.' 

And it is further Enacted, That the Man and Woman having made sufficient, 
proof of the consent of their Parents or Guardians as aforesaid, and expressed 
their consent unto Marriage, in the manner and by the words aforesaid, before 
such Justice of Peace in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses: the said 
Justice of Peace may and shall declare the said man and woman to be from 
thenceforth Husband and Wife; and from and after such consent so expressed, 
and such declaration made, the same, (as to the form of Marriage) shall be good 
and effectual in Law; Aud no other Marriage whatsoever within the Common- 
wealth of England, after the 29th of September, in the year One thousand six 
hundred fifty three, shall be held or accompted a Marriage according to the Laws 
of England: But the Justice of Peace (before whom a M image is solemnized) in 
case of dumb persons, may dispense with pronouncing the words aforesaid: and 

with joining hands in cas3 of persons that have not hands And the 

said Justice of Peace (if it lie desired) shall give unto the parties so married a 
Certificate in Parchment under his hand and seal, of such marriage, and of the 
day of the solemnization thereof, and of two or more cf the witnesses then pres- 
ent ; and the Justices Clerk for this Certificate may receive Twelve pence and no 
more: And if such Certificate shall be produced to the Clerk of the Peace for that 
County, and request made to him to make an Entry thereof, then the said Clerk 
of the Peace is hereby required to enter the same in a Book of Parchment to be 
provided for that purpose, and kept amongst the Records of the said Sessions, 
and to restore the said Certificate; for which Entry, the Clerk of the Peace may 
receive Four pence and no more. 

Other provisions raised the marriageable age of the man to 
consent unto marriage to sixteen years, and of the woman to 
fourteen years, instead of fourteen and twelve respectively. - 
Another important clause vested the jurisdiction of all matters 
and controversies touching contracts and marriages in the court 
of general quarter sessions of the county, instead of in the 
ecclesiastical courts. 3 

Immediately after the Restoration, the authority of the 
clergy in respect to marriages was revived (1660, 12 Chas. II., 
cap. 33), but "■all marriages had or solemnized in any of his 

1 This was the usual form of a common law marriage. 

2 By the civil and the common law the age of consenl of the man was fourteen. 
and of the woman twelve years. 1 Rol. 342. But by the common law persons may 
marry at any age. Co. Litt. 33 a. 

3 Scobell's Acts and Ordinances; Nelson's Abridgement of the Common Law 
Hallam's Const. Hist, of England (N. Y., 1865). II.. 235; Hume's Hist, of England. 
V.. 442; 3 Bacon's Abridgement. 575, 



xlviii THE MARRIAGE LAW OF ENGLAND IN 1664. 

Majesty's dominions since May ist, 1642, before any justice of 
the peace, or reputed justice of the peace of England, or 
Wales, or other his Majesty's dominions, and by such justice 
pronounced or declared, and all marriages within any of his 
Majesty's dominions, since May ist, 1642, had or solemnized 
according to the direction or true intent of any act or ordi- 
nance, or reputed act or ordinance of one or both houses of 
parliament, or of any convention sitting at Westminster, under 
the name, stile or title of a parliament, or assuming that name, 
stile or title ; shall be, and shall be adjudged, esteemed and 
taken to be, and to have been of the same, and no other force 
and effect, as if such marriages had been and solemnized ac- 
cording to the rites and ceremonies established, or used in the 
church or kingdom of England." All pending suits for and 
concerning marriages had and solemnized, as aforesaid, were 
to be tried by a jury of twelve men, as at the common law. 

Such was the law of England in 1664, when New Jersey 
was granted to Berkley and Carteret. 1 

IV. Scottish Marriages. 
The very scanty information we have regarding the earliest 
inhabitants of Scotland indicates that they preserved the tribal 
system of government some centuries later than the Teutonic 
peoples. We may dismiss the statement of Caesar that the 
Picts (supposed to be the earliest, and possibly non-Aryan, 
dwellers in North Britain) were polyandrous, as a conclusion 
derived from imperfect observation, or based on misinforma- 
tion. As to the later invaders — the Brythones, the Gaels, and 
finally the Dalriadic Scots, who swept over from Scotia (or 
the North of Ireland) about A. D. 500 into Alba or Albany. 

1 Lord Chancellor Hardwicke's act. passed in 1753. r26 Geo. II.. Cap. 33. went 
further than previous statutes in checking common law marriages, by providing 
that ■• all marriages solemnized after .March 25th, 1754, in any other Place than a 
Church or Puhlick Chapel, unless by special license, or that shall be solemnized 
without Publication of Banns, or License of Marriage from a Person or Persons 
having Authority to grant the same first had and obtained, shall be null and void 
to all intents and purposes whatsoever."' See Statutes at Large, VII.. 525. Lord 
John Russell's Dissenters' Marriage Act. passed Feb. 12th, 1836. authorized mar- 
riages of dissenters to be solemnized in their own chapels, registered for the pur- 
pose, after due notice to the registrar of the district. Dissenters desiring no re- 
ligious ceremony were enabled to enter into a civil contract before the superin- 
tendent registrar. See May's Const. Hist, of England (N. Y., 1885). II , 395. 



EARLIEST SCOTTISH MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. xlix 

settling in Kintvre — we have somewhat clearer knowledge. 
They retained their tribal customs well on to the twelfth or 
thirteenth century; and indeed there are traces of the primi- 
tive rule of the tribe or clan to this day among the Celtic- and 
Gaelic-speaking villages and hamlets, stronger in their influ- 
ence over the minds and habits of the people than church or 
state, although they have professed Christianity for fifteen cen- 
turies or more, and have been kk civilized " by rude acts of Par- 
liament prescribing the cut of the beard and hair, the length of 
the coat, and even the family names thev must bear. Exogamy 
seems to have been the prevalent custom, as among primitive 
tribes elsewhere. , This, of course, indicates that marriage was 
a matter of bride-purchase, or of capture, with various modi- 
fications, according to circumstances. 1 Readily as the people 
adopted Christianity, as early perhaps as the third or fourth 
century, it was with reluctance that they acknowledged to any 
degree the control of the church over marriage. The Ger- 
manic and Scandinavian settlers in later times in the Lowlands 
of Scotland were at one with their predecessors in this matter, 
so that the primitive idea that marriage was a private contract, 
to be arranged between the two parties most interested, with 
possibly the sanction of the family, the clan or the tribe, was 



i Lang's History of Scotland. I.. 77-82. 

Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Down. Connor, and Dromore, etc., by the Rev. 
William Reeves. Dublin. 18(7, 319-321; citing the annalist Tigernach, MacFirbis. 
and Keating. 

The earliest Irish laws recognized three legal relations between men and 
women: "a first lawful wife;" " a first lawful adaltrach- woman;" and " an adal- 
trach-woman of abduction'" "AH were legal relations, and could not be dis- 
solved except by the will of both parties or by legal process. These relations are 
not defined; but I believe that the first was the only one that had a religious sanc- 
tion, and that the second and third were merely civil relations, the third being 
distinctly stuprous and of itself scarcely conferring any right." "According to 
these laws a man might purchase a wife." See "The Brehon Laws." by Laurence 
Ginnell London. 1894,211-214. 

Chronicon Scotorum. A Chronicle of Irish Affairs, from the earliest times to 
A. D. 1135. etc. Edited, with a translation, by William M. Hennessy. London, 
1866. As to the invasion of ■■ Britain" (now Scotland) by the tribe of Dal Riada. 
see p. 35. The evidences of tribal rule, with petty chieftains, or rirjli, or " kings," 
are apparent on nearly every page of this valuable work. 

Annals of the King of Ireland, by the Four Masters, from the earliest period to 
the year 1616. Dublin 1S51. passim. 

Burton's History of Scotland. I., chap. i. 

Acts of Parliament, temp. Hen. VIII.. passim. 

Sir Walter Scot's novels are full of allusions to ancient tribal or clan customs. 



1 THE MERCHETA MULIERUM IN SCOTLAND. 

most deeply seated among the inhabitants of this land, from the 
earliest times. 2 

Immediately after the Reformation the Scottish Parliament 
began to exercise jurisdiction over the subjects of marriage and 
divorce, passing acts in 1551 "Anent them that maries twa 
wives or husbandes;" and in 1567 " Anent them that commit- 
tis incest," and " Anent lawful manage of the awin blude, in 
degries not forbidden by God his Worde." The following is 

- It is said that in ancient times the Scottish nobles had gradually acquired the 
juris primes noctis, so low had the people been abased. But when Malcolm was 
declared Kin? of Scotland at Scone. April 25th, 1057. having with the assistance of 
Macduff driven off the throne the spoiled Macbeth, " it is reported that his wife 
obtained from him a decree that the degrading custom should be altered, and the 
husband have liberty to redeem it by paying half a mark of silver, which payment 
is yet called marcheta mulerium." —Buchanan' s Hint, of Scotlayid. London, 1722. I.. 
290. It should be noted, however, that Buchanan in this as in many other rela- 
tions follows closely the imaginative and rather unreliable Hector Boethius 
(Boyce or Boece), whose Scotorum Historian Libri was written about the middle of 
the fifteenth century; whereas such writers as Roger of Wendover. in his "Flow- 
ers of History." written prior to 1235 (Bonn's ed.. London. 1849. I., 334, 363-4). An- 
dro of Wyntoun. in his "Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland." written 1420-1424; and 
John of Ferdun, "Chronicle of the Scottish Nation." writing at the close of the 
fourteenth century, although all speaking warmly of St. Margaret, make no ref- 
erence to this remarkable incident. "The Chronicon Scotorum." written proba- 
bly before 1127. merely mentions her death, p. 301. In John Hill Burton's exhaus- 
tive History of Scotland, there is an account of Margaret. I., 380 fol. : and also in 
Andrew Lang's History of Scotland. I.. 90-98. but neither writer deems the story 
worth a reference, although it is just the kind that would appeal to the imagina- 
tion of Mr. Lang, with his fondness for and keen insight into ancient customs and 
folklore. It is probable that the legend arose from a misconception of the mean- 
ing of the term mercheta mulierum, which was really a tine paid by vassals or vil- 
leins to their chieftains or lords on the marriage of their daughters, a custom that 
seems more characteristic of the feudal system of Normandy, introduced a gener- 
ation later. — Lang's Hist. Scotland, I., 153; Villainage in England, by M. Vinogra- 
doff, 153; Tribal Custom in Anglo-Saxon Law, by Frederic Seebohm, London, 
1902, passim; Select C7tarters and other illustrations of English Constitutional Histo- 
ry, ... by William Stubbs. Oxford. 1870, 168. Traces of the custom in the sense 
used by Buchanan above are or were formerly found in certain manors in England, 
as mentioned in Thomas Blount's quaint little book: " Fragmenta Antiquitatis. 
Antient Tenures of Land, And Jocular Customs Of some Mannors." London, 
1679, 143. 153. 159. There were indications of the custom in Scotland in the seven- 
teenth century, as appears by a small pamphlet. " A Modern Account of Scotland. 
... by an English Gentleman," printed in 1670, and reprinted in the Harleian 
Miscellany. London, 1810, VII , -440. 442. But the writer seems to have fallen into 
low company, and to have been intensely prejudiced against everything Scottish, 
so that his statements carry little weight. In that powerful work, La Sorcu-re: 
The Witch of the Miaale Ages, by J. Michelet. London. 1863. pp 63-65, the writer 
gives a terrible picture of this shocking custom in France. He fancifully ascribes 
to it the development of the abused woman into the witch. The efforts of the 
church to assert the sanctity of marriage, under the claim that it was a sac- 
rament, found a powerful justification in these revolting practices. 



SCOTTISH CIVIL JURISDICTION OVER MARRIAGES. li 

the text of the latter act, which is given herewith to show the 

view Parliament took of the marriage ceremony : 

ITEM. Our Soveraine Lord, with advice & consent of my Lord Regent, and the 
three Estates of this present Parliament hes statute, and ordained, that the halie 
hand of mariage made be all Estaites and sorts of men and women, to be als law- 
ful and als frie, as the Lawe of God hes permitted the samin, to be done, without 
exception of person or persones. And hes declared, and declares, that secunds in 
degrees of consanguinitie. and afflnitie, and all degries outwith the samin, con- 
tained in the word of the Eternal God. and that are not repugnant to the said 
word, might, and may lawfully marry at all times sen the viii day of March, the 
zeir of God ane thousand five hundreth fiftie aucht zeiris, notwithstanding ony 
Law. statute, or constitution maid in the contrare. And ratifyis and apprevis all. 
the said mariages done sen the said day. And the bairnis gottin. or to be gottin, 
in sik Mariage to be as lauchful, asweil toward their succession to landis. her- 
itages, or ony other liberties, as ony bairnis gottin in Mariage. and to be repute 
and esteemed, in all times to cume, lauchfullie gottin. in lauchful Mariage, not- 
withstanding any Lawes. statutes, constitutionis. or Actis, maid or to be maid, in 
the contrare. 1 

An act passed in 1573, " Anent them that divertis fra- 
uthers, being joyned of befoir, in lauchful mariage," enacts 
" that quhat-sumever person, or persons, joyned in lauchful 
Matrimonie, husband or wife, divertis frauthers companie, 
without ane reasonable cause alledged, or reduced befoir a 
Judge, and remainis in their malicious obstinacie, be the 
space of four zeires, and in the meantime, refusis all privie 
admonitions," the wronged husband or wife could apply to t'.ie 
Lords of Session, and on due proof the offender should be 
" denounced rebel, and put to the hone;" whereupon the in- 
jured party could apply to the lawful archbishop or other spir- 
itual authority to direct privie admonitions to the offender, and 
in case of disobedience by him or her, the offender should be 
excommunicated, " quhilk anis being pronounced, the ma- 
licious and obstinate defection of the partie offender, to be ane 
sufficient cause of divorce, and the said parties offender to tyne 
and lose their tocher, & donationes propter nuptias." 

The Kirk of Scotland was quite as ready as its predecessor 
to regulate marriage, condemning in 1560 " secret joining in 
marriage ;" and in 1=572 the commissioners appointed " to treat 
and conclude anent all matters tending to the ordering and es- 
tablishing of the Policie of the Kirk," concluded among other 
things: "that ther be readers specially appointed at every 
speciall kirk, where it may be done conveniently, who, being 

1 Scots Acts, Fifth Parliament. James Sext., I., 365. 



Ill SCOTTISH MARRIAGE RITUAE. 

found qualified by the Bishop or Superintendent, and entering 
by the lawfull order of the true Reformed Kbk, shall minister 
the sacrament of baptisme, and solemnize marriage after law- 
ful and orderly proclamation of bannes, as effiers." About 
1630 one of the criticisms upon the new Bishops was " that 
hereunto they grant liberty to solemnize marriage without ask- 
ing of banns." 1 

The " Book of Geneva," based upon the order of service 
drafted in 1554 by John Knox and others, for the use of the 
English congregation at Frankfort, was published at Geneva 
in 1556, and on Knox's return to Scotland in ISS9« tn ' s book 
began to come into general use in that country, the General 
Assembly in 1562 enjoining its use in the "■solemnisation of 
marriages," etc. With some slight modifications this " Book 
of Common Order," as it was called, embodied the law of the 
Scottish Church as to worship from 1564 till 164^, and was 
frequently recognized in acts of Parliament. It required the 
publication of the banns or contract lor three several days in 
the congregation, at the expiration of which the parties were 
to assemble at the beginning of the sermon, whereupon the 
Minister would read the Exhortation, and ask for objections, if 
any. If none, then he would say to the man : 

Forasmuch as no man speaketta against this thing, You X. shall protest here 
before God and His holy Congregation, that you have taken, and are contented to 
have M. here present for your lawful Wife, promising to keep her. to love and in- 
treat her in all things, according to the duty of a faithful Husband, forsaking all 
other during her life; and briefly, to live in an holy conversation with her. keep 
ing faith and truth in all points, according' as the Word of God, and His holy < Jus- 
pel doth command. 

Whereto the man was required to answer as follows : 

Even so I take her, before God. and in the presence of this His Congregation. 

The Minister was then to say to the woman : 

You M. shall protest here before the face of God, and in the presence of this 
His Congregation, that ye have taken, and are now contented to have N here 
present for your lawful Husband, promising to him subjection and obedience, for- 
saking all other during his life; and. finally, to live in an holy conversation with 
him. keeping faith and truth in all points, as God's Word doth prescribe. 

To which she was required to answer thus : 

Even so I take him, before God. and in the presence of this His Congregation. 

1 An Apologetieal Narration of the State and Government of the Kirk of Scot- 
land since the Reformation, by William Scot. Edinburgh, printed for the Wodrow 
Society, 1846. 9. 23, 323. 



SCOTTISH MAItRIAGK K1TUAL. llll 

The Minister was then to read from St. Matthew xix., add- 
ing : "■ If ye believe assuredly these words . . . then may ye 
be certain, that God hath so knit you together in this holy es- 
tate of Wedlock ;" following with a blessing. 1 

In the Westminster Assembly of Divines, 1643-4, in dis- 
cussing the subject of marriage, it was objected that the fore- 
going ritual gave too much authority to the Minister, inasmuch 
as he uttered the promises of the contracting couple, who 
merely assented thereto ; objection was also made to his pro- 
nouncing the final blessing, instead of praying for them. Ac- 
cordingly, in the Directory of Worship, adopted by that body in 
December, 1644, and accepted by the General Assembly of the 
Kirk of Scotland, and by the Scottish Parliament, in Febru- 
ary, 164^, it was expressly declared : 

Although Marriage be no Sacrament, nor peculiar to the Church of God. but 
common to mankind, and of public interest in every commonwealth; yet, because 
such as marry are to marry in the Lord, and have special need of instruction, di- 
rection and exhortation from the Word of God at their entering into such, a new 
condition, and of the blessing of God upon them therein, we judge it expedient 
that Marriage be solemnised by a lawful Minister of the Word, that lie may ac- 
cordingly counsel them, and pray for a blessing upon them. 

The Directory provides for the customary publishing of the 
banns by the Minister three several Sabbath Days, in the Con- 
gregation, at the place or places of their most usual and con- 
stant abode, respectively, and finally prescribes this ritual : 

The Minister (if no impediment be acknowledged) shall cause first the Man to 
take the Woman by the right hand, saying these words: 

/ N. do t'ike thee N. to be inu married Wife, and do, in the presence of God. and 
before this Congregation, promise and covenant to be a loving and faithful Husband 
unto thee, until God .shall .separate us by death. 

Then the Woman shall take the Man by his right hand, and say these words: 
/ N do take thee. N. to be mil married Husband, and I do in the presence of God. 
and before this Cong< eaation. promise, and. covenant, to be a loving, faithful, and obe- 
dient Wife unto thee, until God shall separate, us by death. 

Then, without any further ceremony, 2 the Minister shall, in the face of the Con- 
gregation, pronounce them to be Husband and Wife, according to God's ordi- 
nance. 3 

1 The Book of Common Order of the Church of Scotland, commonly known as 
John Knox's Liturgy, and The Directory for the Public Worship of God. agreed 
upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with Historical Introductions, 
etc, Edinburgh and London. 186S. xiii-xvi. xlv. lxii. 132. 

2 That is. omitting the use of the ring, to which the Scottish Reformers were 
always opposed. 

3 The Book of Common Order of the Church of Scotland, as cited. 261-6, 312- 
313, 358-361. The Parliamentary recognition of the Directory in 1615 was annulled 
by the Act Rescissory, at the Restoration. "The [Scottish] Church, however. 



liv SCOTTISH LAW AGAINST CLANDESTINE MARRIAGES. 

The Parliament of Scotland in 1661 passed an "Act 

against clandestine and unlawful marriages," as follows: 

OUR Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of this present Parliament, considering 
how necessar it is, that no Marriage be celebrat. but according to the laudable 
order and constitution of this Kirk; and by such persons, as are by the Authority 
of this Kirk warranted to celebrat the same. And notwithstanding hereof, sun- 
dry, either out of disaffection to the Religion presently professed in this King- 
dom, or being desirous to eschew the Censures of this Kirk, or to satisfie their 
promise of Marriage formerly made to others, or to decline the concurrence and 
consent of their Parents or others having interest, or out some other unlawful 
pretext, do procure themselves to be Married, and are Married either in a Clan- 
destine way, contrary to the established order of the Kirk, or by Jesuits Priests. 
Deposed or Suspended Ministers, or any other not authorized by this Kirk. 
Therefore His Majesty, with advice of His. said Estates. Statutes and Ordains, 
that whatsoever person or persons, slial hereafter Marry or procure themselves to 
be Married in a Clandestine and inorderly way or by Jesuits, Priests, or any other 
not authorized by this Kirk; that they shal be imprisoned for three moneths, <fe 
beside their said imprisonment shal pay, each Nobleman, one thousand pound 
Scots, each Barron and landed Gentleman, one thousand merks, each Gentleman 
and Burgess, five hundred pounds, each other person, one hundred merks: and 
they shal remain in prison, ay and while they make payment of these respective 
penalties above-mentioned, which are hereby ordained, to be applyed to pious 
uses, within the several Parodies where the said person dwells. And that the 
Celebrator of such Marriages be banished the kingdom, never to return therein, 
under the pain of death. Likeas His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Prohibits 
and Discharges all men and women, having both their ordinar residence within 
this kingdom, to get Marriage to themselves with others within the Kingdom of 
England, or Ireland, without Proclamation of Bannes here in Scotland, and 
against the Order and Constitution of this Church, or Kingdom, under the pains 
following, viz. For each Nobleman so Married, one thousand pounds, for each 
landed Gentleman, one thousand merks; for each Burgess, five hundred pounds: 
and for each other Substantious person, five hundred merks; for an Yeoman, one 
hundred pounds; for each person of inferior quality, one hundred merks; the one 
half of the which penalties, shal belong to the Kings Majestic the other to the 
Paroch. or Paroches where the Married Parties did reside; and Ordains His 
Majesties Advocat, and the Procurator for the Kirk, to pursue before the civil 
Judge, the Parties Contraveenersof this Act, or either part thereof, for payment 
of the penalties respective above-mentioned; And in the case of the poor con- 
dition of any man. married in manner of foresaid, Ordains him to be punished 
with Stocks and Irons : which pains corporal and pecunial, shall no ways be preju- 
dical to, or derogst from, the Order and Censures of the Kirks, to be inflicted 
against the Delinquents.! 

The real object of this act was to discredit the Presbyterian 
ministers who had signed the Solemn League and Covenant, 
and to require marriages to be celebrated only by ministers of 
the Established, or Episcopal, Kirk. This not proving effec- 
tive, another act was passed in June, 1672, providing that per- 

1 Scots Acts, Chap. 14, First Parliament. Charles II.. 193. 

though not rigidly conforming to the Directory, has never treated it as an obsolete , 
statute. "—Ibid., 268 -71. 



THE SCOTTISH LAW OF MARRIAGE. lv 

sons married by ministers not ordained by the Bishops should 
" amit and lose any Right or Interest they may have by that 
Marriage, jure mariti, vel jure relictie, and by and attour 
the Pains and Penalties provided by the Act of Parliament in 
anno i-66i, against disorderly and clandestine Marriages." In 
1679, at the suggestion of Lauderdale, and with the approval 
of the Privy Council, the King's officers were instructed to 
prosecute vigorously all recalcitrants against the Established 
Kirk, including those "guilty of illegal marriages," and on 
August 31, 16S1, an " Act anent Religion and the Test" was 
passed, for the more vigorous enforcement of the laws against 
conventicles, religious services in private houses, and " disor- 
derly baptisms and marriages," meaning such as were not cele- 
brated by the Episcopally-ordained clergy. 1 

Nevertheless, it will be observed that these several statutes, 
although prescribing the requirements of a lawful marriage, 
scarcely went so far as to declare irregular marriages null 
and void, and they went on very much as before, being 
contracted privately by and between the parties, with- 
out any intervening priest, preacher or other officer, or by 
priests or preachers not of the Kirk of Scotland, or by civil 
magistrates, as had been the custom from time whereof the 
memory of man knew not to the contrary. For, by the com- 
mon law of Scotland nothing further was necessary to con- 
stitute a man and woman, husband and wife, than a mutual dec- 
laration of consent by the parties, before witnesses, to constitute, 
as at that date, the relation of husband and wife Or such 
declaration in writing, without witnesses, constituted a mar- 
riage, which was considered binding in all respects. 2 

Or, as Lord Mackenzie has stated the law, more explicitly : 

4k In Scotland marriage is a civil contract, constituted by 

the mutual consent of the parties. The consent to marriage 

must he to a present act ; a promise or engagement to marry 

' The History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, from the Restaura- 
tion to the Revolution, etc . by Mr. Robert Wotlrow. Endinburgh. 1721. I.. 350, 
Appendix, 135: II.. 10. 12. IS. Appendix. 36. 60. 

- Institutes of the Law of Scotland, by Lord Stair. I. J6; 1 Rol. 34:.'. Wilkie 
Collins's novel. "The Law and the Lady." is an exposition of some of the intri- 
cacies of this apparently very simple Scottish law of marriage. 



1 VI THE SCOTTISH EAW OF MARRIAGE. 

at a future period, however formal, where no sexual inter- 
course has followed upon it, may be retracted, though the per- 
son retracting may be liable in damages for breach of promise. 
To the marriage of minors the consent of parents or guardians 
is not necessary. 

t; The law of Scotland recognises four different modes by 
which marriage may be constituted ; (ist) A public or regular 
marriage celebrated by a minister after proclamation of banns ; 
(2d) The deliberate exchange of matrimonial consent by words 
de prcesenli^ without the nuptial benediction or concubitus ; 
(3d) Promise of marriage followed by copula, at least when 
declared a marriage by an action of declarator in the Court of 
Session; (4th) Cohabitation as man and wife, and being held 
and reputed as married persons. 

'• A public or regular marriage is one celebrated by a cler- 
gyman, in presence of two or more witnesses, after due procla- 
mation of banns according to the rules of the Church. All 
marriages entered into in any other form are clandestine or ir- 
regular ; but if the matrimonial consent has been seriously and 
deliberately interposed, they are equally effectual with regular 
marriages, though they expose all concerned in them to certain 
statutory penalties, which, however, are seldom if ever en- 
forced in modern times. 

k ' As to irregular marriages, and the evidence by which they 
may be established, we cannot do better than lay before our 
readers a short exposition of the law in the words of Lord 
Moncreiff, whose authority in cousistorial questions is justly 
entitled to the greatest weight : ' The governing rule of law is 
unquestionably that marriage is constituted by the consent of 

1 In accordance with the general principle that a marriage ppr verba de prfBsenti, 
without religious or other ceremony, if valid where celebrated is valid every- 
where, it has been held by the English courts that such marriages in Scotland. 
prior to 19 and 20 Vict. chap. 96 between persons domiciled in England, would be 
recognized in England, notwithstanding that they would have been invalid if eele- 
brated in England. Ilderton v. Ilderton, 2 H. Bl. 145: McAdam v. Walker 
(1813). 1 Dow. 14S, where the whole subject of Scottish marriages was care- 
fully considered by the House of Lords: Dalrymple v. Dalrymple (the 
leading case). 2 Hagg. C. R 95; Bell v. Graham. 13 Moore. P. C. C. 242. 1 L. T. 
N. S. 221. 8 Week. Rep 98: Dysart Peerage Case (18S1). L. R. 6 App. Cas. 489. 512: 
Lovat Peerage Case, L. R. 10 App Cas. 763. The same general principle has been 
repeatedly affirmed in New Jersey. Clark v. Clark. 52 N. J. Eq. 650 (1S94). 30 
Atl. 81 : Smith v. Smith. 52 N. J. L. 207 (1889). 19 All. 255. 



NEW ENGLAND MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. lvii 

the parties alone ; and that upon legal and satisfactory evidence 
that such mutual consent has been seriously and deliberately 
interposed, the Court will declare such marriage, though it 
should be clear that no formal ceremony or celebration has 
taken place.' " l 

And this was the idea of marriage brought to New Jersey 
bv the Scottish immigrants and refugees who fled or were 
banished from Scotland in 1685 and thereafter, to escape the 
persecutions of the prevailing ecclesiastical power in that 
country. 2 

V. New England Marriage Customs. 

New Jersey was settled so largely by people from New Eng- 
land that they exercised a marked influence in the new colony 
on public sentiment and legislation, marriage regulations in- 
cluded. The Pilgrims and the Puritans who left England to 
found new homes in America were especially determined to 
assert their independence of the authority of the church over 
their domestic affairs — at least, when that authority did not co- 

1 Studies in Roman Law with comparative views of the Laws of France. Eng - 
land and Scotland. By Lord Mackenzie. Edited by John Kirkpatrick. Fifth edi- 
tion, revised. Edinburgh ami London, 1880, 115-116. 

Gretna GreeD (just over the Scottish border, and only nine miles from Car- 
lisle), as the scene of runaway marriages came into prominence in 1754. when 
Lord Hardwicke's Marriage act discountenanced common law marriages in Eng- 
land. They were still valid in Scotland, but as marriages by civil magistrates 
were also lawful many runaway couples from England preferred the apparently 
more regular form of marriage by the blacksmith who was also a justice of the 
peace, and therefore authorized to celebrate marriages. The following is a copy 
of a certificate issued by one of these officials at Gretna Green a century or more 
ago: "This is to sartfay all persons that may be consernid that A. H from the 
parish of ('. and county of D. and E. F. from the parish of G. in the county of H- 
and both comes before me and declayred themselves both to be single persons and 
now mayried by the form of the Kirk of Scotland, and agreible to the Church of 
England, and givine undre my hand, this 18th day of March. 1793."— The Topo- 
graphical, Statistical and Historical Gazetteer of Scotland, Glasgow, 1844, r.. 716. 
In the case of Crompton v. Bearcroft. Dec. 1. 1768, the appellant and the respond- 
ent, both English subjects, and the appellant being under age. ran away without 
the consentof her guardian, and were married in Scotland; and on a, suit brought 
in the spiritual court to annul the marriage, it was held that the marriage was 
good. See Buller's Nisi Prius. 113. cited in T Bacon. Appendix. I'M. 

2 For an account of the persons banished from Scotland because of their re- 
ligious belief, and who sailed with George Scot. Laird of Pitlochie, on the ill- 
fated " Henry and Francis," which finally arrived at Perth Amboy, in East New 
Jersey, in December, 1685, see Wodrow's "History of the Sufferings," etc., 11., 
4S4-6. 505-7. 

F 



Iviii NEW ENGLAND MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 

incide with their own views. As many of them had fled first 
to Holland, they had there found it very agreeable to their 
ideas that marriage was regarded as a civil contract, and not as 
a sacrament. They brought the same thought with them to 
America, where, moreover, they were confronted with novel 
conditions that would have made it difficult, if not impossible, 
to conform to the law and the ecclesiastical requirements ot 
the mother country. Writing under date of 1621, Governor 
William Bradford, of the Plymouth Colony, says: 

May 12 [1621] " was ye first marriage in this place [Edward Winslow to Susan- 
nah White, widow of William White, who died Feb. 21', 1621] which, according to 
yc laudable Custome of ye Low-Cuntries in which they had lived, was thought 
most requisite to be performde by the magistrate, as being a oivill thing, upon 
which many questions aboute inheritance doe depend, with other things most 
proper to their cognizans, and most consonante to ye Scripturs, Ruth 4. and no 
wher found in y<- gospell to be layedon ye ministers as a pari of theiroftice. This 
decree of law about mariage was published by y State of ye Low-Cuntries An<> 
1590. 'Thai those of any religion, after lawfull and open publication, coming be- 
fore ye magistrate in y Town or Stat-house, were to be orderly (by them) mar- 
ied one to another.' PeteVs HiSt.,fol. 1029.1 And practiss hath continued among 
n ,,t ,,mI\ them tun hath ben followed by all y famous Churches of th Christ in 
1 oese parts to this t ime A.n» 1646." 2 

Winslow being in London in 1635, was brought before the 
Lords Commissioners of Plantations in America, and was 
asked by the Archbishop of Canterbury about the practice con- 
cerning marriage, in PI)' mouth. " He confessed that haveing 
been called to place of Magistracie, he had himself maried 
some. Further he tould their LordP y l mariage was a civille 
thinge, St he found no wher in y e word of God y l it was tyed 
to ministrie, again, they were necessitated so to doe, having 
for a long time togeather at first no minister ; besides, it was no 
new thing, for he had been so maried him selfe in Holand, by 
y e magistrates in their Statt house." 3 

The General Court of Plymouth Colony enacted, November 
15, 1636, that tl none be allowed to marry that are under the 
covert of parents but by their consent and approbation, but in 

1 La Grande Chronique Ancienne et Moderne. de Hollande Zelande, West- 
friese, Utrecht, etc., by Jean Francois le Petit, 1601 and 1611. 

2 Hist, of Plymouth Plantation, by William Bradford, the Second Governor of 
the Colony. Collections Mass. Hist. Society, Fourth Series, Boston, 1856, III., 101. 

3 Ibid., 330. And see "The Story of The Pilgrim Fathers. 1606-16-23 A. D.," . . . 
edited by Edward Barber, London, 1897. 161, 365, 366. 



MASSACHUSETTS MARRIAGE LAWS. lix 

case consent cannot be had then it shall be w th the consent of 
the Gove 1 ', or some assistant to whom the persons are knowne 
whose care it shall be to see the marriag be fitt before it be 
allowed by him." The same act also required that notice of 
the intended marriage " be three se vera 11 times published be- 
fore solemnising of it," in meeting, or where there was no meet- 
ing place, then by "a writing thereof made and set vpon the 
usuall publike place for the space of fifteene days. Provided 
the writing be vnder some majestrats hand or by his order." l 

In an act passed June 4, 1645, the General Court defined a 
lawful contract of marriage (preliminary to the marriage itself) 
to be u the mutuall consent of two parties w th the consent of 
parents or guardians (if any there be to be had) and a solemme 
promise of marriage in due tyme to eich other before two com- 
petent witnesses." 2 

Other acts provided for the registration of marriages, etc., 
with the town clerk 3 — a provision continued in the laws of New 
Jersey to this day. 

The General Court of Massachusetts Bay passed an act, Sep- 
tember 9th, 1639, "for prevention of all unlawful marriages." 
which provided : 

Henceforth no persons shall be joined in marriage, before the intention of the 
parties proceeding therein hath been three times published, at some time of 
publick lecture or town meeting, in both the towns where the parties or either of 
them do ordinarily reside, or be set up in writing upon some post of their meet- 
ing house door in public view, there to stand so as it may be easily read, by the 
space of fourteen days. 4 

As some of the clergymen retained their old-world notions 
of their prerogative in the celebration of marriages, and occa- 
sionally exercised the same, the General Court enacted in 
1647: 

That no person whatsoever in this jurisdiction shall join any persons toget her 
in marriage, but the magistrate, or such other as the general court, or court of 
assistants, shall authorize in such place, where no magistrate is near. Nor shall 
any join themselves in marriage but before some magistrate or person author- 
ized as aforesaid. Nor shall any magistrate or other person authorized as afore 
said, join any persons together in marriage, or suffer them to join together in 

1 Records of the Colony of New Plymouth in New England, . . . edited by 
David Pulsifer. XI. Laws, 1623-1682. Boston. 1861, 13, 190. 

2 Ibid.. 4(5. 3 ibid.. 52. 189, 190. 

4 Charters and Laws of Massachusetts Bay, Boston, 1S14, 151; Records of the 
Colony of the Massachusetts. I., 275. 



lx MASSACHUSETTS AND CONNECTICUT MARRIAGE LAWS. 

their presence, before the parties to be married have been published according to 

law.' 

The foregoing statute, it will be observed, virtually prohib- 
ited clergymen from celebrating marriages, and also prohib- 
ited common law marriages. The civil control over marriage 
was again asserted in May, 1656, when it was ordered by the 
General Court : 

That from henceforth any one of the three commissioners for ending small 
causes in the several towns where no magistrate dwells shall and hereby are au- 
thorized and empowered to solemnize marriage between parties legally published. 
pro\ itled 1 wo of the said commissioners be present. 2 

The first settlers of Connecticut closely followed the Massa- 
chusetts precedents regarding marriage as a civil ceremony, to 
be performed by a magistrate. The General Court of the 
Colony of Connecticut enacted, April 10th, 1640: 

That whosoeuer intend to joyne themselues in Maridge Couenant shall 'cause 
that their purpose of Contracte to be published in some publike place & att some 
publike meeting in the seuerall Townes where such persons dwell, at the lest, 
eight dayes before they enter into such Contracte. whereby they ingadge them- 
selues ech to other; and that they shall forbeare to joyne in Maridge Couenant at 
lest eight dayes after the said Contracte. And also the Magestrate who solem- 
nizeth Mariedge betwixt any. shall cause a record to be entered in Courte of the 
day & yere thereof. 3 

The act passed in Massachusetts Bay in 1647 was adopted 
by the Connecticut Colony in 1675, with some slight changes, 

as follows : 

No person whatsoever in this Jurisdiction, shall joyn any persons together in 
Marriage, but the Magistrates, or such other as the General Court or Court of 
Assistants shall Authorize in such places where no Magistrate is near, nor shall 
any Magistrate or other person as aforesaid, joyn any persons together in Mar- 
riage before the parties to lie Married have been published according to law. 

One of the earliest laws of New Haven Colony was closely 
in line with those of her sister New England Colonies, being 
in these words : 

No persons shal be either contracted, or joyned in Marriage before the inten- 
tion of the parties proceeding therein, hath been three times published, at some 
time of publick Lecture, or Town meeting in the Town, where the parties, or 
either of them dwel, or do ordinarily reside; or be set up in writing, upon some 
post of their meeting house door, in publick view, there to stand so as it may be 
easily read by the space of fovrteen daies; and that no man unless he be a Magis- 

1 Ibid. Parson Hobart. of the church at Hingham. Mass.. having had the te- 
merity to perform a marriage ceremony, was incontinently haled before the Gov- 
ernor and Council for thus brooking their authority. 

2 ibid.; Records of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay, III., 398; IV., 255. 
■"Colonial Records of Connecticut (1636-1665), 47. An act similar in effect was 

passed in 1673. See Laws of Connecticut, 1673 (Brinley Reprint. 1865), p 46. 



FRIENDS MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 1X1 

trate in this Jurisdiction, or expresly allowed by the General Courl shall Marry 
any persons, and that in a publicl? place, if they be able to go forth, under the pen- 
alty of live pounds line Cor e\ cry such miscarriage. ' 

Thus the New England settlers who began to pour into 
New Jersey in 1665 and 1666, came from communities that 
had become thoroughly imbued with the idea that marriage 
was a civil contract, sanctioned, it is true, as a Divine ordi- 
nance, but not a sacrament, and that, so far from a clergyman 
being required for the performance of the ceremony, that func- 
tion was or ought to be vested exclusively in the magistrates 
or other civil officers '-' 

VI. Friends' Marriage Customs. 

Still another potent influence in New Jersey legislation was 
that exercised by the Friends, who so largely settled West Jer- 
sey, under the auspices of William Penn and his associates, 
and who were so prominently concerned in the government 
and settlement of East Jersey. Their manner of life was a 
protest against the excesses which had become insufferably ob- 
noxious during the rejgns of James I. and Charles I. During 
the consequent political and religious turmoil of the revolt 
against Charles I. many men sought to evolve new systems of 
religion, which were merely modifications of the old, and were 
clearly man-made. George Fox alone attempted to lead the 
way back to primitive forms and beliefs, seeking to guide men 
not by the declarations of councils, assemblies, convocations 
and other ecclesiastical bodies of men, but by the in-dwelling 
spirit of truth, which should lead all men aright, and make 
them all Friends. Like all other religious reformers, or lead- 
ers, he soon gave his attention to the subject of marriage, which 
lies at the foundation of society, and all social life. As early 
as i653 :! he began to advise thereon, and by 1659 ms deliver- 
ances had assumed this tentative form : 

If any friends go together in the Power of the Lord, or and a necessity there- 
unto to joyn in marriage, after the thing hath been made known between them- 
selves, before anything be concluded, let it lie declared to Friends who are able, in 
the Wisdom and Power of God to se.e and feel into it : & if they sec the thing in 

1 New Haven Colonial Records (1653-1665), II.. 599. 

2 See Palfrey's New England. I.. 114. in 1. and N. Y. Col. Docs., i V.. 793. 

3 Journal of George Fox. London. 1891, II.. 88. 



lxii friends' marriage customs. 

the light and power to stand, it may be declared to friends in the meeting or Meet- 
ings, to which the parties do belong, towards the end thereof as they are moved, 
by the parties themselves, or some other friends as they are moved, both of the 
parties being then present, that it may be by friends felt and seen in the light, 
and enquirie may be made touching any other engagement, to slop scandals, and 
things kept sweet, so that you take time in it. and you may be clear, and feel it 
as it was in the beginning, that no hardness of heart get up; But if the parties 
who are lirsi acquainted with such a marriage, or any friend or friends have any 
thing against it. and if any thing be resolved other wise, that then the matter be 
laid before friends the next General meeting that may be appointed, to consider 
of things relating to' friends, and there to be seen into and ended; If in conven- 
ient time after the thing is declared nothing appear against it by the parties who 
are first acquainted with such a marriage, nor by any Friend or Friends; and 
after things are all sweet and clear, and Friends have unity with it. they may as 
they are moved, declare it in the end of the General Meeting to which the parties 
do belong, before the departure of Friends, or as they are moved, they may de- 
clare it in the mid-time of the Market, on the MarTcet-day in the next Market- 
town, to such parties outward dwelling as they are moved, or they may not as 
their freedom is by the Parties themselves, or such other as the Parties do see fit 
as they are moved; then after a convenient time, and the thing be seen, felt, and 
had unity with, and an Assembly about twelve Friends met together, they may 
speak their Testimony (thai all may take notice who are the persons) as they are 
moved, how the Lord hath joyned them together in Marriage, and then a certifi- 
cate by Friends then present may be given of the Day, Month, and Tear, that it 
may be recorded, and as they are moved, they may declare it to the Magistrate, 
an they will, or they may not; And that those things that cannot be owned by 
all Friends. & have unitie with all in the Power and Spirit of God, may not be re- 
corded, and Unrighteousness, and Filthiness. Fornication, Whoredom, and Adul- 
tery may be shut out. that the witness of God in all Friends may in that which is 
done be answered, and Righteousness, and Purity, and Holiness, that all things 
may be done in the Power, Life, Truth, and Wisdom of the Lord God, and in Unity, 
and you preserved in Unity, that you may serve God in a New life, and one heart. 
and holy Seed, and glorifle him in your Souls, Bodies, and Spirit which are his, 
that your Conversation may be ordered a right, that you may see the Salvation of 
God, and know the Marriage that is sanctified by the Word, that you may be the 
peculiar people, the holy Royal Seed and Generation; and that nothing be record- 
ed for Money iu these things, but freely, a free people and in love serve one an- 
other. . . . Whom God joynes together let no man put a sunder; and that you 
be a Royal seed, a peculiar people zealous of good works, and to know God joyning 
together, which is over and above mens putting a sunder.' 

This interesting document is fortified with numerous Scrip- 
ture texts, to show that marriages among the Jews were not 
celebrated by the priests, but merely by the voluntary consent 
of the parties, declared in the presence of witnesses. 

The first formal endorsement of these recommendations con- 
cerning marriage, of which we have any record, was by a 
meeting of Friends of Kent, Sussex, Surrey and Hampshire, 

i ( ioncerning Marriage, etc.. by George Fox. London. 1661, 1-7. See also Works 
of George Fox. VII.. 79-80: also A Collection of Many Select and Christian Epis- 
tles, Letters and Testimonies, written by .... George Fox: Philadelphia 
and New York. 1831, I., passim. 



friends' marriage customs. lxiii 

England, third month, 1659, who thus tersely voiced their tes- 
timony : 

That all Friends intending marriage, or witnessing a motion of the Lord unto 
that thing, (before they go outwardly together,) bring it to the body or that 
church to which they are joined ; that all in the power of the Lord may feel, and 
in that particular nothing be done hastily or rashly, but in the fear of the Lord; 
and in the presence of many witnesses they may be united, according to the ex- 
ample of the holy men of God in the Scriptures of truth recorded; so ihat no 
scandal or blemish may be laid upon the Truth, but all to the light may be 
brought, which maketh manifest deceit; and that a record in writing of the day, 
place, and year of such things be kept within that meeting, whereof one or both 
are members: under which the witnesses may set their names, or some of 
them.i 

This form of marriage was simply the common law mar- 
riage of England, constituted by the consent of the parties, and 
duly witnessed. The plan of bringing the matter before the 
Meeting was practically the same as the publishing of the 
banns. The Long Parliament in 1653 had legalized marriages 
before civil magistrates, instead of by a " hireling priest- 
hood ;" George Fox went a step further in reverting to the 
earlier and simpler form of marriage without the intervention 
of other than the parties themselves, with certain prudent reg- 
ulations to secure due deliberation, and proper publicity, in the 
celebration of the rite. 

So early as 1661 there was an adjudication as to the valid- 
ity of Friends' marriages, when the Court (Arthur, J.) told 
the jury that " There was a Marriage in Paradise, when Adam 
took Eve, and Eve took Adam ; and that it was the Consent of 
the Parties that made a Marriage. And as for the Quakers, he 
did not know their Opinions, but he did not believe, they went 
together as Brute Beasts, as had been said of them, but as 
Christians ; and therefore he did believe the Marriage was law- 
ful." " And the better to satisfy the Jury, he brought them a 

Case to this Purpose : A Man that was weak of Body, and 

kept his Bed, had a Desire in that Condition to Marry, and did 
declare before Witnesses, that he did take such a Woman to 
be his Wife; and the Woman declared, that she took that Man 
to be her Husband. This Marriage was afterwards called in 

1 A Journal, or Historical Account of the Life, Travels. Sufferings, Christian 
Experiences and Labour of Love in the Ministry of that Ancient. Eminent and 
Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ. George Fox; London, 1703, I. 587 588; Journal 
of George Fox. London. 1891, I , 520 



lxiv friends' marriage customs. 

Question ; and (as the Judge said) all the Bishops did at that 
time conclude it to be a lawful Marriage." 1 

In 1666 George Fox attended a marriage of Friends at 
Oram, when, as he says, he was " moved to open to the Peo- 
ple the State of our Marriages, declaring; How the People of 
Cod took one another in the Assemblies of the Elders : and 
how that it was God that did Join Man and Woman together 
before the Fall. And though Men had taken upon them to 
Join in the Fall, yet in the Restoration it was God's Joining, 
that was the right and honourable Marriage ; but never any 
Priest did Marry any, that we read of in the Scriptures, from 
Genesis to the Revelations. " r - 

The following is one of the earliest Quaker marriage cer- 
tificates extant, May 17, 1667: 

These are to certifle all whom the same may concern, that whereas the agree- 
ment of marriage betwixt William Dewsbury of Durker in the County of York & 
Alice Meades of the Borough of Warwick' & in the County of Warwick single 
woman, hath been published in the respective churches amongst which they have 
had their conversations, according to the order of the Spirit of the Lord, for the 
satisfaction of the Children of Light, who rest satisfied & have unity with them 
in their proceedings & coming together— Know ye therefore, that upon the sev- 
enteenth day of the month called May in the year of our Lord one Thousand six 
hundred sixty & seven, they the said William & Alice did openly & solemnly as 
in the presence of the Lord & before his people give up themselves in the holy 
Covenant of God, & did take each other in marriage to live together according to 
( iod's holy ordinance & appointment. Gen: ch, 2'd, Ver: 24th & Ch. 24th, Ver. 14th 
to the end of t he chapter. 

"And that they were this day openly & solemnly married according to the order 
of the Church of Christ & the good examples of God's peoples in times past men- 
tioned in the Holy Scriptures 1st Tim. Ch. 5th Ver. 14th. 1st Corinth: Ch. 7th, 
Ver. 2nd, Ruth Ch. 1th, Ver. 13th, Gen: Ch 24th Exod: Ch. 2d, Ver. 1st, 

And now we whose names are here underwritten being' eye & ear witnesses of 
the Marriage aforesaid & having unity with them in the light & Truth of God do 
hereby give in our testimonies for them & with them, to remain upon record unto 
future Posterities, as witnesses tor God & his people against all the works of 
darkness & such as go together therein; out of which God hath called us to bear 
witness of his everlasting light & Truth upon the earth; in which stands the 
honourable marriage, whereunto we bear record for the full satisfaction of all 
people, that in any wise may be concerned therein 3 

Robert Barclay, another eminent expounder of Friends' 
doctrines, thus explained their views concerning marriages : 

1 The History of the Rise, Increase and Progress, of the Christian People 
called Quakers, etc., by William Sewel, third edition, Burlington. 1774. 332; The 
Friends' Library, Philadelphia, Is47. XL. 410. 

- Journal of George Fox. London. 1709, II.. 90-91 ; London. 1S91, II.. 75. 
3 Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, XVIII,, 256-257, The 
names of twenty-four witnesses are appended. 



friends' marriage customs. lxv 

These Meetings take Care in the Case of Marriages, that all things be clear; 
and that there may be nothing done in that Procedure, which afterwards may 
prove to the Prejudice of Truth, or of the Parties concerned ; which being an out- 
ward Thins (that is acknowledged in itself to be lawful) of the greatest Import- 
ance a Man or Woman can perform in this World; and from the sudden, unwary, 
or disorderly Procedure whereof, very great Snares and Reproaches may be cast 
both upon the Parties, and the Profession owned by them; therefore it doth verj 
fitly, among other things, when it occurs, oome to be considered of by the People 
of God, when met. to take Care to preserve all Things right and savoury in the 
Household of Faith. We do believe, our Adversaries, lhat watch for Evil against 
us, would be glad how promiscuously or disorderly we proceed in this weighty 
Matter, that so they might the more boldly accuse us. as Overturners of all 
human and Christian Order: But God hath not left us without his Counsel and 
Wisdom in this Thing; nor will he. that any should receive just Occasion against 
us his People: And therefore in this weighty Concern, we. who can do nothing 
against the Truth, but all for. and with regard to the Truth, have divers Testi- 
monies for the Lord. And— 

First, That we cannot Marry with those that walk not in. and obey not the 
Truth, as being of another Judgment, or Fellowship; or pretending to it. wall; 
not suitable and answerable thereto. 

Secondly, Nor can we ko to the Hireling-Priests, to uphold their false and 
usurped Authority, who take upon them to marry People without any Command, 
or Precedent for it from the Law of God. 

Lastly, Nor can we suffer any such kind of Marriage to pass among us. which 
either as to the Degrees of Consanguinity, or otherwise, in itself is unlawful, or 
from which there may be any just Reflection cast upon our Way. 

In that we deny the Priests their Assumed Authority and Power to marry, it is 
that which in no wise we can recede from, nor can we own any in the doing of it; 
it being Part of our Testimony against the Usurpations of that Generation, who 
never yet. that I ever heard of. could produce any Scripture-proof, or Example 
for it. And seeing none can pretend Conscience in the Matter (for they them- 
selves confess that it is no Part of the Essence of Marriage) if any pretending to 
be among us. should, through Fear. Interest, or Prejudice to the Truth, come un- 
der, and bow to. that Image, have we not Reason to deny such slavish and ignoble 
Spirits, as mind not Truth and its Testimony ? 

Lastly, Seeing if any walking with us. or going under the same Name, should 
hastily or disorderly go together, either beinK within the Degrees of Consanguin- 
ity, which the Law of God forbids, or that either Party should have been former- 
ly under any Tie or Obligation to others, or any other vast Disproportion, which 
might bring a just Reflection upon us from our Opposers; can any blame us for 
taking Care to prevent these Evils, by appointing that such as so design, make 
known their Intentions to these Churches or Assemblies, where they are most 
known, that if any know just Cause of Hindrance, it may be mentioned, and a 
timous Lett put to the Hurt, either by stopping it. if they can be brought to con- 
descend; or by refusing to be Witnesses and Concurrers with them in it, if they 
will not':' For we take not upon us to hinder any to marry, otherwise than by Ad- 
vice, or disconcerning ourselves; neither do we judge, that such as do marry con- 
trary to our Mind, that therefore their Marriage is null and void in itself, or may 
be dissolved afterwards; Nay, all our meddling is in a holy Care for the Truth. 
For if the Thing be right, all that we do, is to be Witnesses: and if otherwise. 
that we may say for our Vindication to such as may upbraid us therewith, that we 
advised otherwise, and did no ways concur in the Matter: that so they may bear 
their own Burden, and the Truth and People of God be cleared.' 

i The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc, by Robert Barclay. London. 1674; Phila- 
delphia, Re-printed. 1770, pp. 51 54. 
G 



Ixvi friends' marriage customs. 

A very clear and temperate account of the Friends' practice 
in this important matter is that given by William Penn : 

Their Way of Marriage is peculiar to them; and shews a distinguishing Care; 
above other Societies, professing Christianity. They say that Marriage is an 
Ordinance of Cod. and that God only can rightly join Man and Woman in Mar- 
riage. Therefore they use neither Priest nor Magistrate; but the Man and 
Woman concern'd take each other as Husband and Wife, in the Presence of 
divers credible Witnesses, promising to each other, with God's Assistance, to be 
loving and faithful in that relation, till Death shall separate them. But antece- 
dent to this, they lirst present themselves to the Monthly Meeting for the Affairs 
of the Church where they reside; there declaring their Intentions, to take one 
another as Husband and Wife, if the said Meeting have nothing material to ob- 
ject against it. They are constantly asked the necessary Questions, as in case of 
Parents or Guardians, if they have acquainted them with their Intention, and 
have their Consent, etc. The Method of the Meeting is. to take a Minute thereof, 
and to appoint proper Persons to enquire of their Conversation and Clearness 
from all others, and whether they have discharged their Duty to their Parents or 
Guardians; and to make Report thereof to the next Monthly Meeting, where the 
same Parties are desired to give their attendance. Incase it appears they have 
proceeded orderly, the Meeting passes their Proposal, and so records it in their 
Meeting-Book. And in case the Woman be a Widow, and hath Children, due Care 
is there taken, that Provision also be made by tier for the Orphans, before the 
Meeting pass the Proposals of Marriage: Advising the Parties -concerned, to ap- 
point a convenient Time and -Place, and to give fitting Notice to their Relations, 
and such Friends and Neighbours, as they desire should be the Witnesses of their 
Marriage: Where they take one another by the Hand, and by Name promise re- 
ciprocally, Love and Fidelity, after the Manner before expressed. Of all which 
Proceedings, a Narrative, in Way (if Certificate, is made, to which the said Par- 
ties first set their Hands, thereby confirming it as their Act and Deed; and then 
divers Relations, Spectators and Auditors set their Names as Witnesses, of what 
they said and signed. And this Certificate is afterwards registred in the Record 
belonging to the Meeting where the Marriage is solemnized. Which regular 
Method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in Courts of Law, a good Marriage; 
where it has been by cross and ill People disputed, and contested, for want of the 
accustomed Formalities of Priest and Ring, &c. Ceremonies they have refused: 
Not out of Humour, but Conscience reasonably grounded; inasmuch as no Scrip- 
ture-Example tells us, that the Priest had any other Part of old Time, than that 
of a, Witness among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: 
And therefore this People look upon it. as an Imposition to advance the Power 
and Profits of the Clergy: And for the Use of the Ring, it is enough to say. that it 
was an Heathenish and vain Custom, and never in Practice among the People of 
God, Jews or primitive Christians: The Words of the usual Form, as with my 
Body I thee worship, &c, are hardly defensible. In short, they are more careful. 
exact and regular, than any Form now used: and it is free of the Inconven- 
iences. with which other Methods are attended: Their Care and Checks being so 
many, and such, as that no clandestine Marriages can be performed among 
them .1 

It appears by the Records that the first Yearly Meeting of 
Friends for New Jersey and Pennsylvania was held at Burling- 

i A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers, etc. 
By William Penn. Philadelphia: Re-printed by Joseph Crukshank, 1770, p. 2~. 

A terse summary of Friends' views on this subject is also given in Sewel's His- 
tory of the Quakers, as cited. 777. 



friends' marriage customs. lxvii 

ton, New Jersey, in the house of Thomas Gardner, 31st of 6th 
mo., 16S1, old style. In 16S3 it was by the Meeting advised, 
" that all young and unmarried people in membership with us, 
previously to their making any procedure in order to marriage, 
do seriously and humbly wait upon the Lord for his counsel 
and direction in this important concern; and when favored 
with satisfactory clearness therein, they should early acquaint 
their parents or guardians with their intentions, and wait for 
their consent ; thus preservation from the dangerous bias of 
forward, brittle, and uncertain affections would be experienced, 
to the real benefit of the parties, and the comfort of their 
friends. And it is earnestly recommended to Friends, that 
they tenderly and carefully watch over the youth, and extend 
reasonable caution and admonition, as occasion may re- 
quire." 1 

One of the earliest deliverances on the subject by the Year- 
ly Meeting was the following : 

" When they understand or hear of any y l Intends to offer 
their proposals of Marriage to y e Monthly Meeting which 
seems manifest to them cannot pass there, that they then ad- 
vise (tho' not forbid) them to forbear troubling y e said meet- 
ing therewith till y e said preparative Meetings Objections be 
removed And that the Man at least before he propose his In- 
tended Marriage to y e Monthly meeting Do by himself or some 
friend at his request lay y e matter before y e said preparative 
Meeting he belongs to And if the Woman belong to another 
Meeting that she lay it after y e same manner before y e Women 
friends to which she belongs. And if the Man belong to an- 
other Monthly Meeting that then he produce from thence a 
Certificate of his clearness' from all others & of his Conversa- 
tion to y e Monthly Meeting where the Woman belongs before 
he have the said Meetings final approbation. 

tw Inasmuch as neither Children nor Orphans ought to 
marry without Consent of parents or Guardians, therefore they 
often advise that no man so much as propose his Intentions of 
Marriage to any young Woman before the Consent of such be 
first had and obtained. 

1 Rules of Discipline of the Yearly Meeting of Friends for Pennsylvania, New 
Jersey, Delaware, and the Eastern Parts of Maryland. Philadelphia, 1893, p. 50. 



lxviii friends' marriage customs. 

" . . . . And that y e Care of Marriages in the above 
respects may be the particular Concern of some It's advised 
that y e Monthly Meeting do always appoint two friends to be 
at the said marriages to take inspection thereof and that they 
be appointed as aforesaid at the same monthly meeting where 
the Couples receive their final approbation ; and that one or 
both of the said two friends do acquaint y e next monthly Meet- 
ing after such Marriage is consummate whether it was carried 
on as above advised or not. And that the appointment of the 
said two friends as also their answer as above be entered upon 
record to prevent mistakes and shortness of memory." 1 

The Yearly Meeting for Pennsylvania and New Jersey in 
1702 advised " that none making profession of Truth, and 
would be accounted of us, do take one another in Marriage, 
or join in Marriage any other way, than by the Consent and 
Approbation of the monthly Meeting belonging to the place 
where they live; And if any should proceed, any other way, 
that they be dealt with according to Truth." ~ 

The same body advised in 1733 "that Friends being Jus- 
tices of the Peace do not by Pretext of their Office undertake 
to marry people by Virtue of Licenses obtained to that end, it 
being in the Sense of the Yearly Meeting inconsistent with our 
Principles, & not any part of their duty as magistrates so 
to do " 3 

The following is the form of a marriage certificate agreed 
upon by the same Yearly Meeting in 1 719, and again approved 
in 1762 : 

Whereas A B of C. in the County of D in the Province of E & F G of H &c hav- 
ing declared their Intentions of Marriage with each other before several Mon: 
Meetings of the People called Quakers, at H aforesaid. according to the good 
Order amongst them, (where the Parties are under the Tuition of Parents, or 
Guardians, add) and having the Consent of Parents (or Guardians as the case is) 
concerned, their said Proposals of Marriage were allowed by the said Meet- 
ing. 

Now these are to certify whom it may concern, that for the full accomplishing 
their sd Intentions this day of the Month in the Year of our 

1 MS. Book of Discipline, of 1704. belonging to George Vaux, of Philadelphia, 
to whose kindness the writer is indebted for permitting the above extracts to 
be taken. Mr. Vaux believes this is the oldest Book of Discipline of the Phila- 
delphia Meeting. 

-' Rules of Discipline. 1762. 

3 Ibid 



FRIENDS MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. IxiX 

Lord They the said A r> >v FG appeared inapublickMeetg oi thesd Peo- 

ple den- that purpose appointed it it be so,) at ll aforesaid. & the said A is tak- 
ing tiic v 1 l*' < ! by t in' 1 1 a ml. did in a, solemn Manner openly declare, that lie took 
her tlie -,'t I'' ( : tn be his wife, promise wit ii the Lord's Assistance in be unto her, 
a loving & faithful Husband until! death sin mid seperate them. & t hen, ,^ t here m 
the same Assembly, the S<J FG did in like ma unci-, deed a re that she took the si A 
1! to be her Husband with the Lord's Assistance, promisg to be unto him a faith 

ful. A loving Wife until Death should seperate them: - - - And moreover they 
the said A H & PG (she accord!-' to the Custom of Miuf assuming the Name of 
her Husband) as a further Confirmation thereof, did then, & there to these Pres- 
ents set their Hands; - - - And we whose Names are hereunder also subscribed, 
being pres* at the solemnization of the sd Marra & Subscription have as Wit- 
nesses thereunto, set our Hands the Day, & Year above written - - 1 

VII. Early New York and Pennsylyania Marriage 

Laws. 

Immediately on the conquest of New York by the Eng- 
lish, and while the Duke of York, under the grant of his 
brother, Charles II., held sway over New York, New Jersey 
and Pennsylvania, there was a general meeting held at Hemp- 
stead, Long Island, on March first, 1664, at which a code of 
laws, " collated out of several laws in force in his Majesty's 
American Colonies, and Plantations, and digested into one vol- 
ume," was published, known as " the Duke of York's Laws." 
These laws were re enacted from time to time, with some mod- 
ifications, but remained substantially unchanged for twenty 
years or more. They went into effect immediately in New 
York, and were subsequently- extended to the shores of the 
Delaware. They were also in effect in New Jersey, during 
the brief period that elapsed before the transfer of that territory 
to Sir George Carteret and Lord John Berkley, and again 
after the surrender by the Dutch in 1674, until the new grant 
by the Duke of York and Charles II. to the Proprietors of 
New Jersey. The Long Island people who afterwards 
migrated to New Jersey found but little change in the mar- 
riage laws to which they had been accustomed under the 
dominion of the Duke of York. 

The first act on the subject recognized the impracticability 
of attempting to follow the English ecclesiastical regulations, 

1 Ibid. This deliverance in 1762 was "onAccountof the frequent Transgres- 
sions of our discipline in respect to Marriages," and "thelncrease of Man 

accomplished contrary to the good Order established in the Society." 

2 In 1676. See Record of Upland Court, Memoirs Hist. Soc. Penn . VII., 39 ID. 



lxX NEW YORK AND PENNSYLVANIA MARRIAGE LAWS. 

and sanctioned marriages by a justice of the peace, but re- 
quired the publication of banns. The act, reads thus: 

Whereas by the Law of England no Marriage is lawfully Consummated with- 
out a Minister whose office it is to join the parties in Matrimony after the Banns 
thrice published in the Church or a Lycence first had and obtained from some 
person thereunto authorized, all which formality cannot be duly practiced in 
these parts. 

Yet to the end that a decent rule therein may be preserved It is Ordained that 
from henceforth the names and surnames of each Party who sue for Marriages 
shall be Publiquely read in their Parish Church or place of usuall Meeting, where 
they both then Inhabit three severall Lords day- successively. 

And where no Church or Meeting place shall happen to bee. a publication in 
writing shall be first fourteen Days before Marriage upon three doors of each 
parish whereof the partyes Inhabit (viz) one on the Constables the other two 
upon any two Doors of the Overseers of the Parrish Unless they produce a 
Lycence from the Governouri in both which Cases, and not otherwise, it shall be 
Lawfull for any Minister or for any Justice of the Peaces to joyne the Parties in 
Marriage, Provided that the said Partyes do purge themselves by Oath before the 
Minister or Justice that they are not under the Bonds of Matrimony to any other 
Person Living, and if it shall be after proved, that either or both of the Parties are 
perjured, and thereby attained a Double Marriage, for the said Perjury the par- 
ty or parties offending shall bee boared through the tongue with a read hot Iron 
and moreover proceeded against as in Case of Adultery is provided; But if either 
Party be approved Innocent as to him or her Self and Ignorant of the others 
wicked fraud the innocent Person shall recover damage against thenocent; and 
be sett at Liberty as if no such Marriage had been made.3 

In the Frame of Government or Charter of Liberties of the 
Province of Pennsylvania, dated April n, 16S2, by William 
Penn, with alterations agreed upon in England, it was pro- 
vided : 

Nineteenth. That all marriages (not forbidden by the law of God, as to near- 
ness of blood and affinity by marriage) shall be encouraged; but the parents or 
guardians shall be first consulted, and the marriage shall be published before it 
be solemnized, and it shall be solemnized by taking one another as husband and 
wife, before credible witnesses, and a certificate of the whole, under the hands of 
parties and witnesses, shall be brought to the proper register of that county, and 
shall be registered in his office. * 

This was enacted into law by the Pennsylvania Legislature, 

1 The justices of Newcastle on Delaware, on July 27th. 167S, asked "whether 
the commander hath power to grant licenses for marriages, as to several persons 
he hath done, whereby the common course of three proclamations in the church, 
or banns set up. is laid aside."— Newcastle Records, 311, cited in Hazard's Annals 
of Pennsylvania, 456. 

2 Gov. Andros, of New York, having been asked by the Board of Trade and 
Plantations to report the number of marriages in that Province, wrote a reply, 
received April 18, 1678: •' Scarcity of Ministers.and Law admitting marriages by 
Justices no acct cann be given of the number marryed."— N. Y. Col. Docs., 
III., 261. 

3 Duke of York's Book of Laws, Harrisburg. 1879, p. 36. 

4 Ibid., 101. 



NEW YORK AND PENNSYLVANIA MARRIAGE LAWS. lxxi 

on December 7? 16S2, the Quaker practice being more clearly 
embodied in the statute : 

All marriages not forbidden by the law of God, shall be encouraged; bul the 
parcnis and guardians shall be, if possible, Qrsl Consulted; and the parties clear- 
nes from all other-engagements assured by a Certificate from some < !redible per 
sons where they have lived; And by their affixing of their intentions of Marriage 
on the Court, or Meeting house Door of the County where in they Dwell, one Month 
befqre the solemnizing thereof ; And their said marriage shall be solemnized by 
taking one another as husband and wife, befor Sufficient Witnesses ; And a cer- 
tificate of the whole under the hands of parties and witnesses, (at least twelve.) 
shall be brought to the Register of the County, where they are Marryed, and be 
Registered in his office. 1 

A similar act was passed ioth of 3d Month, 1684, but with 
the modification that the certificate referred to might be pro- 
duced to " such Religious Society to which they relate; or to 
some one Justice of the peace of the County in which they 
Live.'"'- This was still further amended by an act passed in 
1693, which inserted the proviso : " that there be at least one 
Justice of the Peace of the County where such marriage shall 
be, at the Solemnization thereof." 3 

III. MARRIAGE IN NEW JERSEY. 

THE SOVEREIGN POWER IN THE COLONY. 

In tracing the laws and customs concerning marriage in 
New Jersey in the Colonial period we may find it instructive 
to review briefly the origin of the sovereign power in the Col- 
ony, and the agencies through which it was exercised. 

By the patent of King Charles II. to his brother James, 
Duke of York, March 12, 1663-4, *° r tne vast territory ex- 
tending from St. Croix to the Delaware, there was not only 
conveyed the territory, but " full & absolute power & author- 
ity to correct punish pardon governe & rule all such the Sub- 
jects of vs our heires and Successors as shall from time to 
time adventure themselves into any of the parts or places 
aforesaid or that shall or doe at any time hereafter inhabit 
within the same according to such Lawes Orders Ordinances, 
directions & instruments as by our said dearest Brother or 

1 Ibid., 151. 2 ibid.. 171. 

3 Ibid.. 229. A similar act was passed November 27. 1700. which was reenacted 
October 28, 1701, and has remained unrepealed ever since; By an an approved 
June 23, 1885, licenses are required as a prerequisite to marriages. See Statutes 
at Large of Pennsylvania. II., 21; Pamph. Laws of 1885. p. 146. 



lkxii THE SOVEREIGN POWER IN NEW JERSEY. 

his Assignes shall be established And in defect thereof in 
cases of necessity according to the good descretions of his 
deputies, Commissioners Officers or agents respectively as 
well in all causes and matters Capitall & Criminall as civill, 
both marine & others 1 Soe alwaies as the said Statutes ordi- 
nances & proceedings bee not contrary to but as neare as con- 
veniently may bee agreeable to the Lawes Statutes & governm't 
of this our Realme of England. . . . And alsoe to make, or- 
deyne & establish all manner of Orders Lawes directions In- 
structions formes & ceremonies of Governm 1 & Magistracy fitt & 
necessary for & concerning the Governm* of the Territories & 
Islands aforesaid ; Soe alwaies as the same be not contrary to 
the Lawes & Statutes of this our Realme of England but as 
neare as may be agreeable thereunto ; and the same at all times 

i Closely following the language of the first patent from the Crown of England 
for lands in America, granted by Queen Elizabeth, June 11. 157S, to Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert, wherein she gave him, his heirs and assigns, forever, " full Power and 
Authority, to correct, punish, pardon, govern and rule, as well in Causes capital 
or criminal, as civil, all such her Subjects or others, as should adventure them- 
selves in the said Voyages, or should at any Time thereafter inhabit the said 
Lands," etc. The patent to Sir Walter Raleigh, in 1581, was in similar terms. 
By the Virginia C'aarter of May 23. 1600. the London Council of the Virginia Com- 
pany was authorized to appoint Governors, and "to make, ordain, and establish all 
Manner of Orders. Laws, Directions, Instructions, Forms, & Ceremonies of Gov- 
ernment & Magistracy, fit & necessary, for & concerning the Government of the 
said Colony & Plantation." The Governors so appointed, or at least some 
of them, exercised the most absolute sway, ruling as by martial law. - Hack- 
luyt'S Voyages, III.. 174-0. 297-300; Hazard's State Papers, I., 26, 36; Stith'S History 
of Virginia, "Williamsburg, 1747, 5, 294, 305, 322, Appendix, 17; Chalmers. I.. 9. 11. 
The patent of Charles I., to Sir Edmund Plowden, for New Albion (including 
New Jersey in great part), followed the precedents established by Elizabeth in 
granting ample powers of government —Pennsylvania Mag. of Hist. <£• Biog.. VII., 
55. In like manner, the Dutch West India Company, authorized under its char- 
ter to appoint a Director-General and Council, to administer the affairs of New 
Netherland. delegated large powers to that officer, who. moreover, interpreted his 
commissions and instructions with the utmost liberality. — O' Callaghan' s New 
Netherland, I.. 400: II., 18. The charter of Nova Scotia, granted by James I. to 
Sir William Alexander, September 10, 1621, and the Novodamusof Charles I., July 
12, 1625. for the same territory, confer the same powers of government as the ear- 
lier English patents for lands in America. See the patents to Alexander set out 
in full in " Narrative of the Oppressive Law Proceedings, and other measures, 
resorted to by the British Government, and numerous private individuals, to over- 
power the Earl of Stirling, and subvert his lawful rights. Written by Himself," 
etc. Edinburgh, 1836. 55, 79. The foregoing recitals are instructive in the light of 
the commission to Gov. Philip Carteret, of New Jersey, hereinafter quoted. The 
Governors of New England had power which "differed little from that of the 
other magistrates." and they were more subject to the popular will than those 
in the other Colonies.— Palfrey's New England, I., 67-68; II.. 0. 



THE SOVEREIGN POWER IN NEW JERSEY. lxxiii 

hereafter to putt in execution or abrogate revoke or change 
not only within the precincts of the said Territories or Islands 
but alsoe upon the Seas in goeing & comeing to & from the 
same as he or they in their good discretions shall think to bee 
fittest for the good of the Adventurers cS: Inhabitants there." 1 

Even at this early date the practical English mind recog- 
nized the fact that laws made in and for England might not 
be exactly adapted to strange conditions in the new world, and 
that much latitude must be conceded to the "'inhabitants and 
adventurers" of the distant territories in framing laws for their 
government, who would find it impossible to conform always 
to the laws and customs of the home country. 

When the Duke of York, by his lease and release of June 
23-24, 1664, conveyed to John Lord Berkley and Sir George 
Carteret the present territory of New Jersey, the grant em- 
braced not only the lands but " their and every of their appurte- 
n'nces in as full and ample manner as the same" were granted 
to the Duke himself, "and all the Estate Right Title interest 
benefitt advantage clayme & Demand of the said James Duke 
of York," etc.- This was understood to confer upon the 
Duke's grantees full powers of government. 

In " the Concessions and Agreement of the Lords Proprie- 
tors of the Province of New Ciesarea or New Jersey, to and 
with all and every of the Adventurers and all such as shall settle 
or plant there," it was carefully provided that all and every 
person and persons should "freely and fully have and enjoy his 
and their judgments and consciences in matters of religion 
throughout all the said Province . . . any law, statute or 
clause contained, or to be contained, usage or custom of this 
realm of England, to the contrary thereof in anywise notwith- 
standing;" and liberty was granted to the General Assembly 
to provide for the maintenance of a ministry. 3 

The General Assembly, moreover, was empowered, " To 
enact and make all such laws, acts and constitutions as shall lie 
necessary for the well government of the said Province, and them 

1 N. J. Archives, I., 3-4: Learning and Spicer's Collection of the Grants. Conces 
sions mid Original Constitutions of New Jersey, etc.. Philadelphia 1 1758], 5. 

2 N. .1. Art-hives. I., 12-13; Learning and Spicer, !> 10. 

3 N. J. Archives, I., 30; Learning and Spicer, 14. 



1XX1V GOVERNOR CARTERET'S POWERS. 

to repeal ; provided, that the same be consonant to reason, and 
as near as may be conveniently agreeable to the laws and cus- 
toms of his majesty's kingdom of England." 1 " Lastly, to en- 
act, constitute and ordain all such other laws, acts and constitu- 
tions as shall or may be necessary for the good, prosperity and 
settlement of the said Province."- In the same broad way the 
Governor and his Council were authorized and directed " To 
Act and doe all other thing or things that may conduce to the 
safetie peace and well Government of the said Province, as they 
shall see fitt, soe as they bee not contrary to the Lawes of the 
said Province." 3 

The Lords Proprietors, in their commission (February 10, 
1664-s) to Governor Philip Carteret empowered him "to do 
all and every other thing and things which unto the Share and 
Office of Governor doth belong or hath accustomed to belong, 
as fully and freely as any Governor hath ever had ;" 4 and in their 
instructions to the Governor authorized him, with the advice 
and consent of the Council, " to make, do, perform and exe- 
cute all and every Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Powers 
and Authorities whatsoever, which we ourselves, may, can, 
ought or could do in, for, relating or concerning the Govern- 
ment both Civil and Military of the said Province Pro- 
vided also, That all the Executive Part of all the Powers 
hereby made and given, shall be made and exercised by our 
said Governor, to and with the advice of the Major Part of our 
Council," etc. 5 

Governor Philip Carteret wrote (February 25, 1665-6) to 
some persons who proposed settling on the Delaware that 
those coming three years after them, and settling in any other 
county, " must be conformable to such Laws and Customs as 
are there Established, Excepting in matters of Judgment and 
Opinion in Religion." 6 

1 N. J. Archives, I., 32: Learning and Spicer, 15. 

2 N. J. Archives. I.. 34-3n: Learning and Spicer, 18. There are some verbal dif- 
ferences between these authorities. 

3 N. J. Archives, I., 36; Learning and Spicer, 19. 

4 N. J. Archives, I., 21. 
• r > Ibid., I.. 23 24. 

Ibid.. 53. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF WEST JERSEY. lxxv 

After the brief Dutch interregnum, 1673-4, the Duke of 
York, by his indentures of lease and release, July 2S-29, 
1674, made a new conveyance to Sir George Carteret for East 
Jersey (Lord John Berkley having conveyed West Jersey to 
John Fenwick, March iS, 1673-4),' "in as full and ample 
manner as the same is granted vnto the said James Duke of 
Yorke" by the patent of his brother the King, June 29, 
1664,'- and Sir George confirmed the Concessions of Feb. 10, 
1664-5. 3 Carteret's widow and the trustees under his will (dated 
December '5, 167S) by lease and release, February 1-2, 16S1-2, / 
having conveyed East Jersey to the Twelve Proprietors, 4 and 
they having divided with twelve others, the Duke of York for- 
mally released to the Twenty-four Proprietors any and all in- 
terest retained by him in East Jersey, March 14, 16S2-3, 5 and 
the King, on November 23, 16S3, enjoined upon the inhab- 
itants " That they do submit and yield all due Obedience to 
the Laws and Government of the said Grantees, their Heirs 
and Assigns, as absolute Proprietors and Governours thereof 
. . . and also to their Deputy or Deputies, Agents, Lieuten- 
ants, and Officers lawfully Commissionated by them, accord- 
ing to the Powers and Authorities granted to them." 6 

By the quintipartite deed of July 1, i6>j6, West Jersey 
passed into the ownership of William Perm, Nicholas Lucas, 
Gawen Lawrie and Edward Byllynge (John Fenwick being 
considered as having taken title as trustee for Byllynge). The 
new West Jersey Proprietors in a letter of June 26, 1676, de- 
clared : " We put the power in the people, that is to say, they 
to meet, and choose one honest man for each propriety, who 
hath subscribed to the concessions ; all these men to meet as 
an assembly there, to make and repeal laws, to choose a gov- 
ernor, or a commissioner, and twelve assistants, to execute the 
laws during their pleasure." 7 The Proprietors, Freeholders 
and Inhabitants of West Jersey, in their Concessions and 
Agreements, dated March 3, 1676-7, provided for the govern- 
ment of the Province by commissioners appointed by the Pro- 
prietors, until March 25, 16S0, after which the inhabitants were 

1 Ibid., 205. 2Ibid.,166. d., 175. * Ibid. 366. 

5 ibid.. 383. t; Ibid., 438; E. .1. Records. Liber A. f. 1. 1 Ibid.. 288. 



lxxvi MARRIAGE LICENSES BY GOVERNOR CARTERET. 

to choose annually, by " ballating Trunks," the commission- 
ers, " to govern and order the Affairs of the said Province {fro 
tempore) for the good and welfare of the said People," 1 who 
were guaranteed the right " from Time to Time, and at all 
Times, freely and fully [to] have, and enjoy his and their judg- 
ments, and the exercise of their Consciences in Matters of relig- 
ious Worship throughout all the said Province. "~ By the same 
instrument provision was made for the election of a General 
Assembly with power " To Enact and make all such Laws, Acts 
and Constitutions as shall be necessary for the well Govern- 
ment of the said Province, (and them to repeal) provided that 
the same be, as near as may be conveniently, agreeable to the 
primitive, antient and Fundamental Laws of the Nation of 
England," and not against the Concessions. 3 The title of the 
Proprietors of West Jersey was confirmed by the Duke of 
York, by indenture dated August 6, 16S0, 4 but in the mean- 
time Sir Edmond Andros, Governor of New York since 1673, 
had been exercising jurisdiction over West Jersey, and, to a 
limited extent, over East Jersey also, endeavoring to adminis- 
ter the Duke of York's Laws. 5 

MARRIAGE LICENSES BY GOV. CARTERET. 

The sovereign power over New Jersey, granted by Patent 
from King Charles the Second to James Duke of York, and 
by him granted to Lord John Berkley and Sir George Car- 
teret, was now to be exercised on the ground by the Governor 
appointed by the two Lords Proprietors. Thus, Governor 
Philip Carteret had vested in his person all the powers that the 
King himself could have exercised, had he not parted with his 
sovereignty over New Jersey. The long struggle of Henry 
VIII. with the Church of Rome had determined the question 
that the Church of England was a National Church, independ- 
ent of Rome, and having the King for its head, instead of the 
Pope. Hence, the King had supreme jurisdiction in all mat- 
ters ecclesiastical, including marriage and divorce. That be- 
ing so, the Lords Proprietors of New Jersey had like juris- 
diction here, to be administered by their Governor. Pursuing 

1 Ibid.. 243-4, 251. '-' I hid.. 253. 3 Ibid.. 266. 

* Ibid.. 324. 5 II, id.. 179-188. 230-238, 2?(l-3'.'2. 33: : ! 317. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES BY GOV. CARTERET. lxwii 

this line of argument, and acting under the authority conferred 
by his Instructions, Governor Carteret followed the pre- 
cedents of earlier .American Governors, sanctioned by the 
Duke of York's Laws, and readily granted marriage licenses 
to those wishing to dispense with the delay and the notoriety 
of a publication of the banns for three weeks. The earliest 
known of these licenses was in this form : 

lt Whereas I have Received Information of a mutuall In- 
tent and agreement betwene Daniel Perrin of Elizabeth Towne 
in the Province of Ne^v Jersey and Maria Thorel — of the same 
Towne Spinster to solemnize Mariage together for which they 
have requested my Lycence and there apearing no Lawtull 
Impediment for y e Obstruction thereof These are to Require 
you or Eyther of you to Joyne the said Daniel Perrin and 
Maria Thorel in Matrimony and them to pronounce Man and 
Wife, and to make record thereof according to the Lawe in that 
behalfe provided for the doing Whereof this shall be to you or 
Eyther of you a sufficient Warrant. Given Vnd r my hand 
andSeale the twelfth day of February An 1665 and in the 18 th 
Yeare of his Ma ties Raign King Charles the Second &c &c 
kt To any of the Justices of the Peace Phi : Carteret " 

or Ministers W'hin the Government 

of the Province of New Jarsey " 

Appended is the entry : 

" These Couple where Joyned to 
gether in Matrimony the iS feb 1665 
by me J. Bollen " x 

Licenses in the same form were granted April 30, 1666; 
August 31, 1667; April 21, 166S, and frequently thereafter.' 2 
As the marriages in these cases were performed by James 
Bollen, the Secretary of the Province, who entered them on 
the records, it is very probable that many more licenses were 
granted of which we have no record, wdiere the ceremony was 
performed by other Justices of the Peace. 

1 E. J. Records. Liber X". 3. fo 6. 
- Ibid., folios 8, 11, 15, et seqq. 



lxxviii EARLIEST MARRIAGE LAWS IN NEW JERSEY. 
EARLIEST MARRIAGE LAWS IN NEW JERSEY. 

The marriage customs of a people are as enduring as those 
relating to burials. It could not be expected that the first 
settlers of New Jersey would in their new home adopt prac- 
tices on this most important subject differing from those to 
which they had been wont in their previous places of resi- 
dence. When the Assembly of East Jersey met, in 166S, it 
was dominated by the eight English members from Elizabeth- 
town, Newark, Woodbridge, Middletown and Shrewsbury, 
Bergen having the other two Dutch members. They were 
mainly from New England (some of them having for a time 
sojourned on Long Island), and as was to have been expected 
they brought with them New England ideas, which, after all, 
were not so different from Old England's practices, save as 
modified by novel situations in a new country. This East 
Jersey Assembly enacted, May 30, 166S, respecting mar- 
riage : 

" For the preventing of unlawful Marriages, it is ordered 
and enacted, that no person or persons, Son, Daughter, Maid 
or Servant, shall be Married without the consent of his or her 
Parents, Masters or Overseers, and three Times published in 
and at some publick Meeting or Kirk, where the Party or Par- 
ties have their most usual abode ; or set up in writing their 
Purposes of Marriage, on some Publick House, where they 
live, and there at least to abide for the space of Fourteen Days 
before Marriage, which is to be performed in some publick 
Place, if possible may be, and none but some approved Min- 
ister or Justice of the Peace within this Province, or some 
chief Officer, where such are not, shall be allowed to Marry or 
admit of any to join in Marriage, in their Presence, and under 
the Penalty of Twenty Pounds for acting contrary hereunto, 
and to be put out of their Office, according to the Liberty of 
Conscience granted by the Lords Proprietors in their Conces- 
sions : Always provided, That it is and may be lawful for the 
Governor to Grant his Licence, under his Hand and Seal, to 
any Person or Persons that are at their own disposing, or to 
any other under the Tuition of their Parents, Masters or Over- 
seers, to join in Matrimony ; Provided, that the Parents, Mas- 



EARLIEST MARRIAGE LAWS IN NEW JERSEY. l\\i\ 

ters or Overseers are present and consenting thereunto, or that 
their consent be attested by some publick Officer, and present- 
ed to the Governor before the granting thereof, and the others 
to clear themselves by Oath or by Certificate." 3 

This combined the essential features of the Massachusetts 
Bay act of 1639 ; the statute of New Haven Colony, of 1653 or 
earlier; and the Duke of York's Laws. 

SOME EARLY DIVORCES. 

As the Governor's jurisdiction in licensing marriages was 
recognized by the foregoing statute, so, conversely, he was ad- 
mitted to have power in granting divorces, as appears by this 
instrument, in 1669 : 

" These are to Give Notice to all persons Whome It may 
Concerne that Whereas I am Informed that Hopewell Hull 
hath VnLawfully taken to Wife the Daughter of John Martin 
of Woodbridge, Without Observing the Lawes and Customes 
of England Or these parts of America, I the Governor of this 
province doe declare that the Mariage & that all others that are 
or shall be Comitted In the same Manner to be null Void and 
of none Effect, And they that doe Live In that VnLawfull Es- 
tate of Matrimony May be Prossecuted as such as doe Live In 
the Estate of fornication, And that the Children begotten by 
them are to be accompted Bastards and not Capable of Inher- 
itance. Given vnd r my hand and Seale the 29 th day of De- 
cemb 1 ' 1669."- 

The following form of divorce by the mutual consent of the 
parties was regarded as valid N : 

"Know all p r sons Whom It may Concerne That Marma- 
duke Potter now living w hin the Corporation of Woodbridge 
In the province aforesaid Apearing before mee James Bollen 
one of his Ma ties Justices of the peace & Secretary of said 
Province hath declared Vpon his Corporall Oath that hee never 
was Legally married to one Mary Roade now Liveing at the 

1 Learning and Spicer, si. This was re-enacted Nov. 24, 1675. Ibi<K. 107. 

2 East Jersey Records, in office of the Secretary of State, at Trenton, Liber 3, 

p. 32. It is probable that Hull remarried his wife, Mary Martin, with all due cer 
emony. for John Martin, in li is will. March IT. b'.sT S, names bis "son" Hopewell 
Hull as one of the overseer-s and assistants of his executrix.— E.J. Deeds, Liber B 
f. 220: and see N. J Archives. XXL. 107, His. lii-1. 



lx.XX SOME EARLY DIVORCES. 

hoare kills vpon Delaware River or Bay And that hee, the said 
Potter doth acquit and discharge the said Mary from any In- 
gagement, promise, Contract, or any Otherwise pretending 
her the said Mary Roade to be his Lawfull Wife and that shee 
hath his free Consent to dispose of herselfe In manage to 
Whom shee shall think fitt, On condition that shee the said 
Mary Roade shall give vnder her hand atested by some Magis- 
trate and Entred vpon Record the like discharge to him the 
said Marmaduke Potter that then this discharge of him the said 
Marmaduke to be Authentick and remain in force, Otherwise 
to be Accounted void and of none Effect Dated at Woodbridge 
In the province of New Jersey the zS lh 7tember 1676." 1 
Here is another instance : 

" To all Xpian people to whom these p r sents shall come 
and to whom the p'misses Do or may Concerne I Thomas 
Davies of Woodbridge in the County of Middx and in the 
province of East New Jersey gent Send Greeting Whereas 
there was a Manage formerly had and Solemnized in the 
Island Barbados beyond the Seas, between me the said 
Thomas Davies and one Margaret Blew then both of the par- 
ish of St. Peeters in the Island aforesaid on or about the sec- 
ond day of October in the yeere of our Lord One Thousand 
six hundred and Seventy and Three, Now know yee That I 
the said Thomas Davies as well for divers good causes and 
weighty Considerac'ons me therevnto moveing as also att the 
speciall Instance and request of the said Margaret Have and 
Do by these p'sents acquitt Release Exonerate and Discharge 
the said Margarett of and from the said Bonds tyes and obii- 
gac'or.s of Manage made as aforesaid as much as in me Lyes 
giveing her the said Margeret full power and liberty to Dis- 
pose of herselfe as she shall thinke fitt Witnesse my hand this 
24 th day of August Anno D m 16S3 Thomas Davies. — Signed 
and Delivered in the p'sence of John Baker Sam 11 Winder 
James Emott. August 24 th , 16S3. This Day came before me 
Sam 11 Winder and James Emott and did acknowledge they saw 

1 Ibid . Liber 3, p. 128. This appears to be a divorce from matrimony, rather 
from a mere engagement or contract of marriage. Mary Roade doubtless gave 
her consent, for on November 25, 1677. Marmaduke Potter was married to Mary 
Bingla, at Woodbridge. after banns set up on November 8. 1677. 



SOME EARLY DIVORCES. lxxxi 

the abovenamed Thomas Davies signe the above written In- 
strument, who afterwards did deliver the same as his Act and 
Deed. Tho. Rudyard." 1 

This manner of divorce was apparently based on a clause 
of the Duke of York's Laws, providing that in case of the 
involuntary absence of a husband or wife for five years, on his 
or her return ' k it shall and may be Iawfull for the said man or 
woman to Challenge his or her pre-marriage, and obtain an 
order for their Cohabiting as formerly, but if neither shall 
sue for such an order, They may by mutuall agreement Enter 
a Release to each other in the office of Records, and both re- 
main free from their former obligations." 2 

SECOND MARRIAGES. 

The Friends steadily enjoined upon their people the emi- 
nent propriety of those entering upon second marriages pro- 
viding properly for their own children by previous marriages. 
George Fox by way of example details at length the pains he 
was at when about to marry Margaret Fell, to see that she had 
secured her own children by her former marriage, and to as- 
sure himself that they were satisfied. 3 The following docu- 
ment illustrates how this injunction was carried out in one in- 
stance in Fenwick's Colony (Salem), New Jersey: 

" To all people to whome the p r sent Writting shall 
come Ann Craven late of Lyme-house in the "pish of Stepney 
in the Countie of Middx w th in the kingdome of England and 
now of the Towne of New Salem in Fenwicks Colony w u in 
the Province of New Cassaria or New Jersey Widowe sendeth 
greeting Whereas Tohn Fenwick late of Bynfeild in the 
Countie of Berkes w th in the said Kingdome Esq. one of the 
Lords or Cheife Propriet ls of the said Province and "£> ticulerly 
of Fenwicks Colony lying w tb in the same By his deed poll 
dated the tenth day of the seaventh mo" 1 last past in this p's- 
ent yeare Did graunt bargaine sell alien enfeoffe and continue 
Unto her the said Anne Craven her heires and assignes forever 

i [bid., Liber A. p. 40. 

2 Duke of York's Laws. 36. 

3 Journal of George Fox. London. 1891. II.. 117. The date of this marriage ld 
the Bristol Register of Friends, is 27th of sth Month, 1000. 

H 



Ixxxii SECOND MARRIAGES. 

All that tract of three hundred Acres of Fast Land Marsh and 
Swampes then and hereafter to be called Cravens Choyce w th 
the Rivers Rivoletts Quaries Woods Comodities advantages, 
and hereditam ts whoever in the said Deede Poll ^ticulerly 
menc'oned As in and by the same being Enregestered \v ,h in the 
said Colony Relac'on being there Unto had Doth and may ap- 
peare Now Know yee that for and in Considerac'on of a Mar- 
riage shortly to be solemnized betweene her the said Ann 
Craven and Charles Bagaley late of Choptanke in the Countie 
of Talbott w th in the Province of Mary-Land Tanner As alsoe 
for diverse other good Causes and Considerac'ons her the said 
Anne Craven hereUnto moveing Hath given graunted bar- 
gained sold aliened assigned and Confirmed, And by these 
p r sents Doth give graunt bargaine sell alien enfeoffe assigne 
and Confirme Unto him the said Charles Bagaley and Unto his 
heires and assignes tor ever All that the said Tract of three hun- 
dred Acres of fast land marsh, and swampes called or knowne 
by the name of Cravens choyce aforesaid Together with the 
River Rivoletts quarries woods Comodities Advantages and 
other hereditam ts w' soever Unto the said Cravens choyce and 
Tract of three hundred Acres of Up-Land Marsh and Swampes 
belonging or in anywise ap^taining and alsoe all the Estate 
Right title interest pro^tie clayme and demand whoever of her 
the said Ann Craven of in or too the said Cravens Choyce and 
tract of three hundred Acres of fast Land Marsh and Swampes 
and all and singular other the ^.misses herein before menc'oned 
or intended to be given graunted bargained sold and assigned 
or any ^>te or ^cell thereof And the Reverc'on and Reverc'ons 
Remainder and Remainders thereof To have and to hold 
the said Cravens Choyce and tract of three hundred Acres of 
fast Land Marsh and Swamps w th thapprtenances herein and 
hereby bargained and sold enfeoffed assigned and Confirmed 
and every 'pt and ^>cell thereoff Unto him the said Charles 
Bagaley his heires and assignes forever To the only Use 
and behoofe of him the said Charles Bagaley his heires 
and assignes forever Upon Condic'on notw th standing And 
to and for the Uses intents and purposes in manner 
and forme following (that is to say) to the Use and 



IN CASE OF SECOND MARRIAGES. lxxxiii 

behoofe of her the said Anne Craven during her natural] life if 

it shall happen that she survives him the said Charles Bagaley 
and from and after her decease : Then to the Use and behoofe 
of the heires and assignes of him the said Charles Bagaley for- 
ever Provided that if he the said Charles Bagaley his heires 
execrs administrate or assignes shall well and truely paye or 
satistie or cause to be well and truely payd or satisfied in Star- 
ling money or Goods Equivalent the sum of Eighteene pounds 
Unto Ann Craven when she shall attaine to the Age of sixteene 
yeares Unto Thomas Craven the sum of thirteene pounds 
when he shall attaine to the Age of one and twentie yeares and 
Unto Peter Craven the sum of thirteene pounds when he shall 
attaine to the Age of one & twentie yeares or w th in one month 
after that thev the said three Children of her the said Ann 
Craven <jf*>tie to these p'sents doe attaine Unto their generall 
ages aforesaid or if two or any of them attaine (by being sur- 
vivor) Unto her or his age aforesaid And that then the said 
porc'on or porc'ons be not then payd to them twoe or one of 
them so surviveing as aforesaid That then the said Cravens 
Choyce and three hundred Acres of Land Marsh and Swampes 
shall be and envre to the Use and behoofe of them the said 
Thomas Craven Peter Craven and Anne Craven to be divided 
Amongst them or the survivor or survivors of them and to 
the heires and assignes of them or the survivor of them forever 
and not otherwise. In Wittness whereof she the said Anne 

Craven hath hereunto set her hand and seale the day 

of the Eleaventh mo" 1 in the yeare by the English Acct 1679 
etc. 

" Signed sealed and delivered Ann Craven " 

in the p r sence of 

" Samuell Hedge Secry (?) 

" Fen wick Adamss 

"Richard Tyndall 1 

MOKE COLONIAL MARRIAGE LAWS. 

Returning to the subject of legislation concerning marriage 
in New Jersey, it may be noted that in the Fundamental Con- 

1 Liber Salem B, Records in office of the Secretary 3 



lxxxiv MORE COLONIAL MARRIAGE LAWS, 16S2-3. 

stitutions for the Province of East New Jersey in America, 
Anno Domini 16S3, it was provided : 

" XX. That all Marriages not forbidden in the Law of God, 
shall be esteemed lawful, where the Parents or Guardians be- 
ing first acquainted, the Marriage is publickly intimated in 
such Places and Manner as is agreeable to Mens different per- 
swasions in Religion, being afterwards still solemnized before 
creditable Witnesses, by taking one another as Husband and 
Wife, and a Certificate of the whole, under the Parties and 
Witnesses Hands, being brought to the proper Register for 
that End, under a Penalty if neglected." 1 

The influence of the Quakers was clearly shown in the 
foregoing provision, and also in the following act of the East 
Jersey Assembly, in March, 1682 : 

" That all Marriages (not forbidden by the Law of God) 
shall be lawful. Parents or Guardians shall be first consulted, 
and consenting thereto, and the Intention of Marriage shall be 
published at least three weeks before it be Solemnized by tak- 
ing one another as Man and Wife, the Publication shall be En- 
tered and Registered by the Clerk of the Assembly, or publick 
Place where it shall be Published, and the Solemnization shall 
be performed by and before some Justice of the Peace or other 
Magistrate within the Province, unless the Justice of the Peace 
or Magistrate refuse to be present, and the Certificate thereof 
entered in the Register of the Town and County where it is 
finished." 2 

About the same time (May 2-6, 16S2) the West Jersey 
Assembly enacted as follows : 

" That justices of the peace have power, and are hereby 
authorized, within their Jurisdiction, to solemnize Mar- 
riages ; 2 both Parties so to be Married having first published 
their intent of Marriage, Fourteen Days in some publick 
Place to be appointed for that Purpose ; and that the Parents 
or the Trustees manifest and show no lawful reason against it. 
And if any Justice shall presume to join a Couple in Matri- 

1 Leamingand Spicer, 164. - Ibid.. :.!:!•;. 

3 Lord Bellomont wrote, October If). 1700, Unit in " the Jerseys " marriage by a, 
justice of the peace was -their way of marrying there."— X Y. Col. Docs., IV., 

76(5. 



WEST JERSEY MARRIAGE LAWS, 16S2. IxKW 

mony, without the Consent and Knowledge of the Parents or 
Trustees of such Persons so Married (if such Consent can 
reasonably be obtained) then such Justice so offending shall lie 
fined according to Discretion of the General Assembly : After 
which Marriage the Clerk or Register is hereby appointed and 
authorized to enter the Day and Year whereon the same Mar- 
riage was solemnized into the Publick Register." 1 

This act was clearly on its face opposed to the Friends' 
view that Marriage should be a simple agreement between the 
two parties most interested, testified in the presence of wit- 
nesses, and without the mediation of priest or magistrate. 
However, the Friends of Burlington seem to have effected an 
ingenious compromise, by which it was the practice to have a 
Justice of the Peace present as one of the witnesses before 
whom the ceremony took place. The following entries in the 
early records of Burlington apparently bear out this con- 
jecture : 

SOME BURLINGTON MARRIAGES, 16S0-16S4. 

" The Marriage betweene Charles Bagglev and Elizabeth 
Stephens being first published according to order, was solemp- 
nized the 27th of May 16S2 before Elias ffarre, Justice, and 
Thomas Gardner Commission 1 " and other witnesses and Tho. 
Revell Regist 1 ". 

" The Marriage between Thomas Sharman and Frances 
Ward being first published according to order, was solemp- 
nized the 1st day of November 16S2, Before Mahlon Stacy 
Justice Tho : Revell jun 1 ' Tho. Scholey, Martha Brumley and 
Tho. Revell Regist r . 

" The Marriage betweene Walter Reeve and Anne Howell, 
being first published according to order, was solempnized the 
nth day of December 16S2, Befoie Robert Stacy Justice John 
White and Thomas Revell Regist 1 ". 

"The Marriage between William Barnes and Martha 
Bromley being first published according to order, was solemp- 
nized the 13th day of flebruary 16S2 : Before John Cripps Jus- 
tice, Samuel Tayler, Susanna ffarnsworth, Alice Newbold, 
Elizabeth Revell and Tho: Revell Regist 1 . 

1 Learning and Spicer. lit;. 



lxxxvi SOME BURLINGTON MARRIAGES, 16S2-3. 

"The Marriage between ffrancis Beswick and Priscilla 
Pacock being first published according to order, was solemp- 
nized the 19th day of ffebruary 16S2 Before Robert Stacy and 
Elias ftarre Justices, Tho. Revell Regist 1 ' Godfrey Hancock 
Tho : Wright and sev r all other witnesses. 

" The Marriage betweene William Lee and Joan South 
being first published according to order, was solempnized the 
23th day of the Seaventh Moneth called September 1683 : Be- 
fore Tho: Gardner, Jn° Cripps, Jn° Dewsbury,-Tho : Revell, 
Jn° Haynes, Margrett Haynes and Mary Cockayne. 

" The marriage betweene Richard Boyes and Mary Dodson 
being first published according to order, was Solempnized the 
first day of y e nyneth Moneth called November 16S3, Before 
Thomas Gardner Justice, Tho : Revell Record 1 ', Godfrey 
Hancock, Thomas Tyndall, Rich a Harrison, Charles Brig- 
ham, Thomas ftbulkes jun 1 ', Joshua Wright junr, Mary Wright, 
Elizabeth Revell Hellen Stacy and Isbell Chapman. 

" The Marriage betweene John Woolston Jun 1 ' and Lettice 
Newbold being first published according to order, was Solemp- 
nized the Sixth day of the Tenth Moneth called December 
Anno 16S3 Before Elias ftarre and ffrancis Collins Justices and 
Thomas Revell Record 1 ' And John Shinn Sen 1 ' John New- 
bold Godfrey Hancock Jun 1 ' John Shinn Jun 1 ' and Jane Garr- 
wood. 

"The Marriage betweene George Elkincton and Mary 
Bingham, being first published according to Lawe, was Sol- 
empnized the one and Thirtieth day of the Eleaventh Moneth 
called January Anno 16S3, before Sam 11 Jenings, Governo 1- , 
Thomas Gardner and Tho: Budd Justices and ffrancis Collins 
Justice Isaac Marriott, Wm. Brightwen, Jn° Budd and sever- 
all others. 

"The Marriage betweene Peter Jennings and Anne Nott, 
being first published according to Lawe: was Solempnized the 
Twentieth day of y e first Moneth called March 1683-4; before 
John Gosling Justice )- And Thomas Revell Record 1 ', John 
Cripps, Walter Pumphary, Timothy Brandreth, John Tulye, 
Philip Creeke, Joseph Blowers, John Renshawe, John 
ffleckne, Onesiph : Aughwick Godfrey Hancock jun 1- JoAnna 



SOME BURLINGTON MARRIAGES, 16S4. lxxxvii 

Pryor, Sarah Basnett, Mary Dimsdale, Sarah Collins, Sen r 
and lun 1 , Mary Cripps ami Margrett Collins. 

"The Marriage betweene Jodia Higgins and Mary New- 
bold being first published according to Lawe, was Solemp- 
nized ye Twelveth day of y e Third Moneth called May 1684, 
before Elias ffarre Robert Stacy Justices and Thomas Revell 
Regist 1 ', Joseph Wood Eliakim Higgins, Tho : Higgins, Mar- 
grett Newbold Mary Peirson Elizabeth Hull Sarah Higgins 
Elizabeth Revell, Elizabeth Stacy Hellen Stacy. 

" The Marriage betweene Robert [ngall and Joan Home 
being first published according to order, was Solempnized v' 
Fourth day ofy e ffifth Moneth called July 1684: before Rob- 
ert Stacy Justice Tho : Revell Regist 1 ', Tho. Butcher Jn° Day' 
and Elizabeth Dave." 1 

PROTECTING UNWARY MAIDENS. 

At a time when a new and sparsely settled country was 
likely to be overrun with adventurers, it was manifestly ad- 
visable to protect the young and unwary against such gentry, 
as the West Jersey Assembly did by the following act of 5th 
of 7th mo., 1683, which, moreover, was strictly in line with 
the prudent regulations of Friends, in securing their youth 
against hasty marriages witli unknown strangers : 

" W r hereas it hath pleased God to commit this Country and 
Province, into the Hands of such who (for the generality of 
them) are fearing God, and painful and industrious, in the 
promoting and improving the said Province ; and for the bet- 
ter preventing of such as are Prophane, Loose, Idle and 
Scandalous from settling amongst us, who are, and will not 
be only unserviceable, but greatly burdensome to the Province. 
// is therefore hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 
that all Person and Persons, who shall transport him, or them- 
selves, into this Province, shall within Eighteen Months after 
he or they shall arrive in said Province, procure and produce a 

1 Bui'lington Records, in the office of the Secretary of State, at Trenton, sub 
annos. This practice anticipated the law of Pennsylvania, of 1693. cited above, 
requiring the presence of at least one Justice of the Peace at the solemnization 
of every marriage. It was said that thirteen marriages had taken place in Bur- 
lingtonfrom its settlement to 1681.— ProuCPs Hist. Pennsylvania, 1.. 159; Hazard's 
Annals of Pennsylvania, triii. 



lxXXVlii PROTECTING UNWARY MAIDENS. 

Certificate under the Hands of such of that Religious Society 
to whom he or they did belong, or otherwise from two Magis- 
trates (if procurable) or two Constables or Overseers ot the 
Poor, with three or more creditable Persons of the Neighbour- 
hood, who inhabit or belong to the Place where he or they did 
last reside, as may give satisfaction (that is to say) that he or 
they came not clandestinely away, and (if unmarried) that he 
or she are clear from former Engagements, in that particular, 
and also that he or she, are such as live soberly and honestly 
to the best of their Knowledge. And that no Justice shall pre- 
sume to Marry any such Person or Persons, who shall come 
into this Province before such Certificate be Procured, or that 
it be laid before the Governor, and two Justices, and give 
them sufficient satisfaction concerning their clearness. And 
that all such Person and Persons who shall settle in the said 
Province, and shall refuse or neglect to procure such Certifi- 
cate as aforesaid, within the said Eighteen Months, shall be 
fined at the Discretion of the Governor and Council of the said 
Province, not exceeding Twenty Pounds; the same to be lev- 
ied by distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, and to be paid 
into the hands of the Treasurers of the said Province." 1 

AN ANTE-NUPTIAL CONTRACT IN l6S6. 

Herewith is given an interesting ante-nuptial contract, of 
16S6: 

"This Indenture wittnesseth that at Woodbridge in y e 
province of East New Jersey the twentieth and sixth day of 
January in y e year of our Lord one thousand Six hundred 
Eightie and Six It is appointed aggreed and finally contracted 
Between Mr. James Dundas of Amboy Gent, of y e one part and 
Mrs. Jannet Riddell Eldest Daughter to Mr. Archibald Riddell 
Minister of y e Gospel at Woodbridge afores d and y e s d Mr. Archi- 
bald Riddell for his Interest and Takeing the Burden upon him 

i Ibid., 474. Similar legislation obtained in New England, where an act of this 
kind was objected to by some of the Ministers and vestrymen of the Church of 
England. Lord Bellomont, November 28, 1700. explained the object of such leg- 
islation: "The truth is, as I have been informed, some loose people have some- 
times come from England and married in New England, though they had left 
wifes behind them in England and this law was calculated cheifly for prevention 
of such marriages.- —.V. Y. Col. Docs.. IV., 793. 



A MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT, l6S6. lxXXlX 

for his s d Daughter and they both with one Consent and assent 
on y ( ' other part In Maner forme and Effect as hereafter followes 
That is to sav the s' 1 Mr. Dundas shall accept and take and 
doth hereby accept and take the s (1 Mrs. Jannet Riddell for his 
Lawfull Spouse and y e s' 1 Mrs. Jannet Riddell with Consent as 
afores d shall accept and take and doth hereby accept and take 
y e s d Mr. lames Dundas for her Lawfull Husband And both 
of them are Joyntly obleidged to Solemnize and Compleat y' 
s' 1 marriage in a due and Right Maner In Contemplation of w' 1 ' 
marriage the s d Mr. James Dundas Doth hereby obleidge him- 
self his Heires Exrs and Adminstrs w lh his Estate moveable or 
Immoveable to have in readiness betwixt this and tenth day 
of December next in y e year of our Lord one thousand six 
hundred and eighty-seven y e sume of seven hundred pounds 
Sterling or y e value in goods or merchant wares to be Im- 
ployed upon Lands or other suitable Improvements for y e use 
and behoofs of him the s d Mr. James Dundas and Mrs. Jannet 
Riddell his future spouse and y e Children to be procreate be- 
tween them w ch failing to be disposed of as is after appointed 
in consideration whereof y e aboves a Mr. Archibald Riddell 
doth hereby obleidge himself his Heires and Excrs well and 
truely to pay or Cause to be payed unto y e abovenamed Mr. 
James Dundas betwixt y e date hereof and y e first day of June 
Next Ensueing y e sume of one hundred and eighty pounds ster- 
ling w ch sume is to be accumulate in y e afores' 1 sume of 
seven hundred pounds and to be Imployed as a fores' 1 
and so often as y e s' 1 Mr. Dundas does uplift y e s' 1 ac- 
cumulate sume or any part thereof that as oft he 
obleidges himself of New to Imploy it to y e best advantage for 
y e proper Use of him y e s d Mr. James Dundas and his future 
spouse and y e children to be procreate betwixt them w cl1 fail- 
ing to be disposed of in Maner following y l is to say If it so 
happen that at y e time of y e s d Mr. Dundas his deceass there 
shall be noe Childreen alive of y e Marriage nor his s d spouse at 
y e time w th child That then two third parts of all y e afores d 
Estate of Lands Money Bonds Accompts Merchant Wares or 
other moveable or Immoveable Estate whatsoever pertaining to 
y e s d Mr. James Dundas at y e time of his deceass in this province 
or anywhere Else shall belong unto and Immediately become y e 



XC A MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT, l6S6. 

proper Right and Inheritance of y e s d Mrs. Jannet Riddell her 
Heires Exers or assigns, but in Case ther shall be Children of 
y e Marriage one or more alive at y e time of her s (1 Husbands 
deceass that then she and her aforesds shall have Right 
to one third part onelv of y e whole Estate as is above named as 
her or their Inheritance with her Life-rent of one sufficient 
dwelling house and three hundred acres of good arable ground 
about it as her dowrie and to have y e Charge and overseight of 
y e Child or Childreen with a suitable and sufficient allowance 
for their board Cloathing and Education so long as she contin- 
ues unmarried And if it should happen that y e Child or Chil- 
dreen of y e marriage should die dureing y e time of her Wid- 
dowhood that then and in such Case she and her aforesds are 
to have right to two thirds of all y e Estate moveable and Im- 
moveable as is above Expressed as if there had been No Chil- 
dreen alive at y e time of her s d husbands deceass And in Case 
y e s d Mrs. Jennet Riddell should die before her s d husband 
leaveing behind her one or moie Childreen of this Marriadge 
that then y e one Moitie or half part of all y e Lands Chattells 
moneys bonds merchandize or other Estate Moveable or Im- 
moveable above Expressed that they or any of them have a 
right unto at y e time of her deceass shall belong unto y e s' 1 
Child or Childreen then Liveing as their right and due patri- 
monie and that all y e Articles abovenamed be duely performed 
the Nearest of Kine on both sides are hereby Impowered by 
Consent of.all parties to see y e same take Effect Either in an 
amicable way or by Course of Law if Need be. In witness 
whereof, 

"James Dundas, Jannet Riddell 

" Arch. Riddell 

" Witnesses 

"Neill Campbell, Archibald Campbell, And: Hamilton, 

" Patrick Falconar, Wal : Riddell, George Henrie, James 

" Scott." 

A MARRIAGE THAT WAS A FAILURE. 

That marriage (at least of the common law kind) was 
sometimes a failure two hundred years ago is evident from a 

i East Jersey Records, ut supra, Liber F. p. 675. 



A COMMON LAW MARRIAGE 1 A1LURE. XC1 

post-nuptial agreement made March 7, 1689-90, by James Sea- 
towne, of Wbodbridge, with Rebeckah, daughter of Thomas 
and Rebeckah Adames, and her said father, which sets forth 
that James and Rebeckah having lived together as man and 
wife under civil contract, they agree to separate, James giving 
to Rebeckah the dwelling house with furniture, on the south 
side of Cedar Cove, Woodbridge, and thirty acres adjoining, as 
described in deed of gift from said Thomas Adames, to said 
James Scatowne. 1 

THE COLONIAL PRACTICE AS TO MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

The practice of the day regarding marriage licenses is thus 
set forth in a petition to the Governor and Council, November 
27th, 16S4 : 

"The humble Request of James Emott Dep 1 Secretary of 
this Province being then Read setting forth that whereas it has 
bin the Laudable Custome and practice as well in this Prov- 
ince as all other Neighbouring Adjacent provinces that vpon 
applicac'on made for a License for Solemnizeing Marriage the 
Secretary vpon taken Security of such p r sons as Request the 
same that they are vnder noe other obligac'on or p'contract of 
Marriage immediately to make out a License p l 'cureing the 
same to bee signed by the Governor and given vnder the seale 
of the province — praying an Order of Councill may bee passed 
for the Continueing y e said Custome — After the same were 
Considerably Debated the whole Councill was Consenting to 
passe an Order for the Continuac'on of the said Custome, but 
the Deputy Governor- Desired that the same might be Differ'd 
till the next setting of this Councill " — 3 

The subject of this petition engaged the attention of the 
Legislature in 1693, whether for curing irregularities in mar- 
riage, or to increase the revenue of certain officials from 
license fees, does not appear. The proceedings are thus 
minuted in the Journal of the Governor and Council : 

Oct. 30, 1693 — "A Message by Thomas Gordon to y e 
house of Deputyes w ,h 3 bills past by this board viz : . . . . 

1 N. J. Archives. XXL. Is). 2 Gawen Laurie. 

3 X. J. Archives. XIII.. 138. 



XC11 THE COLONIAL PRACTICE AS TO MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

one for regulate of Lycences for publick houses & marriages 
and take oft' y e Excise &c. 

Oct. 31, 1693 — "A Message by John Real & Sam 11 
Dennes w Ul 2 bills past y e house viz : a bill for regulateing of 
marriages & another for takeing off y e Excise & Impower- 
ing y e Gover 1 ' to grant lycences to ordinary keepers & y e Bill 
sent yesterday returned & by this [board] devided into two. 

Nov. 2, 1693 — "A Message by Thomas Gordon Clerk of 
this board to y e house of Deputyes to Informe them y* y e bill 
for Regulateing of marriages .... are past this board." 1 

The act passed was as follows : 

" Whereas There hath been great Irregularities, committed 
in joining Persons in Marriage,'- without either their Banns be- 
ing published, as provided by a former Act, or a Licence from 
the Governor or Deputy Governor for the Time being; for the 
preventing which abuses and irregularities for the future, Be 
it enacted by the Governor, Council and Deputies in General 
Assembly now met and assembled, and by the Authority of the 
same, that after Publication hereof, no Minister, Justice of the 
Peace, or other shall join any Persons in Marriage unless their 
Banns be published, or by a Licence from the Governor, or 
Deputy Governor for the time being, under the Penalty of 
Ten Pounds for each such Offence." 3 

It occasionally happened that a marriage license was ob- 
tained in vain. For example, in the case of that granted July 
7, 1673, to Thomas Williams, " of Exmouth in the county of 
Devon, now of this Province," and Ilonnor Justice, " bornd " 
in Ireland. Opposite the record of this license is the marginal 
note : " This is null and not allowed of by the Deputy Gover- 

1 N. J. Archives, XIII., 200, 201, 202. 

2 This was the confession embodied in many of the early statutes of the Col- 
onies, showing how impossible it was found in practice to compel the people to 
conform strictly and always to any law which interfered with their natural rights 
in assuming this most important relation. The Virginia legislature even went 
so far (4th and L2tta Acts of the Assembly) as to prohibit all marriages to be sol- 
emnized without " a lawful Minister "' (that is. of the Church of England), and 
"imposing the punishment due for fornication on the parties and making their 
children illegitimate." But the Bishop of London was constrained to admit, in 
1678, that there was "a great defect in the execution of those" laws, which he 
considered " wholesome.'"— A'. T. Col. Docs.. III.. 253. 

y Learning and Spicer, 332. 



\ MARRIAGE LICENSE IN I 695 . xciii 

nor." 1 Another instance, due to the fickleness of human na- 
ture, was when a license was issued to Samuel Moore, of the 
town of Woodbridge, and Mary Higgins, widow of Richard 
Higgins, of New Piscataway, September 6, 167S, a marginal 
entry informing us : " This is null one of the persons recant- 
ing the agreement."- The record is silent as to whether it was 
the anxious bridegroom or the coy widow who "recanted" even 
after the license had been obtained. 3 

A MARRIAGE LICENSE IX 1695. 

The following is the oldest New Jersey marriage license 
known to be in existence : 4 

" The Governour and Proprietors of the Province of 
East New Jersey, To Any of his Majesties Justices of the 
peace In the sayd Province, to whose hands these presents shall 
come, Greeting Whereas Application hath beene made 
unto us In behalfe of Grasham Mote and Sarah Clayton both of 
Middletoun In the Countie of Munmouth to bee Joyned In 
Marriage, And Wee being certainelie Informed that the sayd 
Grasham Mote and Sarah Clayton are free and unmarried per- 
sones These are therefore to Authorize and Impower you to 
Joyne the sayd persones In the holy bond of Matrimonie In 
usuall forme, for which these presents shall bee your warrant 
Given under the Seale of the sayd Province the twelth day of 
ffebruarie Anno Dom : 1696. And. Hamilton." 

This document is written on white paper, both ink anil 
paper excellently preserved. In the upper left hand cor- 

1 e, ,]. Deeds. Liber No. 3. f. 92. It is possible that this license had been issued 
by James Carteret, President of the Province by appointment of the General As- 
sembly, and who had usurped the powers of Gov. Philip Carteret (hiring the lat- 
ter's absence. James Carteret sailed for Carolina the latter pari of June or the 
first part of July. If the license had been issued by him, that of itself would be 
sufficient reason for its revocation by John Berry, who hud been commissioned 
Deputy Governor by Gov. Carteret when leaving for England a year ' 
Secretary James Pollen. It is quite probable, however, thai the license hai 
signed in blank by Gov. Carteret, and issued on the day ii bears date by the act- 
ry of the Province, and thai it was annulled for good cause coming to 
the knowledge of the Deputy Governor. 

- Ibid.. 149. 

s One Samuel Moore, of Woodbridge, married ins, Oct. - ,,; . 1693. 

■4 Original in the writer's possession. 



XC1V LORD CORNBURY S INSTRUCTIONS. 

ner is affixed the seal of East Jersey, still quite legible; it is 
protected from exposure by four paper flaps which fold over it, 
joining in the centre to form a perfect cover. 

LORD CORNBURY'S INSTRUCTIONS. 

The Proprietors of East Jersey and those of West Jersey 
having surrendered their rights of government to Queen Anne 
and her successors, on April 15, 1702, New Jersey thereupon 
became a united Royal Province, subject to the English crown. 
The Queen appointed her cousin, Edward Hyde, Viscount 
Cornbury, to the post of Governor of New Jersey, and gave 
him his Instructions, dated November 16, 1702, which con- 
tained these clauses : 

" 75. And to the End the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the 
Lord Bishop of London, may take Place in our said Province, 
so far as conveniently may be, we do think fit that you give all 
Countenance and Encouragement to the Exercise of the same, 
excepting only the collating to Benefices, granting Licenses 
for Marriage, and Probate of Wills, which we have reserved 
to you our Governor, and the Commander in Chief of said 
Province for the Time being. 

" 76. And you are to take especial Care that a Table of 
Marriages established by the Cannons of the Church of Eng- 
land, be hung up in every Orthodox Church, and duly ob- 
served, and you are to endeavour to get a Law passed in the 
Assembly of our said Province, (if not already done) for the 
strict Observation of the said Table." 1 

THE LAWS OF ENGLAND IN FORCE. 

As New Jersev was now under the government of Great 
Britain it became important to have it decided just how far the 
law in force in Engjand was obligatory upon the inhabitants of 
this Province. 

In 1720 Mr. West gave an opinion on the extension of the 
common law to the colonies, in which he said : 

1 N. J. Art-hives. II.. 529; Learning and Spicer, 639; Smiths Hist N. J.. 230. 
These Instructions wen- the same as those given to Gov. Thomas Dongan, of New 
York, in 1686; ami to Col Henry Sloughter, Governor of New York, in 1690.— iV. 
]'. Col. Docs.. III.. 372, 6S8. in the case of the former, the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury was recognized us the ecclesiastical superior. 



THE LAWS OF ENGLAND IN FORCE. XCV 

"The Common Law of England is the Common Law of 
the Plantations, and all statutes in affirmance of the Common 
Law passed in England antecedent to the settlement of the col- 
ony, are in force in that colony, unless there is some private 
Act to the contrary ; though no statutes made since those set- 
tlements are there in force unless the colonists are particularly 
mentioned. Let an Englishman go where he will, he carries 
as much of law and liberty with 1dm, as the nature of things 
will bear." 1 

In 1729 the Attorney-General Yorke gave an important 
opinion upon the statute law in the following words : 

" I am of opinion that such general statutes as have been 
made since the settlement of Maryland, and are not by express 
words located either to the plantations in general or to the 
Province in particular, are not in force there, unless they have 
been introduced and declared to be laws by some Acts of As- 
sembly of the Province, or have been received there by long 
uninterrupted usage or practice."- 

In a report to the Lords of Trade, June 11, 1774, on the 
condition of the Province of New York, Governor William 
Tryon wrote : 

"The Common Law of England is considered as the 
Fundamental Law of the Province, and it is the received Doc- 
trine that all the Statutes (not Local in their Nature, and which 
can be fitly applied to the circumstances of the Colony) enact- 
ed before the Province had a Legislature, are binding upon the 
Colony; but that Statutes passed since do not affect the Col- 
onv, unless by being specially named, such appears to be the 
Intention of the British Legislature. " ;! 

1 Opinions of Eminent Lawyers concerning the Colonies and Commerce of 
Croat Britain, collected by George Chalmers, London. 1814, I.. ^00. 

2 Ibid., 208. 

3 N. Y. Col. Docs.. VIII.. 111. And see discussion on the validity of a Court of 
Chancery, in N. J. Archives. X.. 156. The doctrine enunciated in the text lias pre- 
vailed ever since in England. Its application to the American < 

affirmed in the Lauderdale peerage case, in 1885, relating to a marriage per- 
formed in New York in 1772: ' When English settlers go out to a colony and set- 
tle there they carry with them, so far a- may be applicable to the purpose, all the 
immunities and privileges of the law of England as the law of England was at 
that time." See 10 App. Cases, 693, ;it;. 



XCV1 SOME PECULIAR MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 

SOME PECULIAR MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 

The popular application of certain well known principles ot 
law often leads to quaint and curious customs, and marriage is 
no exception to such interpretation of the law. By the com- 
mon law " the marriage is an absolute gift of all chattels per- 
sonals (of the wife) in possession of her own right, whether 
the husband survive the wife or not." 1 Conversely, fct a hus- 
band was to be charged for all debts of his wife, dura solo."' 
These laws led to a peculiar custom in England, which was 
transplanted to America, and was practiced in New Jersey, as 
appears by the following entry in our public records: 

" Thomas Holmes of Woodbridge brickmaker and Lucra- 
cia the widow of John Pierce of New York [marriage li- 
cense issued July 14, 1679] were married at Mr. Moor's house 
in Woodbridge Thursday 17 July 1679 by James Bollen. 

" The said Holmes disclaymed any of ye Widow's Estate, 
but took her naked only her shift." 3 

The observant Professor Kalm thus entertainingly explains 
the custom and its practice in New Jersey in the middle of the 
eighteenth century : 

" There is a peculiar diverting custom here, in regard to 
marrying. When a man dies, and leaves his widow in great 
poverty, or so that she cannot pay all the debts with what little 
she has left, and that, notwithstanding all that, there is a per- 
son who will marry her, she must be married in no other habit 
than her shift. By that means, she leaves to the creditors of 
her deceased husband her cloaths, and every thing which they 
find in the house. But she is not obliged to pay them any 
thing more, because she has left them all she was worth, even 
her cloaths, keeping only a shift to cover her, which the laws 
of the country cannot refuse her. As soon as she is married, 
and no longer belongs to the deceased husband, she puts on the 
cloaths which the second has given her. The Swedish clergy- 
men here have often been obliged to marry a woman in a dress 
which is so little expensive, and so light. This appears from 

1 Co. Litt. 351. 

■■! 1 Rol. 321, 1. i=>; 3 Mod. 186. 

3 E. J. Deeds, Liber No. 3, f. lo8. 



SOMK PECULIAR MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. XCVU 

the registers kept in the churches, 1 and from the accounts 
given by the clergymen themselves I have likewise often seen 
accounts of such marriages in the English gazettes, which are 
printed in these colonics; and I particularly remember the fol- 
lowing relation: A woman went, with no other dress than her 
shift, out of the house of her deceased husband to that of her 
bridegroom, who met her half-way with fine new cloaths, and 
said, before all who were present, that he lent them his bride, 
and put them on her with his own hands. It seems, he said, 
that he lent the cloaths, lest, if he had said he gave them, the 
creditors of the first husband should come, and take them from 
her; pretending that she was looked upon as the relict of her 
first husband, before she was married to the second." 2 

When a Jerseywoman took up her residence in a neighbor- 
ing Province she seems to have taken this peculiar custom with 
her, if we are to believe a veracious newspaper of the day : 

"Annapolis in Maryland June 4. About a Fortnight ago 
there happened in Frederick County in this Province, as com- 
ical a Wedding, as we remember to have heard of: A 
Couple, with their Guests, (having obtain'd a License) came 
to the House of a reverend Clergyman, late in the Evening, 
after he had been in Bed some time with his Wife, and desired 
to be married ; he willing to oblige them, got up and dress'd 
himself in order to perform the Ceremony; but the Bride- 
groom having imbib'd a Notion, that if he married a Woman 
with any thing, he should be obliged to pay all her Debts, and 
not otherwise, and as she came from the Province of New Jer- 
sey, he was doubtful about her Circumstances; the obliging 
Bride, to remove all incumbrances, stripped to her Buff, and 
two Women held a Sheet between her and the Clergyman 
while he performed his Office; but she having forgot her Cap 
at undressing, in the midst of the Ceremony it came into her 
Mind, and she pulled that off too, and flung it on the Bed, and 
was married to her Spouse (if not in a Wedding Suit) in her 
Birth Day Suit: After the Ceremony was over, the Bride- 

1 No entry of the kind appears i:i any of the records of the Dutch churc 

New Jersey or New York, which the writer has examined. 
- Kalm, as eited. II., ^9-30. 
I 



XCV111 A WORD AS TO "BUNDLING. 

groom put on her one of his own Shirts to cover her — This Ac- 
count the Reader may perhaps look on as improbable and un- 
true, but he may be assured, it is a certain and naked 
Truth." 1 

In this connection a word may be expected regarding that 
singular custom known as "Bundling," where young people 
carried on their courting under circumstances calculated to 
hasten the wedding. The usage is an ancient one in the 
rural districts of England, was introduced into New Eng- 
land by the early settlers, was very generally practiced by the 
original Dutch inhabitants of New Jersey and their descend- 
ants so late as 1S30, and was much in vogue among the New 
England settlers in West Jersey down to the Revolution, if 
not later. The writer has been assured by persons of the 
highest respectability that they "bundled" when courting, 
and that the practice was never, to their knowledge, attended 
with ill consequences. ~ 

THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I 719. 

The origin of this Act does not appear. No petition for it 
is mentioned in the journals of either branch of the Legisla- 
ture. It may have been politics of a certain questionable sort, 
as the law was to the pecuniary interest of the numerous jus- 
tices of the peace throughout the Province. Perhaps it was 
designed to correct the growing abuses of the existing system. 
It shows much care and artificial skill in its drafting — so much 
so that it remained unchanged on the statute books for three- 
quarters of a century. The bill is first mentioned in the pro- 

1 Pennsylvania. Journal, June 18, 1?5'2. No. 500. quoted in N. J. Archives. Vol. 
XIX.. pp. 104- U35. It will be remembered that when Benjamin Franklin was con- 
templating marriage with his future wife, one of the difficulties in the way was 
the fact that her former husband " had left many debts, which his successor 
might be called upon to pay " See Sparks's Franklin. I., 96. 

2 Bundling; its Origin, Progress and Decline in America, by Henry Reed Stiles. 
M. D.. Albany. 1871. For some account of the practice in New Jersey, see History 
of the City of Paterson and the County of Passaic, by William Nelson. Paterson, 
N. J., 1901, 396-7; The Plain-Dealer, 1775-1776, the First Newspaper in New Jer- 
sey, now first printed from a unique manuscript copy, with an introduction and 
notes bj William Nelson, privately printed. 1894, 12-17; Records of theFirstPres- 
byterianSocietj of Paterson, compiled and edited, with notes, by William Nel- 
son. Paterson, X. .(.. 1893, sub " Discipline." 1821-30. 



THE MARRIAGE ACT OF l/If). xcix 

ceedings of the House of Representatives, February 9, 1718- 
19, when " Coll. Pass' presented to the house a Hill Entitled 
An Act to prevent Clandestine Marriages," which was dis- 
cussed again and again, repeatedly amended by both houses of 
the Legislature, and finally received the approval of Gov. 
Robert Hunter on March 27th, 1719.- 

"an act to prevent clandestine marriages. 

" Sect. 1. WHEREAS of late Years several Young Per- 
sons have been, by the Wicked Practices of evil disposed 
Persons, and their Confederates, inticed, inveigled and de- 
luded, led away and Clandestinely Married, which has often 
been to the Ruin of the Parties so Married, as well as the great 
Grief of their Parents and Relations. In order therefore to 
prevent the like as much as may be, for the future; Be it 
Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly 
of this Province, and it is hereby Enacted by the Author- 
ity of the same, That from and after the Publication of this 
Act, no License shall be given to Marry any Person under the 
Age of One and Twenty Years, until such Person have had 
the Consent of his • or her Parent or Parents, Guardian or 
Guardians, or Person or Persons under whose Care and Gov- 
ernment he or she shall be, signified by a Certificate in Writ- 
ing, under the hand of the Parent or Parents, Guardian or 
Guardians, of him and her intended to be Married ; or in case 
any the said Persons intending to be Married have no Parent 
or Guardian, then by a Certificate in Writing under the hand 
of the Person or Persons under whose Care and Government 
the said Person intending to be Married, at that time, shall 
be ; which Certificate shall be filed in the Secretary's Office of 
this Province, and Registered in a Book to be kept for that 
Purpose; for doing of which it shall be lawful for the Secre- 
tary of this Province, or his lawful Deputy, to receive the Sum 
of TJiree Shillings as a Fee or Reward. 

1 Col. Jeremiah Basse was Governor of East Jersey and also <<( West Jersey, 
1897-1699; Secretary of the Council of New Jersey, 1709-1715; and a member of the 
House of Representatives, 1716-1721. 11 e was appointed Attorney-! leneral, March 
2S, 1719, serving more than four years. It [snot unlikely thai he drafted this act. 
No precedenl Cor it ha-- been found; New York and Pennsylvania had no sue! 
islation. 

1 N. .J. Archives, Xlll , 84, 36, 91, 97, la;!. 111. 



C THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I 7 T 9' 

"2. Any Person or Officer that now is, or hereafter shall be 
appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief, for the 
Time being, to give out License of Marriage within this 
Province, who shall give or issue the same to any Person or 
Persons contrary to the Directions, true Intent and Meaning 
of this Act, or any Part thereof, shall forfeit the Sum of Five 
Hundred Pounds lawful Money of His Majesties Plantations 
in America, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, with cost of 
Suit, by the Parent, Guardian of (or Person under whose 
Care) any Person Married by Virtue of such License, shall be, 
in the Supream Court within this Province, in which there 
shall be no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law, or any more 
than one Imparlance. And any Minister or pretended Min- 
ister of the Gospel, Justice of the Peace or other Person, hav- 
ing or pretending to have Authority to joyn Persons together 
in the holy Bands of Matrimony, who shall joyn any Persons 
together in Marriage not having a License mentioning such 
Certificate had, as by this Act is directed and intended, or 
without having been published, as in and by this Act is ap- 
pointed and intended, or contrary to the true Intent and Mean- 
ing of this Act, or any part thereof, every such Minister or pre- 
tended Minister of the Gospel, Justice of the Peace or other 
Person, having or pretending to have Authority to joyn Per- 
sons together in the holy Bands of Matrimony, shall for every 
such Offence forfeit the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, lawful 
Money of His Majesty's Colonies and Plantations in America, 1 
the one half thereof to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, 
the other half thereof to the Parents or Guardian of such Per- 
sons who shall prosecute the same to Effect, to be recovered 
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His 
Majesties Courts of Record within this Province. 

i At a meeting of the Governor's Privy Council, Feb. 21, 1773: "A Complaint 
being exhibited agt Thomas Walker Esq* One of the Justices of the Peace in the 
County of Middlesex for Marrying Persons without Licence or Publication ac- 
cording to Law. His Excellency was pleased t<> order the Depy Secretary to write 
to the said Thomas Walker, and give him an Opportunity to answer it."— N. J. 
Archives, X., 352; XVIII., 275. The offender probably made his peace with the 
Governor, as no further record lias been found in relation to the matter. Had he 
not done so, the Governor would probably have issued a supersedeas, removing 
him from office. 



THE MARRIAGE ACT Ol- i;i<). 



"3. And for the more effectual preventing Frauds in the Ob- 
taining Licenses for Marriage, Be it enacted by the Author- 
ity aforesaid* That every Person under the Age of Twenty- 
one Years, as aforesaid, praying a License to he married, and 
producing a Certificate as by this Act is directed, shall, before 
he or she obtains such License, take an Oath upon the Four 
Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, or if really of tender Con- 
science, shall make a solemn Affirmation and Declaration in 
such Form and Manner, as in and by the Act or Acts of the 
General Assembly of this Province is or shall be prescribed 
and directed, That the Certificate by him or her produced is 
True and Genuine, and Truly and Bona Tide signed by the 
Person or Persons said to sign the same ; which Oath, Affir- 
mation or Declaration, the Person or Officer Impowered to 
give out Licenses, as aforesaid, is hereby Impowered, Directed 
and Required to administer. ■ And the Person or Persons, so 
praying a License as aforesaid, shall also, before the obtain- 
ing such License, enter into Bond to His Excellency Brigadier 
Robert Hunter, Esquire, now Governor of this Province or to 
the Governour or Commander in Chief of this Province for the 
Time being, with two sufficient Sureties, dwelling and hav- 
ing real Estates within this Province in the Penal Sum of Tive 
Hundred Pounds, lawful Money of His Majesties Colonies 
and Plantations in America, on the Conditions following, 



viz. 



••4. The Condition of this Obligation is such. That 
whereas there is a mutual Contract of Marriage betzueen 
A. B. of on the one Party, and C. D. of 

on the other Party, and Certifcatcs having been 
■produced a?id sworn to, or having taken a solemn Affirma- 
tion, according to one Act of General Assembly of this 
Province* made in the fifth Year of the Reign of our 
Sovereign Lord George, by the Grace of God King- of 
Great-Britain, France and Ireland, and the Territories and 
Dominions thereunto bcloug'iug-, oitituled, An Act to pre- 
vent Clandestine Marriages. Now if it shall hereafter ap- 
pear that the said Certificates, cr either of them, have bee?i 
fraudulent, or that cither of the a foresaid A. B. of 



Cll THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I 7 I 9. 

or the aforesaid C. D. of had not the 

Consent of their Parents, Guardians, or Persons under 
xv hose Care they were, signing the said Certificates, or 
that the said A. B. and C. D., or either of them, had some 
lawful Let or Impediment of Pre- Contract, Affinity or 
Consanguinity, to hinder their being Joyned in the Holy 
Bands of Matrimony, and aftcrxvards of living together as 
Alan and Wife, then this Obligation to stand and remain 
in full Force and Virtue, otherwise to be void and of none 
Effect. 

Which Bond shall be and remain in the Secretaries Office 
of this Province, to be produced as Occasion shall require. 

"5. In case it shall so happen that any Person under the 
Age of Twenty one Years aforesaid, shall be deluded and 
Married, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this 
Act, that then, and in such Case, it shall and may be lawful 
for the Parent or Guardian of such Person, under the Age of 
Twenty one Years, so Married by Virtue of such License, 
as aforesaid, or the Person under whose Care and Govern- 
ment such Person so Married as aforesaid, shall have been, 
to put the Bond, before in this Act mentioned, in Suit, in 
the Superior Court of this Province, and recover to his, her 
or their Use the Sum therein mentioned, the said Parent or 
Parents, Guardian or Guardians or other Person or Persons, 
by this Act impowered to put the said Bond in Suit, first 
giving sufficient Security with two sufficient Sureties, dwelling 
in this Province, in the Sum of Twenty Pounds to pay the 
Costs of Suit in case they become Non-Suit, Discontinue, or 
Verdict be given against them, or Judgment be given against 
them, on Demurrer, any thing in this or in any other Act to 
the contrary hereof in anywise notwithstanding. 

"6. And for the better and more effectually Preventing Pri- 
vate and Clandestine Marriages to be made contrary to, and to 
defeat and elude the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, or 
any Part thereof by fraudulent and deceitful Practices in the 
Publications of the Intentions of Marriage between any Per- 
sons, hereafter to be Married within this Province, Be It En- 
acted by the Governor, Council, and General Assembly, 



THE MARRIAGE ACT OF 1719. ciii 

and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the sat/ic, 
That every Person and Persons under the Age before-men- 
tioned, not taking a License, but intending to publish their 
Intentions of Marriage, in order to their being lawfully joyned 
together in the holy Bands of Matrimony shall, before any 
such Publication be made, repair to the Clerk of the Peace, 
or County Clerk of such County within this Province in 
which the Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians, Person 
or Persons under whose Care or Government each Person, so 
intending to be Married, does usually dwell and reside, and 
shall produce to such Clerk of the Peace such Certificate, as is 
herein before directed, and make oath or Affirmation, to be ad- 
ministered by the said Clerk, and enter into Bond accordingly, 
with Sureties, in the Sum and Manner directed, which Bond 
shall be carefully kept in the Clerks Office of the said County, 
and the Certificate enregistered in a Book to be kept for that 
purpose, upon which the said Clerk, within Fourteen Days 
thereafter, shall affix a Writing in a fair legible Hand, in 
the English Tongue, at three the most publick Places in the 
said County, setting forth the Persons Names, Places of 
Abode, and Intentions of Marriage, to be between them ; for 
all which Certificate, Bond and Publication, the said Clerk 
shall receive as a Fee or Reward, from the Person desiring 
such Publication, the Sum of Twelve Shillings, Money afore- 
said ; And if the said Writing so affixed stand and remain 
Publick, for and during the Space of One and Twenty Days, 
from the Time of setting up the same, and no Objections made 
to it, and signified by Writing to the Clerk aforesaid, by the 
Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians, of either of the 
said Persons mentioned' in the said Publication, or Person or 
Persons under whose Care and Government the said Persons, 
or either of them, so intending to be Married, shall be, then 
upon Certificate thereof made by the said Clerk, it shall and 
may be Lawful for any Person, having Authority so to do, 
to joyn the said Persons together in the holy Bands of Matri- 
mony, and not otherwise. And in Case it shall so happen that 
the Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians of any such 
Person under Age and published as aforesaid, or that the Per- 



civ THE MARRIAGE ACT OF 1719. 

son or Persons under whose Care, Tuition or Government any 
such Person under Age shall be, at any Time, during the 
Space of One and Twenty Days, after the Time of such Pub- 
lication set up, as before is Directed, signify his, her or their 
Dislike or Disapprobation of such Marriage so intended to be 
consummated, by Writing under his, her or their Hands, to 
the Clerk of the Peace aforesaid, that then, and in such Case 
the said Clerk shall not give them the Certificate before-men- 
tioned, of their being lawfully published, nor shall any Per- 
son presume, without such Certificate, to joyn the said Persons 
together in the holy Bands of Matrimony, unless the said Per- 
sons, so Intending to be Married and published as beforesaid, 
produce a License legally obtained, as by this Act is directed ; 
and every Clerk of the Peace offending contrary to the Direc- 
tions, true Intent and Meaning of this Act, or any Part there- 
of, shall, for every such Offence, forfeit the Sum of Five 
Hii7idred Pounds, lawful Money aforesaid, any thing in this 
or any other Act to the contrary hereof in anywise notwith- 
standing. 

"7. If any Persons published as before directed, shall be 
joyned together in the Bands of Matrimony without first hav- 
ing had the Consent of their Parents or Guardians or Persons 
under whose Care they at that Time shall be, it shall and may 
be lawful for the Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians or 
Person or Persons under whose Care such Minor shall at that 
Time be, to put the said Bond in Suit in the Supream Court 
of this Province, or in any the Inferior Courts of Common 
Pleas in any County within the same, where the Cause of Ac- 
tion shall arise, and recover to the use of such Parent, Guard- 
ian or other Person before-mentioned, empowered, by this Act, 
to sue for the same, the Penalties in such Bond contained, 
such Parent, Guardian or other Person having first given Se- 
curity for the Paying the Costs of Suit, as in and by this Act 
is before directed and appointed. 

"8. Neither this Act, nor any Part thereof, shall be con- 
strued to be meant and intended to prohibit the Marrying with- 
in any Degrees of Affinity or Consanguinity, but such only as 
by the Laws and Statutes now in Force, or hereafter to be in 



PRACTICE REGARDING MARRIAGE LICENSES. CV 

Force, within his Majesties Kingdom of Great Britain, are or 
shall he prohibited. 

"9. It shall and may he Lawful for all or any Religious So- 
cieties in this Province, to joyn together in the holy Bands of 
Matrimony, such Persons as are of the said Society, according 
to the Rules and Customs of the Society they appertain to, 1 
provided they have the Consent of Parents, Guardians, or of 
such Person under whose Care and Tuition they are, signified 
in Writing, under the Hand or Hands of such Parent or 
Parents, Guardian or Guardians, or such Person or Persons 
under whose Care and Tuition the said Persons so to be Mar- 
ried are, any thing in this Act to the contrary, in anywise not- 
withstanding."- 

THE PRACTICE REGARDING MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Although the Act of 1 719 in terms relates only to the mar- 
riage of minors, it is evident from the records that the cus- 
tom of " marrying by license," as it was called, became more 
general from this time. This fact may have been due to the 
impression that licenses were required in all cases where there 
had been no publication of the banns — which, indeed, public 
sentiment required among church-going people — but largely, 
no doubt, because of the rapidly increasing population of an 
unsettled character, and the growing reluctance of amorous 
swains and maidens to have their intentions proclaimed from 
the pulpit, or published at the church door. 

The practice seems to have been this : the blank bonds and 
blank marriage licenses (the latter signed by the Governor) 
were distributed to certain public officers — usually the county 
clerks. Upon the execution and delivery to them of a mar- 
riage bond they would fill out and issue the license to the anx- 
ious bridegroom, who would take it and his prospective bride 
before a minister or a justice of the peace, who was thereby 
authorized to perform the marriage ceremony without proof 

1 This preserved Friends' customs. And see the Acts of East Jersey and of 
West Jersey, in 1683, p. lxxxiv, infra. 

2 The Act as above given has been transcribed carefully from the compilation 

of New Jersey statutes known as Kinsey's Laws. Philadelphia, 1732. pp. 96-101. It 
is also found on pp. 53-57 of Allinson's Laws. 1776. 



CV1 PRACTICE REGARDING MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

of the publishing of banns, or the consent of parents or 
guardians. The license was retained by the person celebrat- 
ing the marriage, and ultimately went the way of waste paper, 
as very few have been preserved. The bonds were filed 
with the Secretary of the Province, and seem to have been 
kept with much care. Ultimately, they were brought together 
from Perth Amboy and Burlington, the depositaries of the rec- 
ords of East Jersey and of West Jersey, lespectively, and were 
filed in the office of the Secretary of State, at Trenton, about 
1790. 

Prof. Kalm, writing at Raccoon, New Jersey, under date 
of December iS, 1748, thus describes the usage as to marriage 
licenses : 

" All persons who intend to be married, must either have 
their banns published three times from the pulpit, or get a li- 
cence from the governor. The banns of the poorer sort of 
people only are published, and all those who are a little above 
them get a licence from the governor. In that licence he de- 
clares that he has examined the affair, and found no obstacles 
to hinder the marriage, and therefore he allows it. The licence 
is signed by the governor; but, before he delivers it, the bride- 
groom must come to him in company with two creditable and 
well known men, who answer for him that there really is no 
lawful obstacle to his marriage. These men must subscribe a 
certificate, in which they make themselves answerable for, and 
engage to bear all damages of, any complaints made by the re- 
lations of the persons who intend to be married, by their 
guardians, their masters, or by those to whom they may have 
been promised before. For all these circumstances the gov- 
ernor cannot possibly know. They further certify that nothing 
hinders the intended marriage, and that nothing is to be feared 
on that account. For a licence they pay five and twenty shil- 
lings in Pennsylvania money, at Philadelphia. 1 The governor 
keeps twenty shillings, or one pound, and the remaining five 
shillings belong to his secretary. The licence is directed only 
to protestant clergymen. The quakers have a peculiar licence 
to their marriages. But as it would be very troublesome, es- 

1 This in Pennsylvania, but the account applies to New Jersey. 



PRACTICE REGARDING MARRIAGE LICENSES. CV11 

pecially for those who live far from the governor's residence to 
come up to town for ever) 7 licence, and to bring the men with 
them who are to answer for them, the clergymen in the coun- 
try commonly take a sufficient number of licences and certifi- 
cates, which are ready printed, with blanks left for the names ; 
thev give them occasionally, and get the common money, one 
pound, five shillings, for each of them, besides something for 
their trouble. The money that they have collected, they de- 
liver to the governor as soon as they come to town, together 
with the certificates, which are signed by two men, as above 
mentioned ; they then take again as many licences as they think 
sufficient; from hence we may conceive that the governors in 
the English North American colonies, besides their salaries, 
have very considerable revenues. 

" There is a great mixture of people of all sorts in these 
colonies, partly of such as are lately come over from Europe, 
and partly of such as have not yet any settled place of abode. 
Hence it frequently happens that when a clergyman has mar- 
ried such a couple, the bridegroom says he has no money at 
present, but would pay the fee at the first opportunity : how- 
ever he goes oft' with his wife, and the clergyman never gets 
his due. This proceeding has given occasion to a custom 
which is now common in Maryland. When the clergyman 
marries a very poor couple, he breaks oft' in the middle of the 
Liturgy, and cries out, Where is my fee? The man must then 
give the money, and the clergyman proceeds; but if the bride 
groom has no money, the clergyman defers the marriage till 
another time, when the man is better provided. People ot 
fortune, of whom the clergyman is sure to get his due, need not 
fear this disagreeable question, when they are married. 

" However, though the parson has got licences to marry a 
couple, yet if he be not careful, he may get into very disagree- 
able circumstances; for in many parts of the country there is a 
law made, which, notwithstanding the governor's licence, 
greatly limits a clergyman in some cases. He is not allowed 
to marry a couple who are not yet of age, unless he lie certain 
of the consent of their parents. He cannot marry such stran- 
gers as have bound themselves to serve a certain number of 



CV111 A SWEDISH CRITICISM. 

years, in order to pay oft* their passage from Europe, without 
the consent of their masters ; if he acts without their consent, 
or in opposition to it, he must pay a penalty of fifty pounds, 
Pensylvania currency, though he has the license, and the cer- 
tificate of the two men who are to answer for any objection. 
But parents or masters give themselves no concern about these 
men, but take hold of the clergyman, who is at liberty to prose- 
cute those who gave him the certificate, and to get his damages 
repaid. With the consent of the parents and masters, he may 
marry people without danger to himself. No clergyman is al- 
lowed to marry a negro with one of European extraction, or 
he must pay a penalty of one hundred pounds, according to the 
laws of Pensylvania." 1 

Acrelius gives a somewhat similar account, but in a bitter 
spirit, regretting the Swedes' departure from their ancient cus- 
toms : 

' % Marriage is quick, and not according to rule. To be 
published three Sundays and then married is only for poor peo- 
ple. The law of the land permits a much shorter way, which 
is more agreeable and more used, except that it costs money. 
The Governor has a right to license marriage without the pub- 
lication of the banns. In every county office marriage licenses 
are issued in this wise ; that the bridegroom gives his bond to 
pay to the Governor from five to ten thousand dollars copper, 
according to the ability of the applicants, if it should be found 
that the marriage of the persons named therein is not lawful. 
Thereupon a Manifest is issued, which is called a License, in 
the name of the Governor, to some Protestant Minister to per- 
form the marriage ceremony. And as this gives the Governor 
a considerable income, so he quite willingly allows the Minis- 
ters themselves to keep such a license in blank with his name 
subscribed, for which payment is made when the bonds are 
handed in. The abuses of this are indescribable. Yet such a 
marriage license is usual throughout the whole English govern- 
ment, although now much more restricted than formerly. Our 
Swedish people, as naturalized Englishmen, dance to the same 
tune, and our Swedish men who settle here find an equal 

i Kalm, as cited, II.. 25-29. 



A SWEDISH CRITICISM. C1X 

pleasure, or are compelled thereto to gratify their brides, who 
would rather break off their engagements than be proclaimed 
in church. But when such a license comes to the bridal pair, 
in season or out of season, even if it be in the middle of the 
night or early in the morning, if they so please with more or 
less company, then the marriage immediately takes place. The 
bride is in her usual dress, so that in that respect she cannot 
be distinguished from any of the company. Very few cele- 
brate their marriage with a meal and entertainment. Plays 
and dancing are but little in use, and are usually counted as 
among loose and disreputable sports. Seldom do the Minis- 
ters prevail upon any bridal parties to go to church ; but if this 
is done, the marriage takes place after service. The old speak 
of the joy with which their bridal parties formerly came to 
church and sat during the whole service before the altar; but 
when it comes to the time for their own children to do so, then 
they either run off to some English Minister with a license, or 
the parents are afraid of this, or get some other reason for it, 
and so it is impossible any more to root out such an inveterate 
abuse." 1 

It may be added here, that about 1S80 the then Secretary of 
State — Henry C. Kelsey — caused the marriage bonds in his 
office to be arranged and bound in thirty-two stout folio vol- 
umes, and an index of the same to be prepared, in two volumes 
— one of the men, and the other of the women. The index 
also includes the names of persons to whom licenses were is- 
sued prior to the Act of 1 7 1 9, as shown by the entries in the 
records in the same office. 

HOSTILITY TO THE MARRIAGE LICENSE SYSTEM. 

The quotations from Kalm and Acrelius indicate the char- 
acter of the opposition to the system of requiring marriage 
licenses. It was for the rich, rather than the poor. A license 
cost a man a month's wages or more. When the Stamp Act 
was passed, in 1765, this was regarded as so unconscionable an 
additional burden that by common consent it was not enforced 
so far as marriage licenses were concerned, in New Jersey, 2 

1 Acrelius' New Sweden, 356. 

2 N. J. Archives, XXIV., 687. 



CX HOSTILITY TO THE MARRIAGE LICENSE SYSTEM. 

The clergy of the Church of England viewed the practice — 
coupled as it was with provisions for marriage by civil magis- 
trates, as an unwarrantable attack on the church and on their 
own prerogatives. The Rev. Richard Backhouse, writing 
from Chester, Perm., May 14, 1730, to the Secretary of the 
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, 
says : 

" We live in a Government which is a stepmother to our 
Church, who can't rest contented only with taking away our 
properties and perquisites and giving them lo others, But now 
has struck even at constitution itself bv making an Act 1 which 
not only prohibits us to publish but to marry lawfully accord- 
ing to the constitution of the Church of England without the 
license of Parents, Guardians, Tutors, Masters, &c, &c, first 
had and obtained in writing under hand upon the penalty of 
£50. "2 

The Episcopal clergy of Pennsylvania and the three coun- 
ties upon Delaware, under date of 16 April, 1730, represented 
to the Society that this had " a manifest tendency to extirpate 
the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England out of the 
said Province. That it is arbitral}' and tyrannical ..." and 
they therefore urged that this " odious and tyrannical Law " be 
repealed " at the King's Council Board." 3 

The. clergy of the Church of England in New Jersey 
memorialized the Bishop of London on the subject, who at 
their request sent this representation to the Lords of Trade, 
under date of November 12, 176=; : 

" The Bishop of London at the request of the Clergy of 
the Province of New Jersey begs leave to represent to the 
Lords of Trade and Plantations, that by an old Law the 
licences for Marriages are directed to any Protestant Minister 
or Justice of the Peace, which however necessary at the first 
Establishment of the Colony to facilitate Marriages, when there 

1 'A Supplement to the Act Entituled An Act to prevent Clandestine Mar- 
riages." passedFeb. 13, i?.'u :ii). See Penn. Col. Records, III., 379-80. The art was 
much tin; same as the New Jersey Act of 17-19. 

2 Historical Collections, relative to the American Colonial Church, edited by 
William .■slovens Perry, 1). L>. Pennsylvania. 1881, 167. 

3 ibid., 173-5. 



HOSTILITY TO THE MARRIAGE LICENSE SYSTEM. CXI 

were few Ministers in the Country, seems at present not only 
prejudicial to the Clergy, who are depriv'd of a considerable 
part of their Income, hut gives occasion to many Inconven- 
iences and abuses. 

" It appears by a letter from New Jersey dated Dec: 20th 
1760, that the Clergy of that Province petitioned their Gov- 
ernor (Mi. Boone) to alter the Direction of the Licences. By 
his Answer He did not think himself authorized by his Instruc- 
tions to comply with their Petition, as He thought such an Al- 
teration must take place by Order of the Lords of Trade upon 
the Bishop of London's Application. 

"The Clergy of New Jersey have repeated their request to 
the Bishop of London, who hopes, that the Lords of Trade 
and Plantations will take the matter into Consideration, and if 
they see no particular Objections will give their Instructions to 
the Governor of that Province, that for the future Marriage 
Licences may be directed only to a Protestant Minister of the 
Gospel." 1 

For some reason, the Lords of Trade prefeired to shift the 
responsibility upon Governor Franklin, to whom they wrote 
the following letter, dated Dec. 12th, 1765 : 

" The inclosed Memorial stating the propriety of Licences 
for Marriages in New Jersey being directed to the Clergy only, 
has been presented to Us by the Bishop of London. 

" If there is no Law in force, by which the Civil Magistrate 
is authorized to perform the Marriage Rites, or if long usage 
and custom has not established such a practice ; We see no ob- 
jection to what his Lordship purposes: But as it does not ap- 
pear to Us from any Information we can collect here, how the 
case stands in respect to this matter, we desire you will by the 
first opportunity acquaint Us, whether the civil Magistrates in 
New Jersey do or do not perform those Ceremonies; and if 
they do; whether it is by virtue of any declared Law, or by 
usage only ; and if the latter, whether such practice may in your 
opinion he altered in the manner proposed by the Bishop of 
London without Inconvenience or Complaint. "- 

Nothing came of these memorials. Civil marriage had 
been too long established by law and custom in New Jersey to 

1 N. J. Archives. IX., 504. -' Ibid.. 520. 



CX11 BISHOP WHITE ON MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

make it worth while for the politic Governor — steadfast 
Churchman though he was — to even suggest a change, espec- 
ially in a Province where the Dutch, the Presbyterians and the 
Quakers formed so large a proportion of the population. We 
do not find that he even replied to the Lords of Trade on the 
subject. 

BISHOP WHITE ON MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

The Rt. Rev. William White, Bishop of Pennsylvania, 
doubtless voiced a very general sentiment regarding marriage 
licenses in this forcible and comprehensive letter (November 
or December, 17SS,) to the Governor of that State: 

4i When I had ye Honor, yesterday, of stating to your Ex- 
cellency my Objections to ye present system of Marriage 
Licenses, & you condescended to recommend to me ye pro- 
moting of a clerical Representation of ye Subject ; I expressed 
my Doubts as to ye Expediency of such a Measure. My Reason 
is, that I do not think ye Clergy, as such, materially interested 
in the correcting of ye Evil. We marry whom we please, un- 
der no other Restriction than what should prevail in every 
Line of Life, if not Invading of ye Rights of others. It is 
True, a Stranger may be imposed on, by his imagining that a 
license from Government is something more than a blank 
Paper. But to prevent this, I have made it my Business to 
advertise every such, of ye Church under my care, of ye State 
of ye Case & of his own Responsibility. 

k ' It was as a Citizen that I introduced ye Subject to your 
Excellency ; And ye evils which, as such, I reprobate in ye 
present System are as follows: 

"1. The Practice of issuing Licences is, as I apprehend, 
without any Foundation of Law. The only Passage in our 
Acts of Assembly that can be supposed applicable, & this can 
be so by Implication only, defines a lawful Licence to be one 
which contains ye Consent of the Parent or Guardian ex- 
pressed in ye Body of it. But such a Licence I never saw, nor 
do I know of any Clergyman who has. 

" 2dly. It seems to me (I speak it with submission) Dis- 
reputable to Government, to be in ye Exercise of an Act of 



BISHOP WHITE ON MARRIAGE LICENSES. CXI11 

Authority, disregarded (as far as I can hear) & that with Im- 
punity, by the most respectable Clergymen in this City ; who, 
instead of thinking themselves under any Ohligation, either of 
Law or of Morals, to ask for ye Licence, consider it rather as 
a Snare, against which they are to be on their Guard. 

" 3dly. The Licenses, as issued, are a most cruel Invasion 
of domestic Rights. For, as if it were not enough, that ye 
Citizen has ye Peace of his Family exposed to ye acts of ye 
desperate Adventurer, ye Villain robs him of his Child under 
a warrant with ye Seal of ye State annexed to it, & signed by 
ye first Magistrate. 1 I hope your Excellency will not mistake 
me ; I am as much an Enemy to domestic Tyranny as to ye 
civil ; And I know that there sho'd be a certain Age when 
young People may dispose of themselves without the Consent 
of their Parents. What I contend for is, that there should also 
be a Period, during which ye Parent should have an uncon- 
troulable Authority over ye Child, in ye Article of preventing 
Marriage. 

i; As to ye Bond of £100 taken at the office, I think noth- 
ing of it. To my Certain Knowledge it lias been taken, both 
before & since ye Revolution, from persons not worth 100 
pence ; And besides, there are Doubts as to ye Recovery of ye 
Penalty. I should be sorry to be understood, in this Part of 
ye Subject, as reflecting either on ye worthy Gentleman who 
has, nominally, ye Administration of ye Licences, or on his 
Deputy, who is supposed to do his Business. On ye contrary, 
I declare that I believe ye Fault to be, not in them, but in ye 
System, which while it prevails, must involve ye present 
Consequences, let who will have ye Administration. And be- 
sides, I have not seen above one or two Licences during Col. 
Biddle's Secretaryship, nor long before. 

"4thly. It may be of Importance to mention that ye Prac- 
tice has been stigmatized as illegal by ye Council of Censors. 
I speak from Report, not having seen their Resolves on ye 

i So early as June 6, 1709, the House of Representatives of Pennsylvania rep- 
resented to Lieutenant Governor Gookin that the granting of marriage licenses 
was " of an Evil Tendency, whereof many [stances may lie given, part Lcularly that 
of Israel Taylor, whose Daughter had like to have been stolen by Colour of a 
Lycense lately granted to one James Barber, of Chester County, this Province." 
—Penn. Col. Records. II.. 453. 
J 



CX1V RISHOP WHITE ON MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Subject. But my Authority is such that I cannot doubt ye 
Truth of it. 

" And now, Sir, if your Excellency is disposed to listen to 
my Proposal of a Remedy, it is as follows: 

" i. In regard to all Persons marrying agreeably to ye 
Notifications required by their respective religious Societies, ye 
Clergyman celebrating ye Marriage sh'd be responsible in a 
pecuniary, or, if you please, on repeated Transgression, in a 
corporal Penalty. If meer publication be made sufficient, it 
will amount to Nothing ; because it may be made (& is made in 
some congregations) in such a Manner as to be a meer Eva- 
sion. 

" -dly. As to Persons who may not come within ye Rules of 
any religious Society, some Mode of Publication sh'd be pro- 
vided for them. There is one indeed, but it is thought insuffi- 
cient. 

"3dly. The License sh'd be considered as a Dispensation 
from ye Notoriety of Publication ; And accordingly, Govern- 
ment sh'd assume ye Responsibility. The dispensing Officer 
should have a Reward proportioned to his Trouble & Risque. 
He sh'd be liable to a Penalty according to ye Damage sus- 
tained, at ye Discretion of ye Court, within certain Limits. He 
sh'd, therefore, be ye Judge of ye Amount of ye Security to be 
required; And if he take insufficient bondmen, it sh'd be at his 
Peril. The most material Difficulty that can occur in ye above 
Plan is ye discretionary power of ye Court. But I know no 
other Substitute for ye English Mode, which is ye taking of 
Oaths that there is no legal Impediment. 

" Your Excellency's desiring of me to state my Sentiments 
in writing has occasioned you ye Trouble of reading this long 
Letter. I am not tenacious of any Advice I have presumed to 
offer ; But am fixed in my knowledge of ye Fact, & I hope ye 
Freedom of ye Citizen will justify my declaring it, that ye pres- 
ent Practice makes Government contribute to ye sacrificing of 
ve Peace, Honor & Fortunes of Families." 1 

Two years later (Dec. 22, 1790) the Bishop, who was very 

Penn. Archives, XII., 314; 2d Series, II., 8-11; Perm. Col. Records, XV.. 614, 



BISHOP WHITE ON MARRIAGE LICENSES. CXV 

much in earnest on this subject, returned to the attack in an- 
other letter to Gov. Mifllin : 

" In Compliance with your Excellency's Intimation, I am 
emboldened to lay before you briefly, the Substance of what I 
formerly delivered to you more at large, on the present State of 
Law and Practice, on ye Subject of Marriage. 

" The Objections which I had the Honor to state to you 
against ye Marriage License, were that it is a taking of Money 
out of ye people's pockets, without even ye Colour of Law, 
that it had been stigmatized on this Acct. by the Council of 
Censors ; and that to my certain Knowledge, it Prostitutes ye 
chief Magistrates Name & invades Domestic Rights, by the 
Sanction it gives to clandestine Marriages. 

" It is true, the Abuse is considerably lessened, by ve intire 
neglect which is shown the License, by ye greater Number of 
the Clergy of all Denominations; who depend on their own 
Precaution against what they think the Snares of ye govern- 
mental License. But I submit to your Excellency whether it 
be not a great, Evil to leave Matters on this Footing. 

".It is now so well understood that no Man takes out a 
licence, but either thro' Ignorance or for a Cover to an illegal 
Transaction, that we ma)- presume the Doing without them 
will more and more prevail. It must be obvious to every Man 
how much this subjects the Happiness of families to the sudden 
Determination of very young people. Lender such a Dispensa- 
tion from all preparatory Measures, would it be surprising to 
hear, that a Girl of the Age at which Matrimony may be con- 
tracted, were induced by a Toy or by a Sugar Plumb, to put 
an artful Man into ye possession of a Fortune ; out of which he 
would onlv have to pay £^o for ye Irregularity of ye Manner. 
Impositions may happen far short of this, yet very distressing 
to Families and ruinous to the Peace of ye parties. 

" So far as ye Clergy in particular are concerned, it sub- 
jects ye conscientious to great Difficulties ; It gives those of ye 
opposite Description unbounded License ; and it subjects to ye 
Determination of either (and that in situations of great Deli- 
cacy) a Question involving Property and Character and Hap- 
piness. 



Cxvi DECAY OF THE LICENSE SYSTEM. 

" In what Manner an evil of so great Magnitude is to be 
remedied, I presume not to say. But I will hint what I think 
ye great Outline of ye Business; viz. : That in Favor of these 
who either cannot, or who, from conscientious Scruples, will 
not pay for a License, there should be pointed out an unequiv- 
ocal Mode of Publication; and that a License being a Dispen- 
sation from ye Notoriety of Publication, the Officers issuing it 
should be accountable and should receive a Fee proportioned 
to ye Trust and to ye Vigilance required in it." 1 

Wm. White. 

decay of the license system. 

Bishop White's statements as to the prevalent disregard of 
the law requiring marriage licenses are significant. They are 
borne out by the marriage bonds on file in the office of the Sec- 
retary of State at Trenton. There are about 10,000 such 
bonds. Of 48S, taken at random, S3 were given in the decade 
1751-60; 113 in the decade 1761-70; 107 in the years 1771 — 
So, and only 3S in the next ten years, there being but two in 
1790. While this examination may be inadequate for accurate 
generalizations it sufficiently indicates the rapid decay of the 
system. It seems to have fallen into disrepute directly after 
the Revolution. Perhaps it was regarded as a relic of royal 
privilege, pertaining to the Governors appointed by the crown, 
and so to be ignored with the passing of the royal authority. 
The Marriage Act of 1 719 remained on the statute books, how- 
ever, until 1795, although a dead-letter for several years before 
its repeal. 

By an act passed December 16, 17S4, in relation to the Or- 
dinary, etc., it was provided that his authority should extend, 
inter alia, to the granting of marriage licenses.- The Govern- 
or was also the Ordinary under the new constitution, but this 
act was the first to define his powers in the latter capacity, as 
it was the first to engraft upon our system of jurisprudence a 
court the functions of which in the mother country had always 
it-sided in the ecclesiastical tribunals. The power to grant li* 

1 Fenn. Archives, XII.. :il ; 2d Series, II., 10-11, 
:.' Paterson's Laws. 59, 



THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I/9S- CXV11 

censes was taken from the Ordinary by an act passed June 13, 
1S20. 

THE MARRIAGE ACT OF 1 795 . 

William Paterson having been engaged by the Legislature 
to revise the existing statutes and prepare new ones, a bill com- 
piled by him, entitled "An Act concerning Marriages," was 
laid before the Legislative Council, November 7, 1794, taken 
up the following Monday (November 10), and ordered a sec- 
ond reading, and was again considered on November 13, 1 ^ 
and iS, most of the last-mentioned day being spent in discuss- 
ing it, after which it was ordered to be engrossed. It was 
passed on the 26th, and sent to the House of Assemhly, whose 
concurrence was requested. As the Legislature was about to 
take its usual recess the bill went over until February iS, 1795, 
when 

" Mr. Elmer from the committee to whom was referred the 
Bill entitled, An Act concerning Marriages, reported the same 
with sundry Amendments ; which Bill, with the Amendments, 
were read, and after some Time spent thereon 

" Ordered That the further Consideration thereof be post- 
poned. 

Feb. 24. — "The House resumed the Consideration of the 
Bill, entitled " An Act concerning Marriages; and, after some 
Time spent thereon, 

" Ordered, That the said Bill be re-committed to Messrs. 
Elmer, Peck and Clement." 

The next day Mr. Elmer, from the committee, reported 
the bill " with sundry amendments," which were agreed to, 
and the bill ordered to be read a third time. On the day fol- 
lowing the bill was passed, and sent up to the Council the same 
day, and their concurrence asked in the amendments. On the 
following Monday, March 2, the bill was taken up in the 
Council, read a second time, and ordered to be re-engrossed 
with the Assembly's amendments, and on Wednesday (March 
4. 1795) the bill was finally passed. 1 

The following is the text of the Act of 1795 : 

1 Journals of the Council and of tin' Assembly. 






CKVlii THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I 795. 

"I. No man or woman shall intermarry, within the de- 
grees hereafter named that is to say, No man shall marry his 
Grandmother, [etc., etc.]. 1 

II. Every justice of the peace of this State, and every stated 
and ordained minister of the gospel, shall be, and hereby is au- 
thorized and empowered to solemnize marriages between such 
persons as may lawfully enter into the matrimonial relations. 2 

"III. No justice of the peace, minister of the gospel, or 
other person having or pretending to have authority to join 
persons together in the holy bands of matrimony, shall marry 
any male under the age of twenty-one years, or female under 
the age of eighteen years, unless the parent or parents, guard- 
ian or guardians or person or persons under whose care and 
government such minor or minors shall be, be present, and give 
their consent thereto, or until the minor applying to be mar- 
ried, whether male or female, shall have produced a certificate 
in writing, under the hand of the parent or parents, guardian 
or guardians, or if such minor, so applying to be married, 
have no parent or guardian, then under the hand of the per- 
son or persons, under whose care and government he or she 
may at that time be; 3 which certificate shall be proved to be 
genuine by the oath or affirmation of at least one person, of 
full age and discretion, who was present at the signing of the 
same, and affixed his or her name as a witness thereto; which 
oath or affirmation any justice of the peace, or minister of 
the gospel, authorized to solemnize marriages as aforesaid, is 
hereby authorized to take, and shall enter upon the back of 
the certificate. 4 

li IV. Every justice of the peace, minister of the gospel, or 
other person, having or pretending to have authority to join 

1 This list of prohibitions was usually found in the opening pages of the King 
James version of the Scriptures, as well as in the Prayer Hook of the Church of 
England. It had not been incorporated before in the laws of New Jersey. See 
Par. 76. of the Instructions to Lord Cornbury. p. xciv, ante. 

2 Compare this with the Act of the East Jersey Assembly, May 30, 1668, forbid- 
ding marriages except by "some approved Minister or Justice of the Peace within 
this Province, or some chief Officer, where such are not," p. lxxvi. ante. 

3 See the Act of the West Jersey Assembly. May 2-6. 1682, p lxxxiv. ante; and 
the Act of the East Jersey Assembly. Nov. 2. 1693, 11. xcii. ante. And compare 
with Sees. 1 and 2 of the Act of 1719. pp. xcix-c. ante. 

i Compare with Sec. 3 of the Act of 1719. p. ci, ante. 



THE MAKHIACIK ACT OF 1 795 • CXi.X 

persons in marriage, who shall many any minor or minors, 
hy virtue of a certificate had and proved as above directed, 
shall register the same, or cause it to be registered in a book 
by him to be kept for the purpose of registering of marriages, 
and within three months after, transmit the original certificate 
to the clerk of the county, in which the marriage was solem- 
nized, to be by him filed in his office. 

" V. If any justice of the peace, minister of the gospel, or 
other person, having or pretending to have authority to join 
persons together in the holy bands of matrimony, shall marry any 
minor or minors, without the consent of the parent or parents, 
guardian or guardians, person or persons, having the care and 
government of such minor or minors, had and obtained, ac- 
cording to the direction of this act, and contrary to the true 
intent and meaning thereof, every such justice of the peace, 
minister of the gospel, or other person, having or pretending 
to have authority to join persons together in the holy bands of 
matrimony, shall, for every such offence, forfeit three hun- 
dred dollars, to be recovered, with costs of suit, by action of 
debt or information, in any court of record of this State, by the 
parent, guardian, or person having charge of such minor, as 
shall be so joined in marriage as aforesaid, the one half of the 
said forfeiture to be paid to the treasurer of the State, for the 
use of the State, and the other half to be for the use of the 
parent, guardian, or other person, having charge of such 
minor, who shall prosecute the same to effect. 1 

"VI. Every justice of the peace, and minister of the gos- 
pel, shall make and keep a particular record of all marriages 
solemnized before him, and transmit a certificate of everv par- 
ticular marriage (containing both Christian names and sir- 
names) within six months after the solemnization thereof, to 
the clerk of the court of common pleas for the county, in which 
the marriage was solemnized. 

t; VII. If any justice of the peace, or minister of the o- s- 
pel, shall neglect, omit, or refuse to make return to the clerk 
of the county as aforesaid, of all the marriages by him pro- 
nounced, he shall, for every such offence, forfeit the sum of 

> Compare with Sec. 2 of the Aft of 1719. p. c, ante. 



CXX THE MARRIAGE ACT OF I 795. 

fifty dollars, to be recovered, with costs, by the clerk of the said 
court of common pleas, or any other person, who shall prose- 
cute for the same, by action of debt or information, in any 
court having cognizance thereof. 

" VIII. The respective clerks of the courts of common pleas, 
in and for the several counties of this State, shall register and re- 
cord all such returns of marriages at large in a book to be kept 
for that purpose, and no other, within the space of one calendar 
month after receiving the same, for which service the said 
clerks respectively shall be allowed and receive, for each and 
every entry aforesaid, the sum of twelve cents, to be paid by 
the persons married to such justice of the peace, or minister, 
who shall perform the ceremony, and by such justice or min- 
ister, with the certificate thereof, be transmitted to the clerk ; 
and if any such clerk shall refuse, neglect or omit to register 
and record, within the said time, any such return so to him 
made or any part thereof, he shall forfeit the sum of one hun- 
dred dollars, to be recovered, with costs, by any person, who 
shall prosecute for the same, by action of debt or information, 
in any court having cognizance thereof. 

" IX. It shall and may be lawful for every religious soci- 
ety in this State to join together in marriage such persons 
as are of the said society, according to the rules and customs 
of the society, to which they belong ;' provided, that the clerk 
or keeper of the minutes, proceedings, or other book of the 
religious society, wherein such marriages shall be had and 
solemnized, shall make a true and faithful register of all mar- 
riages solemnized, in the society, in the book by him kept. 

" X. Such books of marriages, so kept by the respective 
clerks of the court of common pleas, and by the clerks of such 
religious societies, as are authorized to solemnize marriages 
by the preceding section of this act, shall be admitted as evi- 
dence in all courts of law and equity in this State. 

"XI. If any justice of the peace, or minister of the gos- 
pel, shall wilfully and knowingly make a false return of such 
marriages, or any of them, to the said clerk of the court of 
common pleas, or if the said clerk of such court shall wil- 

1 Substantially the same as the first part of Sec. 9 of the Act of 1719. 



LATER LEGISLATION. CXXl 

fully and knowingly make a false entry, register and record of 
any return of marriages, so to him made, in the said book by 
him before directed to be kept; or if any clerk or keeper of 
the minutes, and proceedings of such religious societies, as are 
authorized to solemnize marriages by this act, shall wilfully 
and knowingly make a false entry, register and record of such 
marriages, or any of them, then every such person, so offend- 
ing, shall be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor, and, on con- 
viction, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, at 
the discretion of the court. 

"XII. The act entitled, ''An act to prevent clandestine 
marriages," passed the twenty- seventh day of March, in the 
year of our Lord, one thousand, seven hundred and nineteen, 
be, and the same is hereby repealed." 1 

The several provisions in this act, requiring registers of 
marriages to be kept by the justices or ministers officiating, 
were taken from the English Marriage Act of 1754. The East 
Jersey Assembly had passed an act at the session begun at 
Elizabethtown, November 5, 1675, requiring registers of mar- 
riages to be kept by the town clerks, and the Fundamental 
Constitutions of East New Jersey, 16S3, provided for a regis- 
ter in each county for births, marriages and burials. The 
West Jersey Assembly enacted, May 2-6, 1682, that marriages 
should be registered in a public register, and by act of March, 
1682-3, required certificates of marriage to be entered in a reg- 
ister of the town and county, " where it is finished." 2 Thus, 
the sections in the act of 1795 providing for public registra- 
tion of marriages were re-enactments of laws which had exist- 
ed in New Jersey for more than a century. 

LATER LEGISLATION, 

The act of 179S was drawn with such artificial skill, and so 
accurately reflected public sentiment, that it remained on the 
statute-books without change for exactly sixty-one years. Then 
a supplement was passed (approved March 4, 1856), evidently 
to cover some particular case of recent occurrence. This legal- 

1 Paterson's Laws. 1799. folio ed., 15S-160. 

2 Learning and Spker, 100, 163, '^36. -146. 



CXX11 LATER LEGISLATION. 

ized a marriage, acknowledged by any religious society in this 
state, where either of the parties had belonged to the society at 
the time of marriage, the same as if both parties were mem- 
bers thereof. 1 

Ten years later a second supplement was enacted (ap- 
proved April 4, 1S66), which in effect amended Sec. III. of 
the act of 1 795 » by adding this clause : 

" Should the person called upon to solemnize the marriage 
not be satisfied with the declarations of the parties desiring 
marriage, that they are of lawful age, he shall administer an 
oath or affirmation that they are of lawful age, of which oath 
or affirmation he shall make a certificate and file with the rec- 
ord of the marriage in the office of the clerk of the county, 
which certificate shall be his justification should said parties de- 
ceive him as to their age." The second section re-enacted Sec. 
V. of the former act.~ 

The next supplement to the act of 1795 merely "extended 
to and conferred on the mayor of every incorporated city, town 
or borough of this state," the powers conferred on justices of 
the peace by the second section of the original act, to solemnize 
marriages. 8 

The Marriage Act of 1795, amended as above, was consol- 
idated with various other statutes, in " An act concerning mar- 
riages, births and deaths — Revision," approved March 27, 
1874, the essential features of the original act being retained, 
with but slight changes. 4 

A general revision of the marriage laws, entitled "An Act 
concerning marriages [Revision of 1902]," approved April 3, 
1902, embodied all the existing statutes on the subject, includ- 
ing a requirement for a marriage license to be issued by the 
county clerk, where both the parties are non-residents of New 
Jersey ; where the male applicant for a license is under twenty- 
one, or the female applicant is under eighteen, the consent of 
the parents or guardian of such minor is requisite to the issu- 
ing of the license. 

1 Laws of 1856, p. L-20 2 Laws of 1866, p. 960. 

3 Laws of 1872. p. 27. 4 Gen. St., 2003. 

s Laws of 1902. p. 490. The Marriage License Act was approved May 18, 1897 
(P. L. 1897, p. 378). 



LEGISLATIVE DIVORCES. CXXlll 

DIVORCES BY THE LEGISLATURE. 

For more than a century alter the conquest of New Neth- 
erland by the English, divorces were granted in New Jersey — 
if granted at all — only by the Governor.' Otherwise there 
lav an appeal to the ecclesiastical courts in England. In 1772 
there was a unique departure from this practice, when the 
Legislature passed an act entitled "An Act to dissolve the 
Marriage of David Baxter with Margaret his Wife late Mar- 
garet McMurtrie." There is nothing to explain why the 
Governor had not granted this divorce. Perhaps the evidence 
adduced before him satisfied him of the essential propriety of 
a divorce, but was legally insufficient. The bill originated 
in the House, was promptly concurred in by the Council, and 
received the assent of Governor Franklin on September 26, 
1772. But when it was laid before the King in Council for the 
royal approbation it was promptly disallowed, September 1, 
1 773' an( ^ instructions were at the same time issued to all the 
Governors in North America to withhold their assent to any 
bills "for the divorce of Persons joined together in holy Mar- 
riage" — so shocked were the King and his advisers at this ex- 
traordinary departure from all precedents."- 

Although the so-called constitution of 1776 was silent on 
the subject of divorce, it so far modified the powers of the 
Governor as to vest in him judicial powers only in his capac- 
ity as chancellor, as ordinary or surrogate-general, and as a 
member of the court of appeals, in the last resort, in all 
causes of law, as theretofore. This seemed to leave it optional 
with the Legislature to exercise the divorcing power, 3 but that 
body was slow to act in that direction, and from 1776 to 1780 
only three couples w r ere divorced by legislative act. From 1781 

1 From a letter to Brigadier Hunter. Governor of New Jersey and New York, 
bearing date March 27, 1711. it may be inferred that the practice in divorce cases 
was by petition, of which, notice was given to the defendant, ami the matter re- 
ferred by the Governor to a magistrate of the vicinage to investigate, perhaps 
taking depositions. See N. Y. Col. Docs.. V.. 215. No records of the New Jer- 
sey Court of Chancery prior to 1TG are known to exist. The published reports 
begin with the January Term. 1830. 

2 N. J. Archives : XVIIL, 334-5, 338, 371 ; X.. lit) I1J: N. Y. Col. Docs.. VIII., 102. 

3 The constitution of 1776 vested " tlie government of the Province" in the 
Governor, Legislative Council, and General Assembly, the legislative depart- 
ment thereby appearing to be supreme. 



CXX1V DIVORCES BY THE COURT OF CHANCERY. 

to 1790 but two such acts were passed; during the next ten 
years there were eight; in 1S01-1S10 there were only four, 
while in the ensuing decade the number jumped to twenty- 
five, increasing to forty-seven in 1S21-1S30, and to 109 in 1 83 1 — 
40, and in the next four years no less than sixty-two acts 
were passed by the Legislature, divorcing as many couples 
from the bonds of matrimony. In the nature of things there 
could be no judicial investigation into the reasons for the 
divorces asked for, and they were granted through the favor 
and influence of some member of the Legislature friendly to 
the petitioners. During the period from 1776 to 1S44, while 
this practice prevailed, there were two hundred and fifty-nine 
divorces granted in this way, one hundred and fifty-two of 
them being of women from their husbands, and one hundred 
and seven of men from their wives; figures which suggest that 
the " weaker sex" was either less patient with matrimonial 
woes, or had a greater proportion to bear than men ; or that 
they exercised more persuasive powers with the legislators. 
The abuses of the system were becoming so alarming that 
when the new constitution was framed, in 1S44, there was em- 
bodied in it the provision, " No divorce shall be granted by 
the Legislature." 1 

DIVORCES BY THE COURT OF CHANCERY. 

Curiously enough, while the Legislature, from 1776 to 
1S44, asserted its authority in the granting of divorces, it never- 
theless sanctioned the judicial method, by an act passed De- 
cember 2, 17941 entitled "An Act concerning divorce and 
alimony." This was evidently one of Mr. Paterson's, and 
doubtless embodied in statute form the existing practice. It 
provided : 1st, that the court of chancery should have jurisdic- 
tion of all causes of divorce by this act directed and allowed ; 
provided the parties were inhabitants of the state. 2d, that the 
like process and course of practice and procedure should be 
had and pursued in causes of divorce, as in other equity 
causes, except that the answer of defendants should not be un- 
der oath. 3d, that divorces from the bond of matrimony should 

1 Art. IV., See. VII., PL 1. 



DIVORCES BY THE COURT OF CHANCERY. CXXV 

be decreed in case the parties were within the degrees prohib- 
ited hv law ; in case of adultery in either of the parties, and 
also for wilful, continued and obstinate desertion, for the term 
of seven years. 1 4th, divorces from the bond of matrimony 
were also authorized where either of the parties had another 
wife or husband living at the time of such second or other mar- 
riage. Divorce from bed and board was authorized for ex- 
treme cruelty in either of the parties.- By a supplement, 
passed March 4, 1795, provision was made for service on an 
absent defendant, by publication. 3 The law was revised, Feb. 
3, 1S1S, the jurisdiction being extended to causes where the 
parties are or should be inhabitants of this State at the time of 
the injury, desertion or neglect complained of, or "where the 
marriage shall have been solemnized or taken place within this 
State, and the complainant shall have been an actual resident 
in this State, at the time of the injury, desertion or neglect 
complained of; and at the time of exhibiting the bill." The 
other provisions were much the same as the act of 1 794^ 
which act, and the supplement of March 2, 1795, were re- 
pealed. 4 Another revision was passed February 16, 1820, 
which amended the first section by providing that the com- 
plainant should annex an oath to the bill of complaint that the 
complaint was not made by any collusion between the par- 
ties. 5 By an act passed Dec. 13, 1S24, it was provided that 
suits in the court of chancery, for divorce, might be by petition, 
instead of by bill, and the practice in that method was pre- 
scribed. 6 An act passed February 22, 1S43, amended the 
first section of the act of 1S20 by adding the requirement that 
where a divorce was prayed for on the ground of desertion, 
"the complainant or defendant shall have been a resident of 
this State for the term of five years, during which such deser- 
tion shall have continued." 7 By a supplement, approved Feb- 

1 Hi duced, by act passed February 22, 1843 (P. L. 1843, p. 18), to five years; by 
act approved March 20, 1857 (P. L. 1857, p. 399), to three years; and by acts ap- 
proved March 7, 1889 (P. L. 1889, p. 48), and March 5, 1890 (P. L. 1890, p. 34), to two 

years. 

2 Paterson's Laws. 143. : Ibid., 160. 

4 Laws of 1818, p. 20. ■"> Laws of 1820, p. 13. 

Elmer's Digest. 1838, pp. 139, 111. 7 Laws Of 1843, p. 18, 



CXXV1 DIVORCES BY THE COURT OF CHANCERY. 

ruary 21 , 1S71, the court was authorized to make and enforce or- 
ders in regard to the care, custody, education and maintenance 
of infant children of parents bringing suit for divorce, and where 
they are divorced. 1 The Revision, approved March 27, 1S74, 
provided (Sec. 4) that divorces might be decreed in cases of 
physical and incurable impotency at the time of marriage, 
"such marriages to be invalid from the beginning and abso- 
lutely void." 2 By an act approved May 11, 1886, it was pro- 
vided that the court should have ''jurisdiction of all cases of 
divorce in case of adultery committed out of this state, where 
the complainant or defendant was or shall have been a resi- 
dent of this state for three years next preceding the time when 
said bill was or shall hereafter be filed." 3 An amendment, ap- 
proved March 7, 18S9, gave the court jurisdiction of all causes 
of divorce and of alimony and maintenance, where either of 
the parties should be resident of this state at the time of the 
injury, desertion or neglect complained of, or where the mar- 
riage shall have been solemnized in this state, and the com- 
plainant shall have been an actual resident in the state at the 
time of the injury, desertion or neglect complained of and at 
the time of exhibiting the bill ; or where the adultery was com- 
mitted in this state, and either of the parties reside in this state 
at the time of exhibiting the bill ; or where either of the par- 
ties shall be a resident of this state at the time of filing the bill 
of complaint, and either party shall have been a resident of 
this state for the term of two years, during which such deser- 
tion shall have continued. 4 

The several statutes on the subject in 1902 were revised 
and consolidated into one, entitled "An Act providing for di- 
vorces and for decrees of nullity of marriage and for alimony 
and the maintenance of children [Revision of 1902]." 5 

1 Laws of 1871, p. 15. 

2 Revised Laws, 1S74, pp. 3-H; Gen. St., 1-207. The Court of Chancery. May T., 
1873, had refused to annul a marriage for impotence. 24 N. J. Eq., 19. Hence this 
statute. 

3 Laws of LS86, p. 315. 

4 Laws of 1889, p. 48; Gen. St.. 1273. 

5 Laws of 1902. p. 502. 



~3VC^ 



^.vi' 1 liOii* 1 (ill *$>£\ 





";■■• 


''/:■ : 'A/..'. 1 / 
/ y, n :■ ' 
Mi , . . / ' 





& 



' <*-*S - « "04 



f/iLl.1. 1 U 






b(. W^bnbxixo} 









;f^%^™^<^ 



" 6 






■t<r . 



7*3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



MALES. A 

Aaronson, Joseph, Barlington, and Hannah Folwell 1736 

Aarouson, Joseph, Burlington, and Achsiah Black 1782 

Aaronson, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Black 1787 

Ahbett, William, Bucks, Pa., and Catherine Conrad. 17G1 

Abbitt, Benjamii>, Salem, and Hannah Wicks, Salem 1770 

Abbitt, John, Hunterdon, and Elsie Akers 177!) 

Abbot, William, Jr., Hunterdon, and Agnis Edmunds 1778 

Abbot, James, Hunterdon, and Mary Maddock, Hunterdon 1749 

Abbot, Jonathan, Bucks, Pa , and Sarah Strickland, Bucks, Pa 1738 

Abbott, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Harden 1784 

Abelea, Melchesidec, Burlington, and Mary Power, Burlington 1780 

Abel, Andrew, and Christeena Schuyler 1779 

Abel, Dauiel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Starkey 1780 

Abit, Burroughs, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Thompson, Gloucester.. .. 1764 

Able, Edward, Gloucester, and Eleanor Starkey 1779 

Abraham, John, Middlesex, and Abigail Ferine, Middlesex 1759 

Abrahams, James, Jr., Matcheponix, and Anne Perine, Matcheponix . 1755 

Ackerman. David, Bergen, aud Margaret Bauta, Bergen 1749 

Ackerman, John, Bergen, and Christiana Peterson, Bergen 1760 

Ackerman, Peter, Middletown, and Elizabeth Patten, Middletown .. 1760 

Ackerman, Garrit, Bergen, and Mary Stag, Bergen 1761 

Ackerman, Abraham, Bergen, and Brache Blauvelt, Orange, N. Y....1763 

Ackerman, Abraham, Bergen, and Hopper 1764 

Ackerman, David, Bergen, aud Antje Vanhorn. 1768 

Ackerman, Abraham S., Bergen, and Cerstina Mead 1769 

Ackerman, David, Bergen, and Catherine Cuyper, Bergeu.. „ . . . 1769 

Ackerman, Albert, Bergen, and Antje Storr, Bergen 1771 

Ackerman, John, Bergeu, aud Elshe Van Bushkirk .1783 

Ackerman, Garret A., Bergen, aud Chari ty Hopper 1790 

Acorn, Samuel, Salem, aud Jane MoKean, Salem. 1763 

Acton, John, Salem, aud Mary Oakford, Salem 1772 

Acton, Benjamin, Salem, and Hannah Randolph, Cumberland 1773 

Acton, William, Salem, and Grace Ambler. 1776 

Adaire, Edward, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Fariss, Bucks, Pa 1732 



Aug. 


25 


Oct, 


9 


July 


24 


Feb. 


18 


Jan. 


4 


Feb. 


12 


April 


4 


Nov. 


15 


Nov. 


17 


July 


8 


Oct. 


30 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


11 


Aug. 


25 


April 


20 


Aug. 


11 


June 


17 


Mar. 


31 


Feb. 


1 


Nov. 


3 


July 


8 


May 


5 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


2 


April 


22 


Jan. 


22 


Aug. 


11 


June 


23 


Aug. 


27 


Jan. 


3D 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


18 


Aug. 


1 



2 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Adaire, William, Bristol, Pa., and Margaret Currant 1759 July 13 

Adair, John, Burlington, and Martha Crossley, Burlington 1774 Dec. 5 

Adams, Stephen, Burlington, and Sarah Rogers, Burlington 1733 Sept. 1 

Adams, Abel, Gloucester, and Tabitha Jay 1784 April 2G 

Adams, Abraham, Gloucester, and Ruth Peterson 1764 Jan. 27 

Adams, David, Gloucester, and Mary Covenover, Gloucester 1774 April 18 

Adams, David, Salem, and Mary Towusend 1775 Oct. 3 

Adams, David, Burlington, and Mary Ryner 178G May 22 

Adams, Ebenezer, Gloucester, and Rebecca Roberts 1781 May 16 

Adams, Fenwick, Salem, and Watkins Anne, Salem "1687 Aug. 18 

Adams, Isaac, Gloucester, and Bersheba Weldon, Gloucester 1730 Jan. 23 

Adams, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Hammel 1784 May 22 

Adams, Jeremiah, Gloucester, aud Mary Homau Gloucester 1738 Jau. 5 

Adams, John, Burliugton, and Judith Pettitt, Burlington 1737 Aug. 15 

Adams, John, Burlington, aud Margaret Fliut 1769 Nov. 19 

Adams, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Reeves, Burlington 1754 June 28 

Adams, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Susanna Rue 1782 Jan. 1 

Adams, Moses, Mansfield, and Elizabeth Iugler 1772 Sept 12 

Adams, Thomas, Burlingtou, and Elizabeth Bowker, Burlington.. .. 1771 Aug. 9 

Adams, Thomas, Philadelphia, aud Sarah Shaw, Burlington .1781 Dec. 24 

Adams, Thomas, Burlington, aud Ann Eyres 1785 May 30 

Adams, Williams, Salem, aud Hannah Evans, Salem 1762 Feb. 16 

Adams, William, Jr., Salem, aud Sarah Bradway 1764 Aug. 18 

Addams, David, Gloucester, and Catharine Wood, Gloucester 1745 June 20 

Addams, Nathan, Burlington, aud Sarah Oldale, Burlington 1745 Oct. 16 

Addams, Jonas, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Mary Arual, Gt, Egg Harbour 1750 May 3 

Addams, Richard, Gloucester, aud Rebecca Ireland 1784 June 26 

Addis, Thomas, Burlington, aud Auue English, Burlington 1749 July 10 

Addoms, John, Burlington, and Sarah Smith, Gloucester 1729 May 26 

Addoms, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Mary Ingerson 1774 Oct. 24 

Adkin, James, Morris, and Mary Budd, Morris 1751 May 4 

Adrianez, Gozen, Perth Amboy, aud Cornelia Banta, Hackensack 1743 June 11 

Adudell, William, Freehold, and Allet Honce, Freehold 1767 Aug. 29 

Aikens, Thomas, aud Margaret Rodman 1780 Oct. i 

Akerman, Philip, BurlingtJD, aud Hannah Stockton, Burlington 1771 Nov. 12 

Akers, Jonathan, Hunterdon, aud Catheriue Abbit 1780 Oct. 1 1 

Akin, Timothy, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Woolley, Monmouth 1748 Jan. 23 

Akin, Stephen, Monmouth, and Elizabeth King, Shrewsbury 1761 April 1 

Akly, Adam, Burliugton, and Mary Parker, Burlington. . 1766 Feb. 17 

Alberson, Jacob, Gloucester, aud Patieuce Chew, Gloucester 1731 April 16 

Albersou, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rose Hampton 1737 April 16 

Alberson, Abraham, Gloucester, aud Hannah Medcalf, Gloucester ...1737 Aug. 6 

Alberson, Ephraim, Gloucester, and Keziah Chew, Gloucester 1711 May 12 

Alberson, Abraham, Gloucester, aud Sarah Danice 1742 July 15 

Alberson, William, Gloucester, and Hannah Harrison, Gloucester. ...1747 June 9 

Alberson, Nathan, Gloucester, and Jane Thome, Gloucester 1764 Jan. 17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Albertsou, William, Gloucester, and Hannah Harrison, Gloucester 1747 

Albertsou, Avon, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Albertson, Gloucester ...1756 

Albertsou, Levi, Gloucester, and Keziah Roberts, Burlington 1756 

Albertsou, Isaac-, Gloucester, and Deborah Thome, Gloucester 1761 

Albertsou, Abraham, Gloucester, and Sarah Albertsou, Gloucester.. 1764 

Albertsou Aaron, Gloucester, and Margaret Wells, Gloucester 1765 

Albertson, Jacob, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Flanningham, Gloucester. 1770 

Albertson, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Mary Albertson 1773 

Albertsou, Ephraim, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Warsick 1775 

Albertson, Isaac, Gloucester, aud Sarah Thackery 1782 

Albertson, Ephraim, and Charity Langley 1782 

Alcott, Thomas, Burlington, and Martha Brauuiu 1780 

Alcott, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Anne Phifer 1782 

Alcott, Josiah, Burlington, aud Tab it ha O'Neal, Burlington 1782 

Alder, Bartholomew, Gloucester, aud Hannah Worthington, Gloucester. 1766 

Aldington, John, Bergen, aud Hannah Bauta, Bergen 1770 

Aldridge, Hermaun, Salem, aud Sarah England, Philadelphia 1733 

Aldridge, William, Gloucester, aud Rebecca Newell, Gloucester 1739 

Alen, John, Salem, aud Mary Hackings, Salem 1686 

Alexander, Alex., Philadelphia, aud Jane Hartt, Salem 1750 

Alexander, David, Salem, and Catharine Dunn, Salem 1762 

Alexander, George, Hunterdon, aud Mary Fleming, Hunterdon.. .. 1766 

Alexander, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Sevill, Burlington 1774 

Alexander, William Somerset, aud Janet Aikmau, Somerset 1750 

Alford, Benjamin, Woodbridge, and Deborah Martin, Woodbridge. . 1754 

Allaways, John, Burlington, and Dorothy Hughes, Burlington 1740 

Allen, Daniel, Gloucester, aud Mary Steelman 1728 

Allen, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth Alleu, Burlington 1730 

Allen, Benjamin, Burlington, and Patience Borden, Burlington 1737 

Allen, Jedidiah, Monmouth, aud Mary Chaml ess, Monmouth 1740 

Allen, William, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Walsh, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Allen, Joseph, Monmouth, and Desire Rogers, Monmouth 1742 

Allen, Benjamin, Burlington, and Deborah Sharp, Burlington 1744 

Alleu, Nathan, Monmouth, and Sarah Salter. . . 1743 

Alleu, Joseph, Monmouth, aud Sarah Jacksou, Monmouth 1740 

Allen, Ralph, Monmouth, aud Mary Bond, Monmouth .... 1742 

Alleu, James, Monmouth, and Catherine Newman, Monmouth 1747-8 

Alleu, George, Monmouth, aud Lydia Parker, Monmouth 1748-9 

Allen, David, Monmouth, aud Sarah Van Dike, Monmouth. . 1748 

Allen, Jedidiah, Monmouth, aud Mary Allen, Monmouth 1749 

Alleu, John, Somerset, and Isabel McCullough, Somerset 1749 

Alleu, William, Somerset, aud Sophia Slover, Hunterdon 1749 

Allep, Benjamin, Burlington, and Rebecca Sherwin, Chester 1749 

Allen, Joseph, Salem, and Hauuah Eldridge, Salem 1750 

Alleu, Peter, Lit. Egg Harbour, and Elizabeth Wheeler, Lit. Egg Har. 1751 
Allen, James, Burlington, and Hannah Phillips, Burlington 1754 



June 


15 


April 


23 


April 


24 


Jan. 


29 


June 


22 


April 


16 


Mar. 


12 


Aug. 


23 


Dec. 


28 


May 


7 


June 


15 


Dec. 


25 


July 


13 


Oct. 


29 


Dec. 


16 


Dec. 


13 


Oct. 


1 


June 


2 3 


Aug. 


10 


June 


16 


Dec. 


19 


Nov. 


29 


Mar. 


22 


Dec. 


3 


May 


1 


Jan. 


1 


Dec. 


25 


Mar. 


27 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


26 


Feb. 


5 


Feb. 


18 


Oct. 


25 


Oct, 


6 


Mar. 


2 


•May 


16 


Feb. 


2 


Mar. 


21 


July 


19 


Mav 


23 


Aug. 


8 


Sept. 


26 


Dec. 


7 


June 


18 


Aug. 


16 


Jan. 


1 



4 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Allen, Richard, New York, and Marah Cox, Shrewsbury. 1754 

Allen, John, Monmouth, and Ruth Howlan, Monmouth .1755 

Allen, David, Monmouth, and Sarah Cook, Monmouth 1759 

Allen, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Margaret Mairs 1760 

Allen, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Allen, Monmouth 1760 

Allen, Samuel, Burlington, and Martha Braning 1760 

Allen, Jedidiah, Salem, and Mary Thompson 1761 

Allen, Samuel, Burlington, and Theodosia Ellton, Burlington 1762 

Allen, Nathan, Salem, and Deborah Lipincott, Salem 1764 

Allen, Elisha, Salem, and Mary Smith, Salem 1765 

Allen, Chamless, Wilmington, Del., and Lydia Stewart, Wilmgtn, Del. 1766 

Allen, David, Salem, and Sarah Kent, Salem 1767 

Allen, John, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Brindley, Monmouth 1767 

Allen, Nathan, Monmouth, and Patience Bills, Monmouth 1767 

Allen, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Iradell, Burlington 1768 

Allen, John, Sussex, and Jean Dunlop 1768 

Allen, Elisha, Salem, aud Hannah Smith, Salem 1771 

Allen, John, Bergen, and Anne Earle, Bergen. . 1772 

Allen, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Jones, Burlington 1772 

Allen, Samuel, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Allen, Bucks, Pa 1773 

Allen, John, Burlington, and Anne Herbert, Burlington. 1774 

Allen, John, Somerset, and Sarah Edmunds 1775 

Allen, Charles, Cumberland, aud Rebecca Dare 1778 

Allen, Samuel, Morris, and Hannah Beach, Meudom 1779 

Allen, Samuel, New Jersey, and Nancy Anderson 1780 

Allen, Robert, Middlesex, and Ann Boggs 1780 

Allen, Gabriel, Bordentown, and Lydia Trench 1782 

Allen, Abraham, Burlington, and Sarah Pitman, Burlington 1782 

Allen, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Prickett 1783 

Allen, Joseph, Chester, and Rachel Cline 1783 

Aller, Joseph, Little Egg Harbour, and Sarah Crammer 1783 

Alleson, James, New Brunswick, and Anne Wells, New Brunswick 1739 

Alley, William, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Moore 1779 

Allgor, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Havens, Monmouth 1763 

Alliger, BeDJamin, Redingtown, and Cisley Bartrou 1780 

Alliu, Andrew, Monmouth, and Marah Crammer, Monmouth 1754 

Alliuder, Joshua, Burlington, and Mary Nixon 1733 

Alloways, Abraham, Burlington, and Hannah Banning, Burlington. .. 1773 
Alloways, Isaac, Burlington, and Christian Davidson, Burlington. ... 1773 

Alloways, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Shinn, Burlington 1774 

Alman, Joseph, Salem, and Catherine Lambson, Salem 1763 

Almond, John, Salem, and Rachel Brown. 1 785 

Alriche, Wessell, New Castle, Del., aud Rebecca Hancock 1757 

Alward, John, Woodbridge, and Ruth Cawood, Woodbridge 1754 

Alyea, Peter, Orange, N. Y., aud Marrity Bertholf, Orange, N. Y. . . . 1773 
Amack, John, Middletown, aud Sarah Carman, Middletown 1757 



Mar. 


25 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


5 


July 


28 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


25 


May 


4 


Mar. 


22 


Oct. 


16 


Sept. 


29 


Mar. 


2 


Mar. 


21 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


31 


May 


4 


April 


13 


Nov. 


10 


April 


8 


July 


3 


April 29 


Oct. 


27 


July 


16 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


14 


Dec. 


12 


May 


19 


Mar. 


11 


April 


[ 8 


Jan. 


7 


Mar. 


23 


June 


3 


Dec. 


17 


July 


29 


Nov. 


20 


June 


: 13 


Mar. 


10 


Aug. 


15 


Mar, 


21 


Jan. 


9 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


12 



Marriage licenses. 

A mack, Stephen, Monmouth, and Mary Heavilon, Freehold 1767 

Ammarman, Jacobus, Somerset, and Marica Haider, Somerset 1740 

Anderson, Joshua, Trent. hi, and Mary Wood, Burlington 1715 

Anderson, Tunis, Monmouth, and Abigail Eteid, Monmouth 1746 

Anderson, George, Jr., Somer.-et, and Matie Van Wickle, Somerset. . .1748 

Anderson, Elias, Monmouth, and Catherine Chamberlin. ... 1761 

Anderson, James, Cumberland, and Theodosia Elmer .... 1761 

Anderson, Ezekiel, Hunterdon, and Mary Combs, Middlesex 1761 

Anderson, Andrew, Burlington, and Martha Brock, Burlington 1762 

Anderson, John, Freehold, and Anna Loyd, Middlesex 1763 

Anderson, John, Essex, and Martha Freeman, Middlesex 1763 

Anderson, John, New York, and Mary Stilwell, Middletown 1763 

Anderson, David, Bergen, and Jane Stuart, Bergen 1768 

Anderson, Josiah, Burlington, and Sarah Anderson 1769 

Anderson, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Ann Bird 1772 

Anderson, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Thomson 1773 

Anderson, Andrew, and Phcebe Williamson 1775 

Anderson, James, Burlington, and Elenor Toy 1777 

Anderson, James, Morris, and Hannah Backhover 1779 

Anderson, John, Hunterdon, and Rebeccah Vanuoy 1779 

Anderson, Simon, Somerset, and Mary Van Hauglin 1781 

Anderson, Thomas, Sussex, and Esther Hughes 1781 

Anderson, David, Burlington, and Emelia Briggs 1783 

Anderson, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Catherine Hunt 1785 

Anderson, Thomas, Sussex, and Hannah Ewen 1786 

Anderson, Aaron, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Williamson 1786 

Anderson, David, Bergen, and Ruth Weed 1786 

Anderson, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Stevenson 1787 

Anderson, Andrew, Burlington, aud Patience Stockton 1791 

Anderson, Johu, Bergen, and Catherine Z ibrisky 1792 

Andrews, Edward, Burlington, aud Sarah Ong, Burlington 1694 

Andrews, Jacob, Burlington, aud Keziah Rider, Burlington 1764 

Andrews, Isaac, Gloucester, aud Hanuah Johusou, Gloucester 1767 

Andrews, John, Amwell, aud Rachel Chamberlin 1773 

Andrews, Johu, Burlington, aud Hauuah Parker, Burlington 1776 

Andrews, Peter, Gloucester, and Hanuah Cook 1779 

Andrews, Peter, Gloucester, aud Mary Cripps 1785 

Androvet, Johu, Richmond, N. Y., and Zipporah Wright, Rich'd, N. Y 17(7 
Audrovet, Peter, Staten Island, and Catherine Nichols, Staten Island.. 1756 

Angelo, Charles, Salem, aud Katherine Noxe, Salem 1690 

Auniu, William, Somerset, and Sarah Ross, Middlesex 1749 

Anuin, William, Somerset, and Sarah Davison.. 1 777 

Ansley, Thomas, Monmouth, and Rebecah Cocke 1760 

Antouittus, John, Monmouth, aud Sarah Vaudom, Monmouth 1761 

Autram, Thomas, Jr., Burlington, and Margaret Lamb, Burlington. .. 17.~>7 
Antram, Daniel, Burlington, aud Susanna Weaver , 1758 



Nov. 


7 


May 


7 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


4 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


30 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


19 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


7 


April 


1 


Dec. 


16 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


22 


Mar. 


9 


Aug. 


28 


Oct, 


17 


Jan. 


24 


Mar. 


30 


Oct, 


11 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


25 


Mar. 


19 


July 


24 


Dec. 


20 


Feb. 


10 


April 


9 


Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


8 


Mar. 


10 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


19 


Feb. 


7 


Sept. 


1 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


14 


Nov. 


30 


Oct, 


6 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


23 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


25 


Jan. 


30 



6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Antram, Isaac, Burlington, and Ruth Webb, Burlington 1773 

Antraui, David, Burlington, and Rebecca Bryan, Mount Holly 1773 

Antram, Joseph, Burlington, and Anna Merret, Burlington 1773 

Antram, Samuel, Burlington, and Charlotte Hawk 1781 

Antram, Thomas, and Anne Hancock 1783 

Applegate, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Parent, Middlesex . . 1729 

Applegate, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Pettitt, Middlesex 1736 

Applegate, Ebenezer, Monmouth, and Mary Imlay, Monmouth 1 743 

Applegate, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Buckalew 1744 

Applegate, Daniel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Hulet, Monmouth 1745 

Applegate, William, Monmouth, and Hannah Potter, Monmouth 1747 

Applegate, John, Monmouth, and Mary Cotterell, Monmouth . 1748 

Applegate. William, Middletown, and Elizabeth Ogborne, Middletown. 1758 

Applegate, Ezekiel, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Smock, Middlesex 1760 

Applegate, Jacob, Monmouth, and Catherine Manlees, Monmouth . . .1763 

Applegate, George, Burlington, and Sarah Fenton, Burlington 1763 

Applegate, Obadiah, Monmouth, and Bethena Vaughn ... 1772 

Applegate, Samuel, Burlington, and Jane Scroggins. 1777 

Applegate, Silas, Burlington, and Lydia Ivins 1777 

Applegate, John, Burlington, and Sarah Johnston 1785 

Archer, George, Monmouth, aud Diadame Dromau, Shrewsbury 1762 

Archer, Benjamin, New York, and Margaret Brown 1784 

Archer, John, Gloucester, and Anne Ong 1785 

Archibald, David, Bergen, and Antje Van Houten, Bergen 1774 

Areyansen, Resolvert, Bergen, and Deborah Verveelen, Orange, N. Y.1773 

Arden, Edward, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Morton, Burlington 1730 

Arden.l John, Burlington, and Margaret Keen, Pa 1774 

Arden, John, New York, aud Sarah Thurston, Woodbridge 1758 

Arell,2 Peter, New York, aud Hannah Shakeshaft, New York 1764 

Arrison, Ashford, Hunterdon, aud Euphemia Petenger, Hunterdon. . .1769 

Armourer, Edward, Philadelphia, and Ann Walker, Philadelphia 1733 

Armstrong, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Shiuu, Burlington 1764 

Armstrong, Henry, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Harvey, Monmouth 1766 

Armstrong, John, Middlesex, and Johanna Patten 176S 

Armstrong, William, Amwell, and Catherine Johnson 1776 

Armstrong, William, Burlington, and Joanna London, Burlington . . .1776 

Armstrong, William, Orange, N. Y., and Catharine Lawrence 1777 

Armstrong, William, Sussex, and Elizabeth Swayze, Oxford 1778 

Arnell, James, Burlington, and Mary Mott 1739 

Arnold, William, Monmouth, and Jane Lane, Monmouth 1746 

Aronson, Aaron, Burlington, and Rebecca Scattergood, Burlington. . . .1730 
Aronson, Joseph, Burlington, and Anne Marriott, Burlington 1749 

i In the body of the bond this name is written Harding, but the principal si^n 
Arden. 

- Entered in the body of the bond as Earle. which is probably correct, but si> 
Arell. 



Jan. 


26 


Feb. 


8 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


10 


Nov. 


25 


July 


18 


Oct. 


6 


July 


9 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


28 


Sept. 


27 


Mar. 


6 


Oct. 


6 


Aug. 


8 


Nov. 


14 


June 


26 


Jan. 


20 


Sept, 


18 


Oct. 


22 


Nov. 


27 


June 


14 


May 


26 


Aug. 


13 


Aug 


1 


Sept. 


5 


June 


4 


Sept. 


4 


Aug. 


30 


May 


9 


Jan. 


5 


July 


11 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


26 


Nov. 


26 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


3 


Apr! 


I 14 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


20 


s his name 


.med P 


eter 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. ; 

Aronson, Benjamin, Burlington, and Hope Folwell, Burlington 17G7 Mar. 13 

Arthur, William, Burlington, and Sarah Biggs, Burlington 1741 Nov. 2'.', 

Arven, James, Perth Amboy, and Catherine Myers, Perth Amboy 1755 April 4 

Asa, Jacob, Burlington, and Elizabeth Lee, Burlington 1780 Feb. 12 

Asay, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Atkinson 1779 Aug. 3 

Asay, Michael, Burlington, and Bethenia Simons 1783 Dee. 16 

Ash, George, Burlington, and Sarah Bates .... 1759 Sept. 24 

Ashbourn, Martin, Philadelphia, and Catharine Clark, Philadelphia. . 1728 Feb. 20 

Ash, William, New York, and Mary Montanyes 1783 Aug. 19 

Ashbrook, John, Gloucester, and Hester Hamilton 1732 July 21 

Ashbrook, John, Gloucester, and Mary Elwell, Greenwich 1736 June 28 

Ashbrook, Thomas, Gloucester, and Ann Gibson 1779 Feb. 4 

Ashburn, William, Chester, and Hannah Hugg, Chester 1750 July 21 

Ashbury, Ebeuezer, Salem, and Margaret Deffose, Salem 1694 July 19 

Ashfield, Lewis M., and Elizabeth Bedford 1748 Feb. 4 

Ashead, Amos, Burlington, and Cecilia Cheeseman, Burlington 1728 Aug. 14 

Ashley, John, Monmouth, and Prudence Maxeu, Middletown 1765 July 1 

Ashton, Isaac, Bucks, Pa , and Dorothy Carr, Bucks, Pa. ... 1736 Nov. 30 

Ashton, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Stillwell, Monmouth 1740 Feb. 5 

Asbton, John, Monmouth, and Catharine Taylor, Monmouth.... .. 1741 June 2 

Ashton, Robert, and Hauuah Fams worth 1747-8 Feb. 15 

Ashton, Johu, Monmouth, and Katherine Taylor, Monmouth 1742 Aug. 19 

Ashton, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Susannah Nutt, Bucks, Pa 1765 Jan. 26 

Ashton, John, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Fenton, Burlington 1765 Feb. 13 

Ashton, Joseph, Burlington, and Anne Helson, Burlington 1770 June 19 

Ashton, Thomas, Gloucester, and Hannah Hugg, Gloucester 1771 Jane 19 

Ashton, Eden, Hunterdon, and Margaret Londibank 1780 Aug. 17 

Asken, James, and Judith Anders 1774 June 13 

Aspinwall, Thomas, Piscataway, and Hannah Hull, Piscataway . ..1743 July 28 

Asson, William, Burlington, and Mary Piatt 1746 Feb. 9 

Asson, Thomas, and Margaret Cleveuger 1746 Feb. 9 

Atchley, Nathaniel, Middlesex, and Keziah Hull, Middlesex 1764 July 2 

Aten, Dirck, Huuterdon, and Judick Van Vliet 1745 Dec. 24 

Ateu, Derrick, Hunterdon, and Ariantie Longstreet, Hunterdon 1749 Aug. 16 

Aten, Gerardus, Reading Town, and Dinah Johnson, Reading Town. . 1756 Aug. 28 

Atkinson, William, Burlington, and Mary Bishop, Burlington 1731 Feb. 3 

Atkinson, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Aaronson, Burlington 1731 Feb. 10 

Atkinson, Johu, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Yaets, Bucks, Pa 1735 July 28 

Atkinson, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Reeves, Burlington 1736 Jan. 12 

Atkinson, Walker, Burlington, and Rachel Wallis, Burlington 1746 Sept. 10 

Atkinson, John, Burlington, and Sarah Folwell, Burlington 1754 Jan. 21 

Atkinson, James, Burlington, and Sarah Alison, Burlington 1756 May 11 

Atkinson, Moses, Burlington, and Rachel Shreve, Burlington 1761 Feb. 22 

Atkinson, John, Burlington, and Sarah Berry, Burlington ... 1761 Feb. 25 

Atkinson, Job, Burlington, and Mary Arison, Burlington 1761 Sept. 21 

Atkinson, John, Burlington, and Mary Cooper, Burlington . 1761 Nov. 12 



8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Atkinson, John, Burlington, Elizabeth Clevenger, Burlington . .. 1764 Feb. 8 

Atkinson, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Hillyer, Burlington 1767 Dec. 7 

Atkinson, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Chester, Burlington 1774 Aug. 18 

Atkinson, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Lippiucott 1779 April 22 

Atkinson, Samuel, Burlington, and Mariana Norton. . . 1779 May 25 

Atkinson, Amos, Burlington, and Mary Bishop 1779 Nov. 17 

Atkinson, Job, Gloucester, and Esther Sharp, Burlington 1780 Aug 17 

Atkinson, Joseph, Burlington, and Bebecca Garwood .... 1780 Dec. 20 

Atkinson, Isaac, Burlington, and Bosity Beats 1784 Mar. 17 

Atkinson, Moses, Burlington, and Elizabeth Powell 1784 Oct. 21 

Atkinson, Moses, New Jersey, and Sarah Abbot. 178G Oct. 31 

Aumack, Tunis, Shrewsbury, and Anne Killey, Shrewsbury 1758 Oct. 17 

Aurijanse, Aurie, Bergen, and Elizabeth Verveelen 1782 Nov. 1 

Austin, Amos, Burlington, and Esther Haines 1736 Sept. 27 

Arrstin, Edward, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Bower, Philadelphia ...1737 Sept. 27 

Austin, Francis, Burlington, and Deborah Allen, Burlington 1748 May 11 

Austin, Edward, Philadelphia, and Sarah Wetherby, Salem 1748 May 6 

Austin, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Austin, Burlington 1764 Sept. 20 

Austen, Seth, Burlington, and Lydia Nailor, Burlington 1770 Mar. 7 

Austin, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ballenger 1782 April 19 

Autor, Derick, Moriis, and Hannah Quick 1778 Jan. 16 

Aves, George, Gloucester, and Sarah Whitall, Gloucester . . 1730 Mar. 15 

Avis, George, Gloucester, and Hannah Rumford, Gloucester 1761 Jan. 30 

Avise, John, Gloucester, and Agnes Holmes, Gloucester 1765 April 8 

Avise, Jame s, Gloucester, and Mary Guest, Gloucester 1773 May 18 

Avise, l Joseph , Salem, and Sarah Bates 1781 Dec. 10 

Axford, Charles, and Bebecca Beekes 1735 Oct. 13 

Ayar, Moses, Cumberland, and Sarah Pettet, Cumberland 1777 July 16 

Ayars, John, Cu mberland, and Susannah Jerman, Hopewell 1751 Nov. 17 

Ayars, Joshua, Salem, and Zerviah Ayars. . 1764 Mar. 13 

Ajdelow, Caleb, Richmond, N. Y., and Ann Eaccow, Richmond, N. Y. 1763 July 11 

Ayers, Moses, Somer set, and Jane Chambers, Somerset 1739 Nov. 13 

Ayers, Obadiah, Somerset, and Dorothy Landol 1746 Feb. 12 

Ayers, Frazee, M iddlesex, and Phebe Bloomfield, Middlesex 1749 Feb. 24 

Ayers, Enos, Woodbridge, and Martha Gold, Woodbridge. . 1749 May 

Ayers, Obadiah, Middlesex, and Mary Wessels, Peith Amboy 1750 Uec. 5 

Ayers, Bargin, Salem, and Susaunah Gilman 1754 May 28 

Ayers, Caleb, Cuinbeilaud, and Amy Dunn ...... 1760 July 30 

Ayers, Robert, Perth Amboy, and Ann Jackson, Perth Amboy 1763 Dec. 31 

Ayers, James, Woodbridge, and Hope Bloomfield, Woodbridge 1743-4 Mar. 13 

Ayers, Samuel, Middletown, and Martha Wilson, Middletowu 1760 Nov. 7 

Ayrs, Valentine, Burlington, and Elizabeth Parker, Burlington 1749 April 3 

i Thus signed'to the bond, but entered in the body of the instrument as Evas. 



marriage licenses. 



A 



FEMALES. 

Aarison, Ann, Burliugton, and David Kockhill, Burliugton. 1758 

Aaronson, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Atkinson, Burlington 1731 

Aastley, Bershaba, and Nicholas Hight, Middlesex 1774 

Abbit, Catherine, and John Akers, Hunterdon 1780 

Abbit, Sarah, and Enoch Lanning, Hunterdon 1785 

Abbot, Sarah, and Moses Atkinson, New Jersey 178G 

Abbott, -lane, and Edward Smout. . .'. 1691 

Abel, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Burgin, Cumberland. . 1761 

Abraham, Hannah, South Amboy, and William Jolly, South Amboy.. 1759 
Abrahams, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Enoch Davis, Middletown. . .1754 
Abrahams, Margaret, Middlesex, and Thomas Ericksou, Middlesex. . . .1761 

Abrahams, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Combs, Perth Amboy 1748 

Abrahams, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and John Combs, Jr., Perth Amboy. 1753 

Ackerly, Sarah, and Richard Thomas, Windsor 1778 

Ackerman, Altje, Hackensaek, aud William Wright, Hackensack.. ...1761 

Ackerman, Altie, and Cornelius Van Horn, Bergen 1790 

Ackerman, Dorcas, and Josejih Feighte, Bergen 1790 

Ackermau, Elizabeth, aud John Pulishfalt, Bergen . 1780 

Ackerman, Mary, Bergen, and John Jones, Bergen 1764 

Ackerman, Rachel, Bergen, and Peter Earle, Bergen 1767 

Ackermau, Wyntye, and John Van Buskirk, Bergen 1789 

Ackermon, Rachel, Bergen, and Albert Vandene, Bergen 1753 

Ackerson, Rachel, New York, and David Blauvelt, New York 1765 

Ackley, Sarah, and William Watson, Gloucester 1783 

Acres, Elizabeth, and Daniel Graaf, Hunterdon 1768 

A lams, Abigail, Egg Harbour, and John Sleelmau, Egg Harbour 1755 

Adams, Aun, aud John Doughteu, Burliugton 1762 

Adams, Barbara, Gloucester, and Stephen Morris, Gloucester. ....... 1731 

Adams, Diadame, and Benjamin Brightwell, Burlington 1764 

Adams, Dinah, Gloucester, and Alexander Fish, Gloucester 1737 

Adams, Elizabeth, Salem, aud Anthony Windsor, Salem 1683 

A lams, Elizabeth, Gloucester, aud John Felgelder, Gloucester.. . . ... 1729 

Adams, Else, Hunterdon, aud Thomas Russell, Middlesex 1768 

A lams, Esther, Gloucester, aud Silvanus Smith, Gloucester 1740 

A lams, Ester, and Thomas England, Gloucester 1782 

A lams, Hannah, Egg Harbour, and Isaiah Willey, Gt. Egg Harbour .1750 
Adams, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Arthur Hamilton, Philadelphia. .1762 

Adams, Hannah, aud Thomas Freeing, Burlington 1778 

Adams, Irene, and Lynch Gray, Trenton 1778 

Adams, Martha, Burlington, aud James Walne, Burlington 1746 

Adams, Martha, and Ezekiel Price, M insfield 1781 

Adams, Mary. Salem, aud Hugh Hutchiugs, Salem ... 1686-7 

Adams, Mary, Gloucester, aud Richard Manring, Gloucester 1749 

Adams, Mercy, Burlington, and Joseph Force, Buniugton 1774 



Aug. 


30 


Feb. 


10 


April 


5 


Oct. 


14 


Mar. 


6 


Oct. 


31 


Feb. 


16 


Mar. 


2 


May 


12 


Nov. 


22 


April 


9 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


25 


Aug. 


17 


July 


24 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


9 


April 


12 


Aug. 


7 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


12 


Oct. 


12 


Jan. 


16 


July 


4 


Jan. 


25 


April 


29 


April 


24 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


12 


Aug. 


23 


May 


22 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


1 


July 


15 


Sept. 


15 


July 


20 


June 


4 


Oct. 


13 


Feb. 


14 


Feb. 


3 


Nov. 


6 


Jan. 


11 



IO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

A darns, Pbebe, Egg Harbour, and George Steclnian, Gt. Egg Harbour. 1737 Dec. 12 

Adams, Pbebe, aud Richard Davis 175G Nov. 24 

Adams, Rachel, Gloucester, aud Abrabam Matson, Gloucester 17(52 Mar. 4 

Adams, Eacbel, aud Job Key, Gloucester 1773 Mar. 3 

Adams, Sarab, Gloucester, aud Matbias Steelman, Gloucester 1730 Sept. 14 

Adams, Sarab, aud David Finlaw, Salem 1771 Aug. 27 

Adams, Sarab, Alloways Creek, aud Ricbard Ware, Stow Creek 1775 July 25 

Adams, Sarab, aud William Sbute, Woolwich 1783 Feb. 23 

Adams, Sarab, aud Jobu Garwood, Gloucester 1784 Mar. 9 

Aiare, Margaret, Burlingtou, aud Adam Parker, Burliugton 1757 Dec. 6 

Addams, Margery, Burliugton, aud Arthur Booradaile, Burliugton . . . 1731 April 27 

Addis, Aun. aud James Ellisou, Burlington 1758 Feb. 1 1 

Addiss, Bridget, aud William Peacbee, Burlington 1733 Dec. 19 

Adington, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and Audrew Golloway, Pa 1727 Oct. 3U 

Adman, Esther, Gt. Egg Harbour, and James Robertson, Gloucester .. 1 736 Mar. 14 

Agnew, Lylia, Salem, aud Jobu Walker, Alloways Creek 1768 Aug. 2 

Aikmau, Agues, Somerset, aud Samuel Niblak. Somerset 1746 May 8 

Aikmau, Janet, Somerset, and William Alexander, Somerset. ... ... .1750 Dec 3 

Aikman, Margaret, Morris, aud Jobu Brown, Somerset 1753 Jan. 17 

Aikman, Sarab, and Lefferts Haugbawout, Middlesex 1747 May 29 

Akers, Elsie, and John Abbit, Hunterdon 1779 Feb. 12 

Akelar, Barbara, and Samuel Hixson, Hunterdon 1777 April 5 

Akin, Elizabeth Perth Amboy, and Andrew Kelly, Perth Arnboy 1752 Aug. 18 

Akin, Lydia, aud Kraghead, Ryle 1779 Mar. 27 

Alberson, , Burlington, aud Thomas Hackney, Burlington.... 1748 Sept. 19 

Alberson, Augee, Bethlehem, aud Dauiel Okeson, New Jersey 1748 Feb. 11 

Alberson, Aun, Gloucester, and Richard Chew, Gloucester. 1766 Oct. 3 

Alberson, Elizabeth, Gloucester, aud William Beakley, Gloucester 1768 July 18 

Alberson, Hannah, Gloucester, and Joseph Thackery, Gloucester 1731 June 1 

Alberson, Judith, Gloucester, aud Joseph Bate, Gloucester 1768 Mar. 14 

Alberson, Letitia, and Charles Day, Gloucester 1759 Sept. 25 

Alberson, Patience, Gloucester, aud John Collins, Gloucester 176G Oct. 3 

Albertis, Elizabeth, Trenton, aud Jonathan Davice, Hunterdon 1740 May 12 

Albertson, Auua, Bucks Co., Pa., and Joseph Severns, Bucks Co., Pa.. 1776 Sept. 30 

Albertson, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Aron Albertsou, Gloucester 1756 April 23 

Albertson, Hannah, and Thomas Ellis, Jr., Gloucester 1759 Sept, 25 

Albertsou, Keziab, Gloucester, and Josiah Ward, Gloucester 1750 Mar. 1 

Albertson, Mary, aud Joseph Albertson, Gloucester 1773 Aug. 23 

Albertson, Sarah, Gloucester, and Abraham Albertson, Gloucester .... 1764 June 22 

AUmrtice, Sarah, Burliugton, aud Hugh Wilcocks, Burlingtou 1727 June 5 

Alburtis, Sarah, and Stephen Humphries, Hunterdon 1769 Mar. 6 

Alcot, Hester, Burlington, and John Bortou, Burlingtou 1754 Sept. 16 

Alcott, Ann, Burlingtou, aud Joseph Rozell, Burlingtou 1737 Dec. 29 

Alcott, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud James Rosell, Burlingtou 1745 April 24 

Alcott, Elizabeth, Burliugton, and James Logan, Burlington 1780 May 20 

Alcott, Rebecca, Burlington, and Joseph Farrington, Burlingtou 1761 Feb. 24 



M ARKTAGE LICENSES. I i 

Alders, Mary, Middlesex, and William Cbeesman, Jr., Middlesex. 1747 Feb. 19 

Aldridge, Michael, Burlington, and William Smith, Burlington 17G1 Oct. 28 

Aim, Mary, and William Van Fleet 1748 Aug. 24 

Alexander, Eleanor, and John Mott, Trenton 1784 June 15 

Alexander, Maty, and John Nutt, Mansfield 1781 May 13 

Alford, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Richard Turner, Perth Atnboy. .. 1762 Dec. 6 

Alford, Sarah, Woodbridge, and David Herriot, Jr., Woodbridge 1741 Sept. 9 

Alison, Mary, and George Githeus, Gloucester 1774 Oct. 29 

Allan, Mary, Middlesex, and Joseph McDaniel, Somerset 1768 Oct. 1 

Allcott, Elizabeth, Northampton, and James Rosele, Northampton ...1745 April 24 

Allen, Agnes, Evesham, and Joshua Parker, Burlington 1750 Sept. 5 

Allen, Ann, and Robert Newell, Moumouth 1759 July 5 

Allen, Catharine, Burlington, and David Budd, Burlington 1738 Feb. 6 

Allen, Catharine, Monmouth, and William Yard, Monmouth 1756 May 29 

Allen, Deborah, Burlington, and Francis Austin, Burlington 1748 May 11 

Allen, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Benjamin Allen, Burlington 1730 Mar. 29 

Allen Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Josiah Cramer, Monmouth. 1750 Sept. 24 

Allen, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Jeffery, Monmouth ] 751 April 25 

Allen, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Allen, Monmouth 1760 July 28 

Allen, Elizabeth, Salem, and Peter Smith, Salem 1760 Sept. 30 

Allen, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Michael V. D. Haef, Monmouth 1760 Dec. 18 

Allen, Elizabeth, and John Kerby, Greenwich 1774 Feb. 1 

Allen, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Alexander McDowel, Burlington . . .1782 May 8 

Allen, Exercise, Shrewsbury, and Uriah Curlies, Shrewsbury. 1746 May 23 

Allen, Hannah, Burlington, and Richard Fenimore, Burliugton 17 J9 Nov. 13 

Allen, Jane, Bedminster, and Ephraim Herriot, Bedminster 1756 Dec. 11 

Allen, Kesiah, and Andrew Hoffman ...1735 Dec. 11 

Allen, Margery, and Job Rogers, Burlington 1769 Jan. 16 

Allen, Margrett, and Nathaniel Hodgson, Middlesex 1783 Dec. 1 1 

Allen, Martha, and William Wilson 1782 Mar. 23 

Allen, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Stevenson, Burlington 1684 July 17 

Allen, Mary, Gloucester, and Andrew Blakeman, Gloucester. 1733 ' July 25 

Allen. Mary, Middlesex, and John Backerlow, Middlesex 1745 June 12 

Allen, Mary, Monmouth, and Jedidiah Allen, Monmouth 1749 May 23 

Allen, Mary, and Edward Hancock, Salem 1757 Dec. 17 

Allen, Mary, Burlington, and John Shinn, Burlington 1763 June 11 

Allen, M ary, Shrewsbury, and Alexander Rose Kraus, Shrewsbury ...17J5 Feb. 21 

Allen, Mary, Burlington, and David Fisher, Burlington 1766 Feb. 5 

Allen, Mary, and Benjamin Ware, Salem 1773 Nov. 9 

Allen, Mary, and Guisbert Sutphin, Roxbury 1778 Sept. 10 

Allen, Mary, and Daniel Severus, Bucks Co., Pa 1779 Oct. 25 

Allen, Miry, Burlington, and George Chumard, Burlington. . . . ... 1782 Nov. 21 

Allen, Massey, and Joseph Gale, Burlington 1783 Mar. 16 

Allen, Mercy, Monmouth, and Joseph Hulit, Monmouth 1750 Mar. 7 

Allen, Mercy, Monmouth, and Thomas Jefferey, Monmouth 1750 April 30 

Allen, Naomi, Monmouth, and Darius Lippincott, Monmouth . 1743 J uly 30 



12 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Allen, Rachel, Philadelphia, and John Hatkinson, Philadelphia .... .1750 

Allen, Rachel, and David Cramer, Burlington 1767 

Allen, Rachel, and Isaac Perkins, Hackensack 1769 

Allen, Rebeckah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Lodge, Gloucester 1762 

Allen, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and William Brower, Shrewsbury 1751 

Allen, Sarah, Salem, and John Longlee, Salem 1761 

Allen, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and Daniel Woolley, Shrewsbury 1763 

Allen, Sarah, Bucks Co., Pa., and Samuel Allen, Bucks Co., Pa 1737 

Allen, Sary, Shrewsbury, and Samuel Scott, Shrewsbury. 1758 

Allgur, Mary, Middlesex, and Thomas Walker Middlesex 1764 

Allin, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Jacob Harvey, Monmouth 1776 

Allin, Hannar, Shrewsbury, and Peleg Slocum, Shrewsbury 1755 

Allin, Lydia, Shrewsbury, and Jacob Stookey, Shrewsbury 1755 

Allinson, Elizabeth, Mount Holley, and William Chew, Gloucester.. . .1774 

Allison, Ann, and Robert Spencer, Hunterdon 1733 

Allison, Anne, Piscataway, and James Walker, Piscataway 1754 

Allison, Phebee, Burlington, and John Ely, Hunterdon. 1731 

Alloways, Elizabeth, Northampton, and James Peun, Northampton. . .1749 

Alloways, Judith, and Michael Chemaly. Burlington 1783 

Alloways, Sarah, Sand Plains, and John Roy, Sand Plains. .' 1745 

Alloways, Sarah, and Josiah Stratton, Evesham. 1784 

Allward, Rachel, and John Harned, Middlesex 1768 

Almon, Rebecca, Burlington, and Arney Lippincott, Burlington. ... 1761 
Alston, Hannah, Woodbridge, and William Wright, Perth Amboy . . 1773 

Alston, Mary, and George Brown, Middlesex 1745 

Alston, Mary, Rahway, and Michael Hays, Elizabeth Town. . . 1758 

Alstone, Rhode, Middlesex, aud John Morris, Essex 1763 

Alton, Sarah, Burlington, and John Condrick, Burlington 1763 

Alyea, Jannetye, and John Blauvelt, Bergen ... 1783 

Alyea, Rachel, and Jacobus T. Post, Ramapo 17S3 

Alyea, Susannah, and Henry Berry, Morris ... 1785 

Amack, Mary, Monmouth, and John Honson, Jr., Monmouth 1754 

Ambler, Grace, and William Acton, Salem 1776 

Ambruster, Elizabeth, and John Cove, Burlington 1778 

Ammermou. Jenny, and Michael Murphy, Burlington. 1781 

Amock, Apham, Momnouth, aud Joseph Davis, Monmouth 1754 

Auders, Judith, aud James Asken. 1774 

Anderson, Auua, aud Tallmau Smith, Chesterfield 1756 

Auderson, Anna, Monmouth, aud James Johnston, Middlesex 1756 

Auderson, Anne, Hunterdon, aud John Braines, Hunterdon 1728 

Auderson, Catherine, and John Tiudall, Trenton 1768 

Anderson, Eleanor, Hunterdon, and Cornelius Pollemus, Monmouth 1741 
Anderson, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Cornelius Wychof, Somerset ....1740 

Anderson, Elizabeth, Bergen, and John Heatou, Bergen 1765 

Auderson, Elizabeth, Hunterdou, and Beujamin Stout, jr., Hunterdon. 1765 
Auderson, Elizabeth, and John Davison, Middlesex . 1774 



June 


27 


June 


8 


July 


21 


Nov. 


17 


Mar. 


25 


May 


13 


Feb. 


23 


May 


4 


Sept. 


13 


Dec. 


18 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


13 


Nov, 


19 


April 


21 


Feb. 


19 


A] nil 


17 


May 


3 


Nov. 


3 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


16 


Feb. 


20 


Sept. 


20 


Mar. 


21 


Au^. 


20 


Aug. 


24 


May 


18 


Nov. 


26 


May 


5 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


17 


Dec. 


10 


Nov. 


18 


Dec. 


3 


June 


9 


Sept. 


14 


June 


13 


April 


27 


May 


3 


July 


30 


June 


1 


June 


3 


June 


9 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


11 


Feb. 


1 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 3 

Anderson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Boyd, Burlington 1775 

Anderson, Elizabeth, and Samuel Hendry, Burlington ... 1785 

Anderson, Elizabeth, and John Bispham, Gloucester 1787 

Anderson, Hannah, and Joseph Bowne, Monmouth.. 17G3 

Anderson, .lameniinah. Somerset, and Simon Wickoff, Hunterdon. ..1770 
Anderson, Lydya, Newcastle, Del., and Isaac Stathem, Cumberland. .. 1769 

Anderson, Martha, Hunterdon, and John Roland, Hunterdon 17+0 

Anderson, Mary, and Cornelius Rappalje, Somerset 1743 

Anderson, Mary, Freehold, and John Cook, Pa 1761 

Anderson, Mary, Hackensack, and Christian Van Horn, Hac.kensack.17G8 

Anderson, Mary, and Samuel Dorland, Morris 1778 

Anderson, Mary, and Francis Vannoy, Hunterdon ... 1781 

Anderson, Nancy, and Samuel Allen, New Jersey 1780 

Anderson, Pamela, and Edmoud Palmer, Hunterdon , 1782 

Anderson, Penelope, and Ralph Hart, Hunterdon 1770 

Anderson, Rachel, Hunterdon, and David Frazer, Hunterdon 1771 

Anderson, Sarah, Maidenhead, and Andrew Willson, Bucks Co., Pa. .. 1769 

Anderson, Sarah, and Josiah Auderson ... 1769 

Andrews, Amy, Burlington, and Ebeuezer Borden, Burlington 1748 

Andrews, Dorcas, Burlington, aud Abram Miers, Burlington 1757 

Andrews, Elizabeth, Middletown, aud Thomas Far num, Middletown ..1750 

Andrews, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud William Myars, Burlington 17G6 

Andrews, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Levi Haines, Burlington 1767 

Andrews, Esther, and Joseph Silver, Mauuington 1784 

Andrews, Patience, Burlington, and Joseph Hancock, Burlington. . .. 1751 

Audrews, Prudence, aud John Bevy, Burlington 17C4 

Andrews, Phebe, aud Joseph Holmes, Jr., Monmouth 1758 

Audrews, Rebecca, Monmouth, aud David Gorden, Monmouth ...1746-7 
Andrewson, Catherine, Hunterdon, aud Joseph Huduut, Hunterdon.. 1764 

Audrewvet, Rebecca, aud John Story, Staten Island. 1744 

Aiidriss, Catherine, Burlington, and Samuel Emley, Jr., Burlington. . . 1763 

Audriss, Mary, and Solomon Wardell, Shrewsbury 1767 

Anele, Judah, aud Peter Ten Eick, Somerse t 1763 

A.nuis, Elizabeth, and Samuel Hall, Philadelphia ... 1732 

A.nsley, Anne, Monmouth, aud Moses Robins. Monmouth 1761 

Ansley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, an 1 Jacob Morris, Monmouth 1765 

Ausley, Mary, Monmouth, and Job Morris, Monmouth 1760 

Anthony, Anne, Hunterdon, aud Francis Bowes, Hunterdon 1728 

Anthony, Clara, aud John Brand, Hunterdon... 1779 

Authony, Mary, aud John Paradis, Hunterdon 1778 

Antill, Mary, Middlesex, aud Richard Cochran, Middlesex ... 1764 

Antonides, Barbara, Monmouth, and Samuel Lougstreet, Monmouth ..1756 

Antram, Hannah, and William Stratton, Burlington 1777 

Antram, Hannih, and Samuel Norcross, Burlingtou 1789 

Antram,- Mary, aud James Webb, Burlington 1783 

Antram, Patience, aud Moses Haines, Burlington 1747 



Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


2 


Oct. 


8 


Jan. 


18 


July 


27 


Nov. 


27 


June 


16 


Oct. 


17 


Nov. 


17 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


28 


Jan. 


12 


April 


29 


April 


20 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


31 


Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


14 


June 


15 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


7 


Mar. 


2 


May 


2 


Feb. 


6 


Nov. 


4 


Feb. 


13 


Feb. 


4 


Mar. 


8 


May 


21 


July 


11 


Oct. 


25 


Jau. 


31 


Nov. 


13 


Feb. 


13 


May 


17 


Nov. 


18 


Apl. 


17 


Aug. 


25 


Oct. 


15 


Oct. 


30 


July 


28 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


16 


Dec. 


11 



14 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Antram, Rachel, Mansfield, and William Talbot, Mansfield 17G7 

Autram, Sarah, Burlington, and William Evan Hughes, Burlington.. .1775 

Antram, Susannah, Burlington, and Samuel Steward, Burlington 1774 

Antrim, Sarah, Mansfield, and Edward Church, Bristol, Pa 1765 

Antrum. Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joseph Garwood, Burlington .. 1732 

Antrum, Margaret, aud Howell Dads, Burlington 17G1 

Antrum, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Biddle, Burlington 1728 

Antrum, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Eldridge, Burlington 1744 

Anvey, Mary, Salem, and Edward Harvey, Salem 1749 

Aplen, Mary, Gloucester, and Noah Harris, Cumberland 1761 

Appleby, Mary, and Jonathan Duel, Trenton 1779 

Applegat, Hannes, Middletowu, and Jonas Solomon, Monmouth 1757 

Applegat, Sarah, Monmouth, and Richard Francis, Monmouth 1766 

Applegate, Betheney, and William Throp, Upper Freehold 1773 

Applegate, Catherine, Monmouth, and Levy Hart, Monmouth 1757 

Applegate, Elizabeth, and William Hutchinson, Middlesex 1767 

Applegate, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and George Watwood, Perth Arab. . 1745 

Applegate, Hannah, Middlesex, aud Henry Johnston, Middlesex 1760 

Applegate, Jemiinah, Burlington, and Isaac Morris, Burlington 1759 

Applegate, Joanna, Middlesex, and John Feavil, Monmouth 1737 

Applegate, Mary, aud John Thomson, Middletowu 1746-7 

Applegate, Rebecca, Middletown, aud Samuel Bray, Middletowu 1753 

Applegate, Rebekah, Monmouth, aud John Tilton, Monmouth 1744 

Applegate, Sarah, Burlington, and Isaac Boultou, Burlington 1745 

Applegate, Sarah, aud Samuel Ivins, Burlington 1779 

Appleget, Elizabeth, aud Isaac Potter, Shrewsbury 1761 

Appleton, Ann, Burlingtou, and George Bass, Burlington 1767 

Appleton, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Smith, Burlington 1685 

Applyn, Elizabeth, and Samuel Lippincott, Gloucester 1758 

Arason, Elizabeth, and Hugh Hunter, Hunterdon 1769 

Archad, Christian, and William Guest, Gloucester 1735 

Archer, Mary, Burlington, and Isaac Field, Burlington 1772 

Arey, Mary, Burlington, and James Fagens, Barliugton 1769 

Arey, Rachel, and Restore Morton, Burlington 1779 

Arison, Hannah, Burlington, aud Cornwell Woolston, Burlington. ... 1762 

Arison, Mary, Burlington, and Job Atkinson, Burlington 1761 

Arison, Sarah, Burlingtou, and James Atkinson, Burlington 1756 

Arkley, Catharine, and John Thompson, Bucks Co., Pa 1778 

Arnal, Mary, Egg Harbor, and William Carney 1750 

Arnal, Mary, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Jonas Addams, Gt. Egg Harbour. 1750 

Arned, Elizabeth, and Daniel West, Burlington 1736 

Arnel, Amey, aud John Lxnuing, Burlington 1777 

Arnell, Elizabeth, Burlingtou, and James Pearson, Burlington.. . . 1767 

Arney, Mary, aud Samuel Lippincott, Burlington 1737 

Arney, Mary, Burlington, and John Linuington, Philadelphia 1766 

'Arnold, Betsy, Burlington, and Jacob Force, Burlington 1781 April 27 



Feb. 


13 


Oct, 


28 


May 


7 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


27 


April 


18 


Oct. 


30 


Sept, 


12 


May 


1 


July 


23 


April 


28 


Dec. 


27 


July 


3 


Mar. 


26 


Dec. 


9 


Jan. 


3 


Mar. 


25 


June 


12 


April 


11 


Mar. 


11 


Mar. 


2 


Oct. 


2 


Aug. 


14 


July 


15 


Jau. 


11 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


3 


Nov. 


25 


Jau. 


7 


June 


3 


Feb. 


1 


April 


10 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


2 


April last 


Sept. 


21 


May 


11 


April 


24 


May 


3 


May 


3 


June 


5 


Nov. 


12 


Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


20 


Mar. 


13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 15 

Arnold, Martha, and Nicholas Foster, Burlington 1778 

Arnold, Phehe, Morristown, and Jonas Phillips, Morristown L766 

Arnold, Rebecca, Burlington, and Andrew Conerow, Burlington 1727 

Armitage, Sarah, and Benjamin Van Kirk, Hunterdon 1769 

Armour, Sarah, and Samuel Peterson, Cape May 1775 

Armstrong.. Agues, Hunterdon, and William Little, Hunterdon 1770 

Armstrong, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John (haddock, Monmouth. ..1749 

Armstrong, Hannah, and Alexander Linn, Sussex. . . 1779 

Armstrong, Mary, Sussex, and Robert Beavers, Sussex 1773 

Armstrong, Mary, and Jesse H tines, Burlington 1783 

Armstrong, Sarah, Essex, and John O'harah, Somerset 1752 

Artepe, Sarah, Somerset, aud Vincent Dye, Eastern Division 1716 

Arvin, Elizabeth, Middlesex, aud John Stewart, Somerset 1753 

Arvine, Hannah, Staten Island, aud John Lse, Middlesex 1741 

Ash, Mary, Burlington, and Johu West, Burlington 1728 

Ashbrook, Hannah, Gloucester, and Jeremiah Chew, Gloucester 1745 

Ashhrook, Mary, Gloucester, and Benjamin Cheesman, Jr., Gloucester. 1753 

Ashbrook, Hannah, Gloucester, aud James Gibson, Gloucester 1768 

Ashburu, Elizabeth, and Joseph Newton, Burlington 1775 

Ashbnrne, Sarah, Jr., Bucks Co., Pa., and John Thornton, Bucks Co., Pa. 1756 

Ashbury, Hannah, aud Alexander Smith, Salem 1687 

Asheton, Susanna, Philadelphia, and , Philadelphia 1710 

Ashfield, Isabella, Monmouth, aud Samuel Hunt, West Chester, N. Y. . 1749 

Ashlee, Anne, and Richard Cook, Hunterdon 1783 

Ashmore, Elizabeth, and Hugh Smith, Nottingham 1778 

Ashmore, Hanuah, New Jersey, aud William Gifford, New Jersey 1727 

Ashton, Ann, Salem, and Johu Breding, Salem. , 1764 

Ashton, Coziah, and Thomas Starkey 1761 

Ashton, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Joseph Taylor, Monmouth 1743 

Ashton, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud William Hill. Burlington 1749 

Ashton, Elizabeth, Backs Co., Pa., aud William Shallcross, Bucks Co., Pa. 1764 

Ashton, Hanuah, and David Newburu, Bucks Co. , Pa 1733 

Ashton, Hannah, Hunterdon, aud Thomas Burrowes, Hunterdon 1772 

Ashton, Jemima, aud John Harris, Burlington 1750 

Ashton, Lidia, aud John Horner, Moumouth. . . 1773 

Ashton, Margaret, Salem, and Elwell Moore. Salem 1765 

Ashton, Mary, Philadelphia, aud Benjamin Wood, Gloucester 1727 

Ashton, Mary, Monmouth, aud William Willsou, Burlington 1730 

Ashton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Daniel Stillwell, Monmouth 1741 

Ashton", Sarah, and Thomas Potts, New Hanover 1777 

Ashton, Susannah, Middletown, and Gabriel Vanhorn, Middletown. . . 1767 

Asson, Hannah, Monmouth, aud Joseph Morris, Burlington 1741 

Asson, Mercy, and William Clevenger, Burlington 1750 

Atau, Judith, aud Joseph Moorhead, Hunterdon 1770 

Aten, Yaunetie, Somerset, and Kike V. D. Bilt, Middlesex 1749 

Atkinson, Abigail, aud Isaac Piersou, Burlington 1773 



Nov. 


18 


Dec. 


IS 


Mar. 


29 


Nov. 


23 


•Inly 


5 


July 


5 


Oct. 


30 


April 


17 


May 


3 


Aug. 


2 


Oct. 


13 


Sept. 


1 


Nov. 


5 


July 


21 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


22 


June 


13 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


29 


Oct. 


28 


Aug. 


8 


Dec. 


14 


Nov. 


27 


May 


13 


June 


9 


May 


8 


Dec. 


12 


May 


23 


May 


12 


Sept, 


9 


Dec. 


4 


Dec. 


4 


Feb. 


18 


April 


25 


Jan. 


20 


April 


9 


Mar. 


30 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


20 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


21 


Aug. 


17 


April 


1 6 


July 


26 


Dec. 


25 



1 6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Atkinson, Ann, and Richard Jennings, Salern 1734 

Atkinson, Anna, Burlington, and William Shaw, Burlington 1713 

Atkinson, Anne, Burlington, and John Scott, Burlington 175-1 

Atkinson, Christian, Burlington, and Ezekiah Willson, Burlington . . 1727 
Atkinson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and George Farrell, Burlington. ... 1766 
Atkinson, Hannah, Burlington, and Hugh Copperthwaite, Burlington 1737 

Atkinson, Hannah, Essex, and Benjamin Kelsey, Essex 1741 

Atkinson, Hannah, Hunterdon, and Joseph Hankinson, Hunterdon . 1770 
Atkinson, Hester, Northampton, and Joseph Rogers, Northampton... 1783 

Atkinson, Hope, Burlington, and Zehedee Robbins, Burlington 1766 

Atkinson, Hope, and Nathan Folwell, Burlington 1785 

Atkinson, Lydia, Burlington, and John Lavenuer, Burlington 1729 

Atkinson. Lydia, Burlington, and Chris Kale, Burlington 1767 

Atkinson, Mary, and James Smitb, Burlington . . 1756 

Atkinson, Mary, and Job Deacon, Burlington 1784 

Atkinson, Sarah, Burlington, and William Harris, Burlington 1731 

Atkinson, Sarah, and Samuel Asay, Burlington 1779 

Atkinson, Sarah, and Samuel Mullen, Burlington 1784 

Atkinson, Sibilla, Northampton, and Samuel Parker, Northampton. . .1772 
Atkinson, Susanna, Evesham, and William Ridgents, Northampton. . . 1776 

Attmore, Susannah, ami William Clark, Jr., Gloucester 1763 

Attwood, Susannah, Gloucester, and Edmond Lord, Gloucester. .... .1736 

Auiuack, Garcha, Shrewsbury, and John Sutphen, Freehold 1767 

Anmerman, Anne, and Christopher Herder, Somerset 1779 

Austin, Abigail, Burlington, and Samuel Downs, Burlington. 1783 

Austin, Ann, Burlington, and William Walker, Gloucester 1773 

Austin, Esther, and John Wright, Northampton 1772 

Austin, Esther, and Isaac Barber, Burlington 1773 

Austin, Hannah, Burlington, and William Sharp, Burlington 1735 

Austin, Hannah, Evesham, and Thomas Talman, Evesham 1763 

Austin, Hannah, Burlington, and Jacob Austin, Burlington ... 1764 

Austin, Hannah, and Thomas Buzby, Burlington. 1795 

Austin, Jane, and Thomas Shinn, Evesham . . 1782 

Austin, Martha, Burlington, and John Hughston, Gloucester 1740 

Austin, Marthew, and John Reeves, Cumberland 1777 

Austin, Mary, Evesham, and John Somers, Evesham 1761 

Austin, Patience, Burlington, and John Mott, Burlington 1771 

Austin, Rebecca, Evesham, and John Sharp, Evesham 1782 

Austin, Sarah, Burlington, and Jacob Haines, Burlington .... 1770 

Austin, Susannah, and Enoch Sharp, Evesham 1783 

Austin, Tamar, Chester, and Benjamin Sharp, Chester 1773 

Austin, Vesti, Burlington, and John Rogers, Burlington 1754 

Austin, Zilpa, Evesham, and Levi Prickett, Evesham 1775 

Auten, Tyne, and William Wilson, Somerset 1781 

Autrurmau, Alitia, and John Degrave, Middlesex 1779 

Aves, Sarah, and Isaac Farra, Philadelphia 1759 



April 


is 


Nov. 


10 


April 


29 


Feb. 


1 


Sept. 


23 


April 


19 


July 


1 


April 


3 


Aug, 


25 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


20 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


3 


May 


13 


April 


15 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


28 


Dec. 


5 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


17 


Nov. 


24 


Sept. 


20 


July 


23 


Sept. 


24 


May 


5 


Aug 


18 


Sept. 


20 


Mar. 


2 


April 


15 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


19 


April 


1 


Sept. 


15 


April 


23 


April 


5 


Ja-n. 


4 


Jan. 


11 


Aug. 


6 


Feb. 


27 


Sept. 


3 


May 


23 


Jan. 


6 









MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 7 

Avars, Darkis, Cumberland, and David Randolph, Cumberland 1775 Nov. 8 

Avars, Rachel, AUoways Creek, and Daniel Rumsey, Piles Grove 1772 April 1 

Ayeres, Zeruiah, and Joshua Ayars, Salem 1764 Mar. 13 

Ayeres, Esther, and William Guest, Jr., Gloucester 1771 Nov. ID 

Avers, Hume, Middlesex, and Peter Knap, Middlesex 1743 Feb. 15 

Avers, Johanna, Wooibridge, and William Tappen, Woodbridge 1762 Jan. 2G 

Avers, Mary, Woodbridge, and George Eerriot, Woodbridge 1750 Dec. 24 

Avers, Mary, New York, and John Parry, Sussex . . 1778 Nov. 20 

Avers, Rachel, Middlesex, and Mulford Martin, Middlesex 1741 Jan. 23 

Ayres, Anne, Middlesex, and John Dunn, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 11 

Ayres, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Thomas Martin, Middlesex 1762 Feb. 15 

Ayres, Esther, Somerset, and Joseph Prudden, Morris 1770 Nov. 26 

MALES, " 

Babbit, Daniel, Morris, and Sarah Baach, Morris , 1779 May 26 

Babcock, George W., Gloucester, and Elizabeth Roe 1784 Oct. 13 

Babcock, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Lavina Bishop, Burlington 176U Nov. 12 

Babcock, Simeon, Monmouth, and Jane Greggory, Monmouth 1757 Aug. 20 

Bachman, John, Hunterdon, and Ketrina Pickel 1775 Aug. 30 

Bacon, Amos, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Mills, Cumberland 1769 Nov. 22 

Bacon, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Mary Davis 1775 April 18 

Bacon, David, Cumberland, and Sarah Barker 1786 Mar. 7 

Bacon, Edmond, Cumberland, and Mary Eldredge, Cape May 1766 Mar. 28 

Bacon, Isaac, Cumberland, and Mary Sayre, Cumberland 1764 Feb. 29 

Bacon, Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Eunice Culver, Monmouth 1762 Nov. 6 

Bacon, Jeremiah, Jr., Cumberland, and Rachel Shepherd 1757 April 10 

Bacon, Jesse, Salem, and Sarah Pairpoint 1773 Oct. 20 

Bacon, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Smith, Salem 16S8 Oct. 17 

Bacon, Joseph, Salem, and Elizabeth Pancost, Salem ... 1693 Aug. 11 

Bacon, Phillip, Cumberland, and Sarah Ward, Cumberland 17(iS Mar. 1 

Bacon, Richard, Cumberland, and Martha Devine, Salem 1774 Feb. 21 

Bacon, Richard, Cumberland, and Rebecca Marshall 1779 Dec. 1 

Bacon, Samuel, Cumberland, and Mary Fitzgerald, Cumberland 1767 April 2 

Badcock, Gideon, Gloucester, and Rebekah Towusend 1768 Aug. 23 

Badcock, Gideon, Gloucester, and Pheby May 1772 Nov. 14 

Badcock, Gideon, Gloucester, and Margaret Bright, Philadelphia 1773 Feb. 23 

Badcock, John, Gloucester, and Rebecca. Somers, Gloucester 1750 Aug. 11 

Badcock, John, Cape May, an 1 Abiah Badcock 1778 Nov. 16 

Badcock, Joseph, Cape May, and Phebe Mackey 1780 Feb. 1 

Badcock, Return, Cape May, and Abigail Cresse 1733 Feb. 22 

Baester, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Doren, Burlington 1774 July 23 

Baggley, Charles, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stevens, Burlingtcii. .. 1682 May 27 

Baggs, Isaac, Burlington, and Sarah Lanning, Burlington 1763 Aug. 13 

Bailey, Elias, and Mary Garretson, Middletown 1759 Feb. 8 

Bailey, James, Philadelphia, and Sarah Marsh, Perth Amboy 1759 May 12 

Bailey, John, Burlington, and Rachel Harris 1759 Aug. 31 



l8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bailey, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Walling 1771 

Bailie, Henry, Hunterdon, and Isabella Reading 1767 

Bailler, Michael, Hunterdon, and Mary Bunyan 1774 

Bain, Samuel, Gloucester, and Sarah Gerrard, Gloucester 1739 

Bainbridge, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Daughty, Somerset 1740 

Bainbridge, John, Hunterdon, and Frances Philips 1745 

Bainbridge, William, Hunterdon, and Hannah Hunt 1777 

Baird, Andrew, Monmouth, and Sarah Heldridge, Monmouth 1762 

Baird, David, Monmouth, and Sarah Compton, Monmouth 1744 

Baird, John, Somerset, and Catharine Deboise 1779 

Baird, Samuel, Monmouth, and Susannah Rogers, Monmouth 1762 

Baird, William, Somerset, and Margaret O'harah, Somerset 1751 

Baird, William, Morris, and Margaret Riley, Monmouth 1758 

Baird, Zebulon, Monmouth, and Lidy Hildreth, Monmouth 1765 

Baites, Will, Gloucester, and Rebecca Tomlinson, Burlington 1741 

Bake, John, Hunterdon, and Ellenor Slaught, Hunterdon 1772 

Baker, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Patience Rose, Hunterdon 1764 

Baker, Jacob, Salem, and Elizabeth Lippincott 1785 

Baker, John, and Mary Peachee 1696 

Baker, John, Middlesex, and Ann Swim, Middlesex 1736 

Baker, John, Burlington, and Barbara Sheydecker, Burlington 1742 

Baker, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Scull, Cape May. 1760 

Baker, John, Burlington, and Hannah Price 1779 

Baker, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Clarke, Burlington 1747 

Baker, Joseph, Burlington, and Rachel Kimble, Burlington 1754 

Baker, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Getty Bullman 1785 

Baker, Michael, Burlington, and Rebecca Middleton, Burlington. .. 1758 

Baker, Michael, Burlington, and Leah Bishop. . 1768 

Baker, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Hazelton, Burlington, 1749 

Baker, Timothy, Hunterdon, and Jemima Nox, Somerset 1764 

Baker, William, Monmouth, and Mary Borden, Monmouth 1731 

Baker, William, Burlington, and Catharine Corken, Burlington 1739 

Baldwin, Caleb, Essex, and Jemima Taylor, Essex 1747-8 

Baldwin, David, Hunterdon, and Martha Cornel, Hunterdon 1775 

Baldwin, James, Bucks, Pa., and Catharine Gaththius, Bucks, Pa . ..1751 

Baldwin, John, Middlesex, and Cornelia Thomson, Middlesex 17(54 

Baldwin, Matthias, Elizabeth, and Mary Ross, Elizabeth 1746 

Baldwin, Jonas, Middlesex, and Mary Fitzrandolph, Middlesex 1763 

Bale, John, Burlington, and Sarah Roads .- 1711 

Ball, John, Chester, Pa., and Sarah Thomas, Philadelphia 1747 

Ballaugy, Ewy, Cape May, Susanna English 1738 

Ballinger, John, Burlington, and Sarah Jones, Burlington 1784 

Ballinger, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Rachel Conner, Cumberland. . . 1769 

Ballinger, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Cheesman, Gloucester 1760 

Ballinger, Joshua, Burlington, and Rebecca Moore 1788 

Ballinger, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Coffin, Burlington 1742 



Jan. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


19 


May 


26 


Jan. 


24 


Sept. 


18 


May 


24 


Oct. 


27 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


6 


Oct. 


14 


Dec. 


1 


April 


11 


Aug. 


6 


Dec. 


15 


April 


13 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


16 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


9 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


30 


Oct. 


17 


Aug. 


13 


May 


22 


Dec. 


17 


Oct, 


5 


Sept. 


19 


Nov. 


27 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


19 


May 


30 


June 


24 


Nov. 


30 


May 


12 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


12 


April 


22 


April 


18 


Feb. 


9 


Dec. 


26 


Nov. 


8 


Nov. 


17 


Nov. 


3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 19 

Ballman, Gersham, Monmouth, and Mary Ann Browne, Monmouth. .. 1761 

Bancroft, David, Cape May, and Abigail Stiles, Cape May 1752 

Bancroft, Ephraim, Cape May, and Sarah Mathew, Cape May 1700 

Bancroft, Elisha, Cape May, and Susannah Hughes, Cape May 1773 

Bancroft, Miller, Cape May, and Jane Hand 1787 

Bancroft, Ephraim, Cape May, and Elizabeth Crowell, Cape May 17(13 

Banks, James, Jr., Newark, and Catherine Johuson, Newark 1758 

Banks, John, Gloucester, and Deborah Castle 1779 

Banks, Joseph, Salem, and Susannah Barber, Salem 1762 

Bankson, Andrew, Philadelphia, and Mary Webb, Philadelphia 1731 

Bankson, Andrew, and Elizabeth Ford 1778 

Banta, Abraham, Bergen, and Geertye Ryerson 1782 

Banta, Abraham, Bergen, and Hilletye Van Sise 1780 

Banta, Aury, Bergen, and Altje Van Bushkirk, Bergen 1773 

Banta, Cornelius J., Bergen, and Hentsje Outwater, Bergen 1703 

Banta, Heudrick, Bergen, and Elizabeth Lake, Long Island 1769 

Banta, Hendrick, Bergen, and Margaret Dedricks, Bergen 178i 

l>auta, Jacob, Bergeu, Aaltje Dedricks, Bergen 1773 

Banta, Jacob, and Catherine Lambert 1788 

1 Santa, Jacob C. , Bergen, and Weyntie Zabriskie 1788 

Banta, Jacob, Bergen, and Hester Hopper 1789 

Banta, John Heudrick, Bergen, and Cornelia Helm 1709 

Banta, John, Bergen, and Rachael Van Horn 1781 

Banta, Sieba, Bergen, and Rachel Loots, Bergen 1703 

Banta, Thomas, Bergen, and Gertrude Terhune 1700 

Banto, Jacob, Bergen, and Claushey Van Wiucle, Bergen 1754 

Barbar, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Anne Walton 1784 

Barber, Daniel, Gloucester, and Margaret Hampton, Gloucester 1738 

Barber, Elijah, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hoppman, Salem 1772 

Barber, George, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Blackshoe, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Barber, Isaac, Burlington, and Esther Austin 1773 

Barber, James, Bucks, Pa., and Rebecca Morford, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Barber, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Morford 1772 

Barber, Samuel, Salem, and Barbara Hugius, Salem 1704 

Barber, Thomas, Salem, and Hannah Jennings 1770 

Barber, William, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Parmer 1700 

Barbur, James, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Mitchell, Pennsylvania. .1728 

Barcalow, David, Monmouth, and Rebecca Polhemus 1779 

Barclay, David, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Walker, Monmouth 1749 

Barclay, John, Balkeuridge, and Catherine Crawford, Elizabeth Town. 1719 

Barclay, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Aune Reid, Freehold 1750 

Bard, Dr. John (license), and Susannah Valeau 1741 

Bard, Dr. John (bond), Philadelphia, and Susanna Valleau, Phila .... 1741 

Barger, Benjamin, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Sprogle 1732 

Bargue, James, Morris, and Hester Berry, Morris 1711 

Barkalow, Dirrick, Monmouth, and Ann Baird 1772 



Nov. 


9 


Nov. 





Dec. 


20 


April 


7 


Oct. 


1 


June 


8 


Oct. 


17 


July 


13 


Nov. 


24 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


20 


Sept. 


8 


July 


17 


Nov. 


20 


Aug. 


2 


July 


1 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


22 


Oct. 


10 


April 


17 


April 


12 


Mar. 


20 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


20 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


8 


April 


13 


Julv 


29 


Sept. 


24 


May 


22 


July 


24 


May 


16 


Feb. 


10 


July 


21 


Sept. 


10 


June 


24 


Mar. 


3 


April 


6 


April 


9 


Feb. 


5 


May 


29 


Mar. 


17 


May 


12 


Jan. 


28 



20 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Barkelow, Daniel, Middlesex, and Mary Miller, Middlesex .1752 

Barker, Isaac, Cumberland, and Phebe Tomlinson 1778 

Barker, Jobn, Cumberland, and Abigail Scott, Cumberland 1770 

Barker, Richard, Monmouth, and Charity Hadden, Monmouth. 1712 

Barker, Richard, Cumberland, and Mary Scott 1782 

Barker, Wade, Cumberland, and Hannah Sayre 1768 

Barker, Wade, and Phebe Shepherd 1771 

Barker, Wade, Cumberland, and Hannah Sears, Salem 1779 

Barker, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Gregory, Salem 1739 

Barker, William, Cumberland, and Hannah Fithian, Cumberland . . 1766 

Barnes, John, Burlington, and Catherine Ebert 1781 

Barnes, Levi, Cumberland, and Sarah Cleves, Cumberland 17o0 

Barnes, Samuel, Salem, and Sarah Hollinshead 1738 

Barnes, Thomas, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Watson 1732 

Barnes, William, Hunterdon, and Catharine Cock, Hunterdon 1712 

Barnes, William, Burlington, and Martha Bromley, Burlington 16S2 

Barnet, John, Burlington, and Mary Conaro ... 1788 

Barnet, Joseph, Elizabeth Town, and Sarah Rolph, Elizabeth Town 1751 

Bamhart, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Eslon, Burlington 1773 

Barns, John, Cumberland, and Rebecca Hajnes, Cumberland 1759 

Barns, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Damaris Garrison, Cumberland. .. 1762 

Barrett, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Downes 1767 

Barricklo, Hendrick, Middlesex, and Leonora Davie 1771 

Barris, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Barbara Siler, Bucks, Pa 171> 

Barron Samuel, Woodbridge, and Johanna Campton, Woodbridge.. . .1719 

Barry, David, Monmouth, and Wiilimpe Truax, Monmouth 1771 

Barry, Richard, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Runyon, Perth Arnboy . . 1751 
Barry, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Anne Cray ton, Perth Amboy. ... 1750 

Bartholf, John, Bergen, and Lydia Lydecker 1787 

Bartholf, Yelles, Bergen, and Sarah Zabriskie 1779 

Baitholomew, Benjamin, Burlington, and Mary Murrell 1777 

Bartleson, William, Salem, and Mary Peterson 1773 

Bartlett, Joseph, Monmouth, and Phebe Havens, Monmouth 17 7 

Bartlett, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Gilford 1766 

Bartlett, Nathan, Monmouth, and Mary Willis 1778 

Bartley, Richard, Monmouth, and Hannah Horseman, Monmouth . . 1711 

Barton, Andrew, Somerset, and Mary S ivage, Somerset 1771 

Barton, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Pettet, Hunterdon 1775 

Barton, Stephen, Somerset, and Rachel Stout, Somerset 1717 

Bartrom, John, Bergen, and Angenitje Bsem 1762 

Bartson, John, Cape May, and Rhoda Gaudy, Cape May 1763 

Basley, John, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Watson 1783 

Bass, George, Burlington, and Ann Appleton, Burlington 1707 

Bass, Thomas, Middlesex, and Mary Lawrence, Middlesex 1761 

Bass, William, Northampton, and Rebecca Ewan, Northampton 1781 

Bassett, Jeremiah, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Simpson 1782 



Aug. 


11 


May 


19 


Feb. 


20 


July 


6 


Jan. 


30 


Aug. 


18 


Sept. 


21 


Feb. 


23 


Jan. 


7 


April 


10 


Dec. 


17 


May 


20 


May 


20 


June 


10 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


13 


Mar. 


20 


June 


(i 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


21 


Jan. 


7 


Jan. 


25 


April 


10 


Jan. 


16 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


8 


Aug. 


6 


Dec. 


10 


June 


15 


Oct. 


12 


April 


5 


Dec. 


2 


July 


13 


June 


18 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


22 


April 


9 


Nov. 


30 


April 


7 


Aug. 


3 


Sept. 


11 


April 


13 


May 


30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES; 21 

Rassett, Elij;ib, Salem, and Agnes Ren, Salem 1770 

Hate, Joseph, Gloucester, and Judith Alberson, Gloucester 1768 

Bate, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Shivers, Gloucester 1732 

Bateman, Amos, Cumberland, and Jane Mechesney 1779 

Bateman, Daniel, Cumberland, and Amey Bryant 1779 

Bateman, John, Salem, and Sarah Luptin 1746 

Bateman, John, Cumberland, and -Judith Hand, Cape May 1771 

Bateman, William, Cumberland, and Victorinia Saunders 1780 

Hates, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Sarah Hugg, Gloucester 17G6 

Bates, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Mary Thackery 1777 

Bates, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Hammell 1777 

Bates, Daniel, Gloucester, and Sarah Higbie, Burlington 1746 

Bates, Daniel, Gloucester, and Tamzen Williams 1784 

Bates, Ephraim, Monmouth, and Zelpha Chamberlain, Monmouth. . . . 1755 

Bates, John, Burlington, and Sarah Collins, Gloucester 1747 

Bates, John, BnrlingtoD, and Abigail Stratton, Burlington 1782 

Bates, John, Gloucester, and Laitetia Hillman 1783 

Bates, Richard, Freehold, and Agues Thompson 1745 

Bates, Samuel, Gloucester, and Eleanor Davis 17bl 

Bates, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Clemmer 1740 

Batlin, Francis, Gloucester, and Anne Chrisman, Gloucester 1730 

Batten, Francis, Gloucester, and Deborah Hofman, Salem 17(53 

Batten, John, Gloucester, and Ann Scott, Burlington 17(ir> 

Batten, Richard, Gloucester, and Eleanor Hoffman 17(53 

Bavis, John, Burlington, and Abigail Norcross 1777 

Baxter, Charles, Sussex, and Ann Westbrook, Sussex 1755 

Baxter, John, and Elizabeth Collier 1778 

Baxter, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Burk, Gloucester 1780 

Bayles, Samuel, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Wilson 1779 

Bayley, John, Middlesex, and Susannah Burtis, Middlesex 1747 

Baynton, Peter, Burlington, and Mary Carpenter, Burlington 1739 

Beach, Isaac, Morris, and Mary Bigalo, Morris ... 17(58 

Beach, Israel, Essex, and Mary Pool 1781 

Beach, John, Morris, and Sarah Chivers 177(5 

Beach, Joseph, and Catherine Ogden 1779 

Beadle, Benajab, Middletown, and Sarah Orchard, Middletown 1750 

Beagle, Silas, Staten Island, and Fhebe Wood 1743 

Beakley, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Alberson, Gloucester . . 1768 

Beal, Alexander, Gloucester, and Esther Butterworth 174(5 

Beal, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Sarah Barbar 1784 

Beam, Anthony, Bsrgen, and Catherine Bush 1783 

Beam, Anthony C, Bergen, and Vrautye Demarest 1788 

Beam, Jacobus, Bergen, and Adriange Hopper , . , 1790 

Beans, Thomas, Bucks, Pa , and Jane Sands, Salem 1739 

Beard, Zebulon, Monmouth, and Anne Smith, Monmouth 1749 

Beasley, John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth George, Philadelphia 1738 



Nov. 


19 


Mar. 


14 


Mar. 


(1 


Oct. 


15 


Sept. 


28 


Aug. 


21 


July 


27 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


24 


Sept. 


c> 


Oct. 


5 


April 


4 


April 


20 


May 


30 


Sept. 


19 


Mar. 


20 


Mar. 


29 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


12 


April 


1(5 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


Mar. 


23 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


3 


May 


11 


Sept. 


7 


May 


25 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


30 


Jan. 


8 


Sept. 


14 


Nov. 


3 


Mar. 


2 


Nov. 


15 


July 


21 


Nov. 


26 


July 


18 


Dec. 


11 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


27 


Feb. 


5 


Oct. 


16 


April 


9 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


21 



11 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Beaty, Charles, Bucks, Pa., and Ann Reading, Hunterdon 1746 

Beaumont, Hammond, and Elizabeth Trotter 1768 

Beavers, George, Hunterdon, and Sarah Launiug 

Beavers, Robert, Sussex, and Mary Armstrong, Sussex 1773 

Bechtolde, John Vaite, Burlington, and Rachel Taylor, Burlington 1742 

Beck, Aaron, Burlington, and Hope Shinn, Burlington 1774 

Beck, George, Burlington, and Mary Griffith, Burlington 1750 

Beck, John, Burlington, and Deborah Wood, Burlington 1747 

Beck, John, Burlington, and Polly Ferris, Burlington 1780 

Beck, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Scattergood 1779 

Beck, Raworth, Burlington, and Hannah Gibbs, Burlington 1743 

Beck, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth McGallard 1777 

Beckett, John, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Jolly, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Becstolzseimer, George, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Weyerly 1769 

Becstolzseimer, George, Amwell, and Margaret Spence 1772 

Beech, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Jane Smout, Philadelphia 1732 

Beekman, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Ann Guest 1745 

Beekman, Adrian, Middlesex, and Mary Bruuson, Somerset 1740 

Beekman, Charles, Jr., New York, and Catherine Brown, Somerset.. .1742 

Beekman, Christopher, Middlesex, and Sarah Cox, Middlesex 1741 

Beekman, James, New York, and Sarah Lefferts 1775 

Beekman, Samuel, New York, and Jane Van Horn, Bergen 176 L 

Beers, Nathan, Middletown, and Sarah Warne, Perth Amboy 1749 

Beesley, John, Jr., Salem, and Hannah Beesley, Salem. 1776 

Beesley, Morris, Salem, and Mary Whetherton 1755 

Beesley, Joseph, Burliugton, and Susannah Crosby, Burlington 1766 

Belange, Joshua, Cape May, and Mary Champion, Gloucester 1751 

Belangey, Newlass, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Morris 1777 

Belcher, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Woolston 1754 

Bell, James, and Michael Johnson 1783 

Bell, James, Gloucester, and Rachel Ruduow 1784 

Bell, Johannes, Orange, N. Y., and Margaret Remseu, Orange, N. Y..1761 

Bell, John, Bucks, Pa., and Priscilla Dyer 1732 

Bell, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hunt 1769 

Bell, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Roberts, Middletown Point. . 1759 

Bellanger, William, Burlington, and Dorothy Stockton 1781 

Bellenger, Thomas, Burlington, and Brazilla Carson -. . . 1768 

Belles, Joseph, Gloucester, and Susannah Fish, Gloucester 1741 

Bellis, Adam, Hunterdon, and Anna Sutphin 1778 

Bellton, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Mary Champion, Gloucester 1728 

Bellville, Nicholas, New Jersey, and Anne Brittan 1780 

Belton, Hezekiah, Salem, and Sarah Bassall 1756 

Benam, Peter, Middlesex, and Hannah Clayton, Monmouth 1759 

Benam, Peter, Freehold, and Catherine Wesel, Freehold 1761 

Beney, James, Cape May, and Priscila Eldridge, Cape May 1751 

Benjamin, Herrick, Morris, and Mary Stout, Monmouth 1764 



June 


13 


Nov. 


17 


May 


3 


Oct. 


4 


July 


11 


Nov. 


2 


Feb. 


22 


June 


20 


April 


24 


April 


8 


Aug. 


22 


July 


17 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


27 


May 


27 


June 


14 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


12 


May 


30 


May 


22 


Nov. 


25 


April 


2 


Feb. 


20 


Nov. 


20 


April 


15 


Dec. 


6 


May 


31 


Jan. 


11 


May 


3 


Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


22 


May 


5 


May 


14 


Mar. 


20 


May 


28 


Jan. 


11 


July 


18 


April 


19 


Jan. 


10 


June 


3 


April 


2 


Feb. 


24 


April 


12 


Mar. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 23 

Bennet, Abraham, Capo May, ami Levice Stevens 1759 

Bennet, Abraham, Gloucester, and Mercy Bates 1782 

Benuet, David, Cumberland, ami Dillilab Thompson 1780 

Benuet, Edward, Monmouth, and Anna Holesberry, Monmouth 1707 

Bennet, Frederick, Monmouth, and Nely Colwells, Monmouth 1702 

Benuet, Garret, Monmouth, and Mary Tilton, Monmouth 1760 

Bennet, Henry, Burlington, and Abigail Borden, Burlington 1774 

Benuet, Jacob, Monmouth, and Uphame Davis, Monmouth 1764 

Benuet, James, Burlington, and Susannah Daually, Burlington 1770 

Benuet, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Voorhies 1779 

Benuet, .Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Anne Randolph 1780 

Bennet, .John, Burlington, and Mary Kindel, Burlington 1741 

Benuet, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Smock, Monmouth 1749 

Benuet, John, Monmouth, and Aultie Covenhoven, Monmouth 1701 

Bennet, John, Bristol, Pa., and Lydia Carr 1778 

Bennet, John, Hunterdon, and Abigail Furman 1779 

Bennet, John, Jr., Somerset, and Jane Van Middleswarth 1783 

Bennet, Joseph, Burlington, and Martha Rogers 1764 

Bennet, Joshua, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Smith 17G8 

Bennet, Michael, Burlington, and Charity Fitz Randolph, Burlington.. 1774 

Bennet, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Reeves 17<s:> 

Bennet, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Curtis, Monmouth 174G 

Bennet, William, Cape May, and Hannah Hand 1702 

Bennet, William, South Amboy, and Catherine Warne, South Amboy. . 1700 

Benuet, William, Monmouth, and Margaret Perce, Monmouth 1763 

Bennett, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Rebecca Brown 1746 

Bennett, John, Burlington, and Sarah Gaskell, Burlington 1772 

Bennett, Thomas, Jr., and Jamima Duffy. , 1778 

Bennit, William, Middletown, and Margaret Smith 1751 

Bennit, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Vanmater, Monmouth.. ..1766 

Benson, James, Cumberland, and Abigail Whitecar, Cumberland 1774 

Benson, William, Hunterdon, and Mary Price , 1778 

Berdau, Jacob D., Bergeu, and Catherine Bilyer 1783 

1 ten Ian, Jacob, Bergen, and Elizabeth Post 1788 

Berdan, John I., Bergen, and Mary Degray 1792 

Bergen, George, Somerset, and Maritie Probasco, Somerset 1744 

Bergen, James, Somerset, and Mary Voorhies 1779 

Bergen, Simon, Long Island, and Gasha Dehart, Middletown 1767 

Berkinshew, Thomas, Burlington, and Margaret Bliss 1738 

Berrien, John, and Margaret Eatton 1759 

Berry, Henry, Morris, and Susannah Alyea 1785 

Berry, James, Hunterdon, and Mary Kelly. Hunterdon 1773 

Berry, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Lefletveau 1734 

Berry, John, Bergen, and Phebe Van der Beck, Bergen 1753 

Berry, Joseph, Gloucester, and Catherine DeGraw, Bergen 1772 

Berry, Paul, Sussex, and Sarah Clawson, Morris 1709 



Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


23 


April 


12 


Oct. 


27 


Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


10 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


21 


June 


22 


Sept. 


2G 


June 


8 


Jan. 


1G 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


16 


Sept. 


6 


Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


21 


Mar. 


28 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


8 


Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


8 


July 


24 


July 


29 


Jan. 


27 


May 


30 


Jan. 


14 


Dec. 


10 


Nov. 


7 


May 


13 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


18 


June 


20 


Sept. 


10 


May 


15 


May 


16 


Nov. 


11 


Aug. 


16 


Sept. 


17 


July 


19 


Nov. 


27 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


25 


Nov. 


14 



24 new jersey Colonial documents. 

Berry, Peter, Morris, and Susannah Jones 1751 

Berry, Philip, Bergen, and Helen Degraw 17-13 

Berry, Phillip, Bergen, Catherine Van Winkle, Essex 1761 

Berry, Samuel, Morris, and Catherine Berry, Morris 1749 

Berry, Sidney, Hunterdon, and Catherine Waldron 17(18 

Berry, Thomas, Somerset and Jane Hernolt, Woodbridge 1758 

Berry, William, Salem, and Rebecca Thompson 17G8 

Berryman, John, Springfield, and Margaret Mariolt 1719 

Bertholf, Jacob, Bergen, and Leah Dobbs. 178G 

Beschever, John, Morris, and Mary Robertson, Monmouth 1781 

Bessonet, John, Bucks, Pa., and Joyce Bramsford, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Best, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Jane Garrabrant 1784 

Beton, Daniel, Middlesex, and Nelly Bordman 1752 

Betts, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Fort 1763 

Bevan, Charles, Philadelphia, and Mary Kemble, Burlington 1772 

Bevan, George, Trenton, and Ann Cleayton 1763 

Bevan, William, Cumberland, and Alisa Moon 1781 

Bevis, Denmore, Little Egg Harbor, and Bloomey Garrish 1784 

Bevis, George, Burlington, and Mary Sooy 1771 

Bevis, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Draper, Burlington 1737 

Bevis, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Brackney, Burlington 1741 

Bevy, John, Burlington, and Prudence Andrews 1764 

Bibb, Thomas, and Ruth Kettle 1693 

Bibby, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Radford, Burlington 1730 

Bibby, Robert, Philadelphia, and Bridget Jackson, Philadelphia 1730 

Bice, Dennis Van Den, Middlesex, and Ann Sebring 1765 

Bickerton, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Sarah Kimble 1778 

Bickerton, George, and Rachel Kimble 1780 

Bickham, Caleb, Gloucester, and Rachel Scull, Gloucester 1762 

Bickham, John, Burlington, and Deriah Jolley, Burlington 1761 

Bickle, Coonrad, Hunterdon, and Anna Sharpenstein, Hunterdon 1752 

Bickley, William, Burlington, and Mary Willis.. 1734 

Biddle, Arney, and Abigail Ogden 1754 

Biddle, Joel, Bordentown, and Mary Walling, Middletown 1748 

Biddle, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Rogers, Burlington 1745 

Biddle, Joseph, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Shreve, Burlington 1763 

Biddle, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Antrum, Burlington 1728 

Bidgood, William, Burlington, and Esther Burroughs 1733 

Biggerlee, John, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Hotchson 1755 

Biggins, John, Burlington, and Rachel McVay 17115 

Biggs, George, Hunterdon, and Jane Bartson, Hunterdon 1773 

Biglow, Samuel, Burlington, and Eleanor Courow, Burlington 1767 

Bilderback, Albert, Salem, and Sarah Bartleson, Salem 1762 

Bilderback, Charles, Salem, Sarah Vickery, Salem 1764 

Bilderback, Isaac, Salem, and Rebecca Vickery 1 772 

Bilderback, Isaac, Salem, and Lydia Wright 1784 



June 


15 


Nov. 


2 


April 


15 


Oct. 


39 


Oct. 


10 


Feb. 


8 


May 


27 


July 


3 


Jan. 


14 


May 


4 


Dec. 


21 


Dec. 


15 


May 


10 


Jan. 


23 


July 


9 


Feb. 


3 


Mar. 


27 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


18 


June 


24 


Feb. 


6 


July 


20 


Mav 


11 


June 


11 


Nov. 


26 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


1 


Aug. 


5 


April 


11 


July 


18 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


4 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


7 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


5 


Jan. 


16 


June 


28 


Sept. 


24 


July 


28 


Sept. 


15 


Sept. 


4 


Mar. 


26 


Mar. 


24 



Marriage licenses. 25 

Bilderback. Jonathan, Salem, and Auu Sullivan, Salem 1771 

Bilderback; Peter, Salem, aud Catherina Gill 175G 

Bilderback, Peter. Salem, and Mary Murphy, Salem 1761 

Biles, Charles, Pennsylvania, and Maria Baker, Pennsylvania 1728 

Biles, John, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Carpenter, Hunterdon 1738 

Piles, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Keziah Hunt, Hunterdon 1737 

Piles, William, Hunterdon, and Mary Opdike ... 1768 

Biles, William, and Sarah Mott 1780 

Billings, Joshua, Cape May, and Prudence Cresse 1787 

Billiugs, William, Cape May, and Charity Ingram, Cape May 1736 

Hillings, William, Cape May, aud Rhoda Hand 1763 

Bills, Daniel, Monmouth, aud Deborah Demean, Monmouth 1764 

Bills, Gersham, Monmouth, aud Margaret Chamberlin, Monmouth..'. . 1755 

Bills, Richard, Monmouth, and Hannah Reuuals, Monmouth 1753 

Bills, Silvanus, Monmouth, and Rachel Lippiucott, Monmouth 1744 

Bills, Sylvester, Bucks, Pa., and Elenor Blackwell 1782 

Bim, John, Burlington, and Mary Sile, Burlington 1763 

Binar, Isaac, Cape May, and Lydia Corson, Cape May 1740 

Binge, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Hetchel Smith, Hunterdon 1728 

Binge, William, Hunterdon, aud Sarah Drake 1780 

Birch, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Mary Jones .... 1736 

Birdsal, Uriah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Webb, Burlington 1767 

Bishop, Barzilla, Burlington, and Ann Jess, Burlington. . 1776 

Bishop, Daniel, Cumberland, and Rhoda Platts, Cumberland. ........ 1762 

Bishop, David, Hunterdon, and Ann Schenck, Hunterdon 1775 

Bishop, Ever, Burlington, and Mary Crispin, Burliugton 1782 

Bishop, Isaiah, Gloucester, and Rebecca Burr. 1782 

Bishop, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Shotwell, Middlesex 1748 

Bishop, John, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Meade, Bucks, Pa 1737 

Bishop, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Matlock, Burliugton 1737 

Bishop, John, Woodbridge, and Mary Marsh, Elizabeth Town 1747 

1 lishop, John, Gloucester, and Mary Hubbs 1778 

Bishop, John, Burliugton, and Mary Stockton 1783 

Bishop, Joseph, Burliugton, and Aune Reeves, Burlington 1754 

Bishop, Joseph, Cumberland, and Anna Harris 1757 

Bishop, Joseph, Cumberland, and Priscilla Loyd, Salem 1761 

Bishop, Joshua, Burlington, and Martha Lanning 1739 

Bishop, Joshua, New Hanover, and Sarah Eslow 1780 

Bishop, Noah, Burlington, and Thankful Bennet. Burlington 1 772 

Bishop, Peter, Burlington, and Ann Wetherill, Burlington 1731 

Bishop, Breston, Cumberland, and Ester Woodruff, Cumberland 1761 

Bishop, Robert, Burliugton, aud Mary Hall 1727 

Bishop, Robert, Burlington, aud Jane Hanes 1759 

Bishop, Robert W., Burlington, and Lucy Ridgeway 1793 

Bishop, Thomas, Burlington, and Elipha Prickett, Burlington 1733 

Bishop, Thomas, Burlington, aud Hannah Lanning, Burlington 1739 



Sept. 


30 


April 


15 


Dec. 


17 


July 


28 


Oct. 


13 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


25 


Oct. 


4 


Jan. 


10 


Feb. 


19 


Feb. 


20 


Mar. 


7 


April 


7 


Sept. 


4 


June 


9 


Aug. 


12 


Sept. 


12 


June 


20 


April 


9 


Jan. 


27 


April 


20 


Oct. 


29 


Sept, 


2 


Feb. 


9 


Oct, 


16 


Feb. 


23 


Aug. 


29 


June 


11 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


5 


Nov. 


30 


Nov. 


24 


May 


28 


Mar. 


:; 


April 


21 


Jau. 


29 


Feb. 


26 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


15 


Mav 


19 


Aug. 


19 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


1 



26 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bishop, Thomas. Burlington, and Sarah Garwood 1754 

Bishop, Thomas, Burlington, and Lucretia Furnace 1779 

■ Bishop, Timothy, Burlington, and Sophia Brock, Burlington 1761 

Bishop, William, Burlington, and Mary Indicott, Burlington 1729 

Bishop, William, Burlington, and Ann Richards 1734 

Bishopp, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Smith, Burlington 1730 

Bispham, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Hope Fortune 1783 

Bispham, John, Burlington, and Margaret Reynolds, Burlington 1754 

Bispham, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Foster 1785 

Bispham, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Anderson 1787 

Bispham, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Bispham, Burlington . . 1781 

Bispham, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Hinchman, Gloucester 1754 

Bispham, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Haines 1784 

Bisset, Andrew, Perth Amboy, and Anne Jolly, Perth Amboy 1758 

Bisset, John, New Jersey, and Jane Delap, New Jersey 1742 

Bittle, William, Salem, and Rebecca Hoffman 1781 

Black, Hugh, Sussex, and Elizabeth Flatt, Sussex 1773 

Black, Jacob, Monmouth, and Jannet Lippincott, Monmouth 1742 

Black, John, Philadelphia, and Amye Borden, Bordentown 1746 

Black, Jobn, Burlington, and Mary Lippincott, Burlington 1770 

Black, John, Burlington, and Lydia Newbold 1784 

Black, William, Burlington, and Mary Gibbs, Burlington 1754 

Blackham, Josiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stoakes, Burlington 1729 

Blacklege, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Randall 1730' 

Blackman, David, Gloucester, and Mary Clark 1769 

Blackmore, George, Burlington, and Mary Merrit, Burlington 1728 

Blackwell, Elijah, Hunterdon, and Martha Lanning 1781 

Blackwell, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Mary Brewer, Monmouth 1764 

Blackwood, John, Salem, and Hannah Stretch, Salem 1778 

Blackwood, Joseph, Salem, and Rebecca Moss, Salem 1770 

Blaen, Hendrick, Somerset, and Catalintie Lineson, New York 1748 

Blain, James, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Dennison, New Brunswick. . 1748 

Blair, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Leech 1781 

Blair, David, Essex, and Beeltye Freeland ,. . , 1783 

Blair, James, and Eophram Colbraeth 1760 

Blair, Robert, Burlington, and Ann Walker 1780 

Blake, William, Monmouth, and Rhode Smith, Monmouth 1709 

Blake, Thomas, Burlington, and Anne 1728 

Blakeman, Andrew, Gloucester, and Mary Allen, Gloucester 1733 

Blakeney, William, Bergen, and Mary Moore, Bergen 1771 

Bland, James, and Elleanor Obrian 1760 

Blauvelt, David, New York, and Rachel Ackerson, New York 1765 

Blauvelt, Jacobus, Bergen, and Catrina Smit 1763 

Blauvelt, Johannis, Bergen, and Fammetie Vauder Beck, Bergen 1773 

Blauvelt, John, Bergen, and Jannetye Alyee .... 1783 

Blauvelt, Joseph, Bergen, and Johanna Demorest, Bergen 1769 April 29 



Mar. 


5 


May 


18 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


9 


Dec. 


29 


Feb. 


6 


Sept. 


16 


July 


27 


Oct. 


8 


Aug. 


21 


Feb. 


18 


Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


11 


July 


24 


April 


11 


Aug. 


23 


Dec. 


9 


Sept. 


3 


Sept. 


22 


Feb. 


10 


Aug. 


14 


Feb. 


1 


April 


15 


April 


10 


July 


26 


Mar. 


20 


Dec. 


4 


April 


28 


Aug. 


27 


June 


1 


Jan. 


28 


May 


22 


Mar. 


17 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


4 


Julv 


17 


July 


29 


July 


25 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


13 


Oct. 


12 


Oct. 


1 


July 


26 


Mar. 


6 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



27 



Blauvelt, Richard, Bergen, and Sally Van Dalseu 1781 April 7 

Bleuchfill, James, Morris, and Margaret Ferver, Morris 1774 June 8 

Bligh, Patrick, 26th Regt. Foot, and Abigail Seolse, 2Gth Regt. Foot. . 1768 Mar. 25 

Bli«s, George, Bordentown, and Susannah Preston, Mansfield 1751 June 26 

Blizard, John, Jr., Cumberland, and Susannah Taylor, Cumberland. . .1776 June 4 

Blond, Gabriel, Burlington, and Susanna Yard, Burlington 1739 April 18 

Bloodgood, Aaron, Middlesex, and Abigail Carman, Middlesex 1763 Mar. 31 

Bloodgood, Francis, Middlesex, and Margaret Backelow, Middlesex. .. 1764 Dec. 15 

Bloodgood, Gach, Woodbridge, and Susannah Shippey, Woodbridge. .1755 Nov. 15 

Bloom, Abram, Hunterdon, and Mary Pickle 1780 Sept. 20 

Bloomer, John George, Salem, and Catherine Ullrich '. . . 1771 May 21 

Bloomfield, Ezekiel, Middlesex, and Margaret Forster, Middlesex ....1744 Oct. 18 

Bloomfield, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Cowan, Burlington. . 1773 June 28 

Bloomfield, Nathaniel, Woodbridge, and Abigail Elston, Woodbridge. 1748-9 Mar. 14 

Bloomfield, Thomas, Woodbridge, and Sarah Morris, Woodbridge ... 1758 Jan. 3 

Bloomfield, Thomas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Morris, Middlesex. . . . 1772 Aug. 4 

Bloomfield, Timothy, Jr., Woodbridge, and Sarah Foord, Woodbridge 1749 May 22 

Bloomfield, William, Woodbridge, and Jane Ross, Woodbridge 1758 Oct. 23 

Blue, Frederick, Somerset, and Elizabeth McNeal 1784 Oct. 7 

Blue, Michael, and Nelly Hollinsett 

Board, Burgin, Somerset, and Mary Robinson, Hopewell 1734 April 2 

Board, Cornelius, Bergen, and Annas Board 1785 Aug. 27 

Bockitt, Josiah, and Mary Johnson 1784 Dec. 1 1 

Bodine, Francis, Middlesex, and Rachel Wilson, Middlesex 1755 Jan. 29 

Bodine, Francis, Burlington, and Mary Rose, Burlington 1768 Mar. 20 

Bodine, Peter, Somerset, and Mary Wartrebe, Somerset 1749 Oct. 5 

Bogart, Peter, Somerset, and Mary Vanmiddleswart 1742 April 26 

Bogart, Roelof, and Jannet Bauta 175(5 Aug. 19 

Bogart, Stephen, Bergen, and Maritie Hammond, Bergen 1761 July 6 

Bogert, Cornelius, Somerset, and Mary Van Scaick 1742 Jan. 22 

Bogert, Cornelius, Somerset, and Catherine Van Nest, Somerset 1752 Jan. 22 

Bogert, Isaac, Bergen, and Antie Van Horn, Bergen 1761 Feb. 26- 

Bogert, Jacob, Bergen, and Geesie Kipp, Bergen 1771 Aug. 1 

Bogert, Stephen, Bergen, and Geesje Westervelt 1770 Nov. 21 

Bogert, Jost, Bergen, and Mary Zabriskie 1772 Sept. 12 

Boggs, Samuel, Salem, and Rebecca Boggs 1730 Jan. 18 

Boggs, Samuel, Gloucester, and Margaret Holloway, Gloucester 1762 April 21 

Boice, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Jane Campbell 1767 June 5 

Bollinger, Jacob, Gloucester, and Anne Stiner 1784 April 20 

Bolton, Joseph, Burlington, and Rachel Matson, Burlington 1771 Nov. 6 

Bolton, Nehemiah, Bucks, Pa.j and Susanna Orchard, Perth Amboy. . 1754 April 12 

Bomen, George, Burlington, and Mary Thompson 1760 June 9 

Bond, Elijah, Trenton, and Mary Biddle, Trenton 1742 Dec. 13 

Bond, James, Salem, and Sarah Richmond 1758 June 15 

Bond, James, Salem, and Sarah Dickinson, Salem 1768 July 31 

Bond, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Mary Cain 1784 June 15 



2§ NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bond, Joshua, Monmouth, and Mary Corlies, Monmouth 1745 

Bond, Levi, Cumberland, and Rebekah Burr 1782 

Bond, Richard, Cumberland, and Tamon Howell 1781 

Bond, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Weyman 1742 

Boner, Robert, Salem, and Hannah Peck, Salem 1761 

Bongart, Johannis, Bergen, and Mary Zebrisco, Bergen 1754 

Bonham, Jeremiah, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Cock, Shrewsbury. . . . 1758 

Bonham, Samuel, Burlington, and Ruth Bowyer, Philadelphia 1747 

Bonnel, Aaron, Morris, and Ann Brotherton 1772 

Bonnel, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Shinn, Burlington 1731 

Bonnel, Joseph, Monmouth, and Rachel Pittenger, Monmouth 1767 

Boody, John George, Gloucester, and Lydia Giberson 1773 

Boon, Thomas, Salem, and Mary Fitz, Salem 1767 

Booradaile, Arthur, Burlington, and Margery Addams, Burlington. . . 1731 

Booram, Aaron, Somerset, and Mary Lane, Somerset 1749 

Booth, Edward, Maryland, and Hannah Flat 1779 

Booth, Robert, Trenton, and Agues Braithwaite, Trenton 1772 

Booz, Peter, Bristol, Pa., and Mary Cooper, Bristol, Pa 1774 

Borden, Ebenezer, Burlington, and Amy Andrews, Burlington 1748 

Borden, Francis, Monmouth, and Solos Johnston 1790 

Borden, Jacob, Burlington, and Margaret Barbiss, Burlington 1775 

Borden, John, Monmouth, and Lydia Worthley, Monmouth 1767 

Borden, John, Burlington, and Content Chayton 1783 

Borden, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Mary Earle, Burlington 1730 

Borden, Jonathan, Jr., Burlington, and Rebecca Homer, Burlington. .1743 

Borden, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Martha Holme, Gloucester 1754 

Borden, Jonathan. Burlington, and Lydia Mason 1781 

Borden, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Beunet, Monmouth 1757 

Borden, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Baker, Burlington 1762 

Borden, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Lippincott 1783 

Borden, Richard, Middletown, and Esther Layton 1747 

Borden, Richard, Burlington, and Catherine Taylor, Burlington. . .. 1772 

Borden, Richard, Burlington, and Catherine Deberd 1780 

Borden, Richard, Gloucester, and Sarah Hopper 1788 

Borden, Thomas, and Mary Coulton, Monmouth 1746 

Borden, Thomas, Monmouth, and Massey Jackson 1751 

Borden, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Wooly 178U 

Bordine, Nicholas, Somerset, and Ann Webster 1781 

Borradaille, William, Burlington, and Jerusey Jordon. 1782 

Borraidell, William, Burlington, and Sarah Rockhill, Burlington 

Borrowe, Crawley, Perth Ainboy, and Catherine Weekes, Perth Amb'y. 1754 

Borton, Abraham, Burlington, and Margery Kirkbride 1764 

Borton, Jacob, Burlington, and Jemimah French 1790 

Borton, John, Burlington, and Hester Alcot, Burlington 1754 

Borton, Joshua, Burlington, and Rachel Boston 1781 

Borton, William, Burlington, and Martha Owen, Burlington 1760 



June 


2 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


28 


Oct. 


31 


Dec. 


23 


July 


8 


May 


24 


May 


29 


April 


13 


Nov. 


23 


May 


9 


Jan. 


4 


Feb. 


17 


April 


27 


Dec. 


4 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


5 


May 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


7 


June 


26 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


13 


Nov. 


26 


Sept. 


14 


Mar. 


25 


Jan. 


4 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


13 


Sept. 


22 


May 


28 


Sept. 


21 


Nov. 


23 


Dec. 


1 


Jan. 


29 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


19 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


3 


Sept. 


15 


April 


21 


Sept. 


16 


Sept. 


24 


April 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 29 

Boseubark, Abram, Hunterdon, and Anney Vauhorn, Hunterdon 1763 

dosser, Christopher, Burlington, and Anne Mason, Burlington 1774 

Boswick, Francis, Burlington, and Priscilla Pacock, Burlington 1682 

Botfield, Frederick, aud Sarah Delaney 1787 

Bouker, Michael, Burlington, and Mary Collios 1711 

Bonlton, Henry, Northampton, aud Hannah Davis, Northampton 1746 

Bjulton, Isaac, Burlington, and Sarah Applegate, Burlington 1715 

Bjulton, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Warrick, Burlington 1773 

Bjulton, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Scott, Burlington 1774 

Boulton, William, Burlington, and Hannah Campbell, Burlington. . . . 1766 

Bourdett, Oliver, Bergen, and Catherine Lydecker, Bergen 1769 

Bourdett, Peter, Bergen, and Rachel Bones, Bergen 1762 

Bourdett, Samuel, Bergen, and Rebecca Smit, Bergen 1764 

Bourdett, Stephen, Bergen, and Nelly Bauta, Bergen 1764 

Bourne, Jonathan, Bucks, Pa., and Susanna Jackson, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Boutteuhouse, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Rachel Buukston 1762 

Bouynten, Robert, Bergen, and Mary Maloney 177 

Bovee, Martin, Essex, and Sukey Jones, Bergen 1749 

Bjwden, John, Burlington, and Margaret Shepherd 1789 

Bowen, Dan, Cumberland, and Sarah Stiles, Cape May 1766 

Bowen, Dan, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Kelsay 1780 

Bowen, Dan, Cumberland, and Ruth Swinney 1785 

Bowen, David, Cumberland, and Lucy Shepherd, Cumberland 1763 

Bowen, David, Cumberland, and Zeruiah Hughes, Cape May 1775 

Bowen, David, Jr., Cumberland, and Jane Potter /. .1788 

Bowen, Elijah, Cumberland, and Rachel Harris, Cumberland 1771 

Bowen, James, Hunterdon, and Prudence Yard 1779 

Bowen, James, Hunterdon, and Mary Biggs 1785 

Bowen, Jeremiah, Cumberland, and Sarah Slatham, Cumberland 1769 

Bowen, John, Burlington, and Susanna Britain, Burlington 1774 

Bowen, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Rebecca Shepperd 1758 

Bowen, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Rachel Pennington 1760 

Bowen, Joseph, Cumberland, and Mary Bacon, Cumberland 1761 

Bowen, Samuel, Cumberland, and Anne Chester, Cumberland 1768 

Bowen, Samuel, Cumberland, and Rebecca Glaspey, Cumberland 1771 

Bowen, Seth, and Charity Billins 1778 

Bowen, Smith, Cumberland, and Mary Hand 1786 

Bowen, Stephen, Cumberland, and Rhoda Stratton , 1 786 

Bower, Edmond, Burlington, and Mary Foster, Burlington 1765 

Bower, John, Hallafax, and Elizabeth Hoffmire, Middletown L767 

Bower, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Mayple 1769 

Bower, Robert, New York, and Elizabeth Rickey, Somerset 1760 

Bowers, Ebeuezer, Salem, and PrisiLla Burrows (?), Salem 1730 

Bowers, Michael, Cumberland, and Catherine Sleesman 1779 

Bowes, Francis, Hunterdon, aud Anne Anthony, Hunterdon 1728 

Bowin, George, Salem, and Charity Davis, Salem 1738 



Nov. 


4 


Oct. 


29 


Feb. 


19 


April 


12 


Sept. 


9 


Nov. 


3 


July 


15 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


31 


May 


28 


Feb. 


15 


June 


18 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


1 


Dec. 


28 


May 


3 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


16 


July 


27 


Mar. 


28 


Dec. 


20 


April 


6 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


5 


Feb. 


18 


Jan. 


13 


Aug. 


24 


Dec. 


20 


July 


19 


Dec. 


4 


Nov. 


8 


Dec. 


22 


July 


11 


Oct. 


30 


May 


27 


Jan. 


24 


May 


13 


Oct. 


22 


Feb. 


25 


June 


15 


Dec. 


2 


May 


1 


Aug. 


3 


Nov. 


18 


Aug. 


26 



30 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bowker, Barzillai, Burlington, aud Hester Minyon, Burlington 1774 

Bowker, Charles, Burlington, and Alice Falks, Burlington 1770 

Bowker, John, Burlington, and Jemima Mills, Burlington 1738 

Bowker, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Lame 178-1 

Bowker, Joseph, Burlington, aud Grace Garwood, Burlington 1716 

Bowker, Laban, Burlington, and Rhoda Gaskill, Burlington. 1784 

Bowker, Levi, Burliugton, and Anne Mount, Burlington 1773 

Bowker, Lot, Burlington, and Ann Glasby, Burlington 1777 

Bowker, Richard, Burlington, Joanna James 1741 

Bowker, Richard, Burlington, and Esther Gwin, Burlington 1750 

Bowlby, George, Burlington, and Elizabeth Tonkin, Burlington 1737 

Bowlby, Thomas, Morris, and Catherine Fitzrandolph 1745 

Bowlby, Thomas, Morris, and Mary Tuley, Burlington 1749 

Bowman, Edmond, and Margaret Watson 1781 

Bowman, George, Hunterdon, and Sarah Jewell, Hunterdon 1768 

Bowne, Abraham, Bucks, Pa., and Grace Jones, Bucks, Pa. . . 1749 

Bowne, Andrew, Monmouth, and Mary Barcalow, Monmouth 1765 

Bowne, Henry, Hunterdon, aud Charity HofE 1784 

Bowne, James, Middletown, and Elizabeth O. Hartshorne 1743 

Bowne, John, Monmouth, and Catherine Disberry, Amboy 1752 

Bowne, John, and Francis Bowman 1692 

Bowne, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Schanck, Monmouth 1757 

Bowne, Joseph, Monmouth, aud Hannah Anderson 1763 

Bowne, Obadiah, and Anne Reid, Freehold 1749 

Bowne, Obadiah. Monmouth, and Susannah Debowe 1770 

Bowne, Phillip, Burlington, and Mary Taylor, Burlington 1765 

Bowne, Phillip, Burlington, and Sarah Wilson 1778 

Bowne, Safety, Monmouth, and Phebe Worden, Monmouth 1743 

Bowne, Samuel, Middletown, and Mary Laylon, Middletown 1751 

Bowne, Samuel, Monmouth, and Patience Covenover, Monmouth 1754 

Bowne, Samuel, Monmouth, and Margaret Debowe, Monmouth.. .. 1763 

Bowne, Thomas, Monmouth, and Helen Read, Monmouth . 1747 

Bowne, William, Monmouth, and Phebe Davis, Monmouth 1755 

Bowne, William, New York, aud Sarah Newbold 1791 

Bowman, Ichabod, Monmoutb, and Lydia Petty, Monmouth 1744 

Bowye, John, Gloucester, aud Mary Nixon 1 731 

Boyce, George, Somerset, aud Lena Sydarn, Somerset 1751 

Boyce, Jacob, Middlesex, aud Mary Rappleye 1744 

Boyd, Robert, New York, and Mary Vanderpool, Essex 1753 

Boyd, William, Somerset, and Esther Parkison 1775 

Boyd, William, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Anderson, Burlington 1775 

Boyer, David, Monmouth, and Margaret Hardin, Momnouth. 1761 

Boyes, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Dodson, Burlington 1683 

Boyle, Hugh, New Jersey, aud Catherine Sampson 1777 

Boyle, John, Somerset, and Haunah Frasie, Middlesex 1761 

Boyle, Joseph, Morris, and Ketrin Cross, Somerset 1776 



Mar. 


4 


Oct. 


5 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


5 


May 


15 


Feb. 


24 


Oct. 


16 


May 


12 


May 


13 


Sept. 


26 


Aug. 


17 


June 


10 


June 


12 


Sept. 


18 


July 


15 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


11 


June 


30 


Aug. 


17 


May 


27 


Dec. 


26 


June 


13 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


12 


April 


3 


Mar. 


11 


Jan. 


10 


April 


22 


Nov. 


28 


Sept. 


3 


April 


16 


Dec. 


26 


July 


28 


May 


11 


Oct. 


18 


June 


19 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


7 


Feb. 


19 


June 


27 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


1 


July 


14 


Aug. 


7 


May 


1 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Boylston, Edward, Bergen, and Catey Boudet 17G3 

Boys, Elias, Gloucester, and Sarah Shaw, Cumberland 1760 

Boys, Nathan, Jr., Gloucester, and Mary Reynolds, Gloucester 17(53 

Boyse, John, New Jersey, and Sytie Van Winkle, Somerset 1719 

Boyse, Leonard, Middlesex, and Mary Stvidam, Somerset 17f)'2 

Bozorth, Andrew, Burlington, and Mary Bishop, Burlington 1750 

Bozorth, Zebulon, Burlington, and Margaret Regens, Burlington 17C8 

Bozworth, John, Burlington, and Innocent Borden 1734 

Bozworth, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Symonds, Burlington 1747 

Brachman, Mathias, Burlington, and Isabella Wair. . 1760 

Brackney, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail Borden, Burlington 1657 

Brackney, Joseph, Burlington, and Rachel Middleton 1782 

Brackney, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Smith 1787 

Braddock, Kobert, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bates, Burlington 1737 

Bradford, William, Philadelphia, and Rachel Budd, Burlington 1742 

Bradhurst, Samuel, and Mary Smith 1778 

Bradshaw, Samuel, Burlington, and Jane Newell, Burlington 1776 

Bradway, Aaron, Salem, and Mary Walden; Salem 1742 

Bradway, Joshua, Salem, and Hannah Wiggins, Salem 1739 

Bradway, Nathan, Salem, and Deborah Thackery, Pennsylvania 1771 

Brady, Hugh, and Hannah Halee 1741 

Brady, John, Beading Town, and Elizabeth Vanetta, Heading Town . . 1749 

Braines, John, Hunterdon, and Anne Auderson, Hunterdon 1728 

Braithwaite, William, Salem, and Ann Worlidge, Salem ..... .1702 

Bralesford, Abrrn, Bristol, Pa., and Frances White, Bristol, Pa 1739 

Braman, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Drussilla Tomliu, Gloucester. . . . 1768 

Braman, Jonathan, Burlington, and Anna Starkey 1779 

Bramar, Robert, Gloucester, and Martha Bright, Gloucester 1741 

Bramiu, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth Pointzell, Burlington. . .1741 
Brand, William, Monmouth, and Deborah Lawrence, Monmouth. ...1767 

Brandreth, Timothy, Cape May, and Elizabeth Hughes 1776 

Branin, Michael, Burlington, and Elizabeth Norcross, Springfield 1730 

Branin, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth "Brooks, Burlington 1771 

Brannin, Cornelius, Burlington, and Amelia Neveu, Burlington 1773 

Brannin, Luke, Monmouth, and Joice Hauce, Monmouth 1762 

Branson, John, Gloucester, and Abigail Graisbury 1788 

Branson, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Edge, New Hanover 1745-6 

Branson, Moses, Burlington, and Sara Borrodail, Burlington 1766 

Brant, John, Hunterdon, and Clara Anthony 1779 

Brasee, Christophel, Somerset, and Jane Vannest, Somerset. . 1748 

Brass, Elias, Burlington, and Rachel Ony, Burlington 1742 

Bratt, Aaron, New York, and Petertie Marselis, Bergen 1760 

Bray, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Cornelia Traphagen 1780 

Bray, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Mary Woolverton 1 772 

Bray, James, Monmouth, and Catherine Winter, Monmouth 1756 

Bray, James, Morris, and Mary Fitz Randolph, Middlesex 1771 



May 


2 


July 


14 


Oct. 


17 


May 


27 


Aug. 


22 


May 


21 


April 


7 


July 


13 


July 


14 


May 


9 


Feb. 


24 


May 


6 


Mar. 


10 


Nov. 


24 


Aug. 


18 


Dec. 


16 


Mar. 


26 


Oct. 


10 


Mar. 


8 


Dec. 


24 


May 


28 


Jan. 


6 


July 


30 


July 


2 


April 


19 


Feb. 


27 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


7 


Sept. 


14 


Feb. 


20 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


24 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


30 


Oct. 


7 


Nov. 


18 


Mar. 


18 


Dec. 


5 


April 


17 


April 


8 


Jan. 


24 


May 


21 


Dec. 


3 


May 


2 


Feb. 


23 


Oct. 


3 



32 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bray, Samuel, Middletown, ami Rebecca Applegate, Middletown 1753 

Brayley, Banjamin, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Cook, Hunterdon 1732 

Brayman, Jonathan, Burliugton, and Sarah Wilson, Burlington 1742 

Brayman, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Lycans 1783 

Breasley, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Rhoda Mershon 1783 

Breaser, James, Cumberland, and Sarah Dare 1754 

Breding, John, Salem, and Ann Ashton, Salem 1764 

Brees, John, Jr., Somerset, and Hannah Gildersleeves, Morris 1769 

Brelford, John, Backs, Pa., and Mary White 1734 

Brelford, John, Bucks, Pa., and Rebecca Brown 1760 

Brelsford, John, Bucks, Pa., aud Catherine Weaver, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Brelsford, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., Rabecca White, Bucks, Pa 1742 

Brewer, Abraham, Bergen, aud Catey Fuuk, Bargen. 1763 

Brewer. Abraham D., Bergen, and Elizabeth Devoe 1788 

Brewer, Adam, Monmouth, and Catherine Mitchell, Monmouth 1742 

Brewer, Adam, Monmouth, and Mary Curtise, Monmouth 1761 

Brewer, Bsnjarnin, Monmouth, and Mary Lane, Monmouth 1767 

Brewer, Elazarus, Monmouth, and Frances Morris, Monmouth 1755 

Brewer, Elias, Burlington, and Rebecca Wickers 1786 

Brewer, George, Monmouth, and Lidy Clark, Monmouth 1761 

Brewer, Hendrick, Monmouth, and Abigail Hunt, Monmouth 17(13 

Brewer, John, Monmouth, aud Ann Hulse, Monmouth 1761 

Brewer, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Wickoff 1783 

Brewer, Lias, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Palmer, Monmouth 1753 

Brewer, Peter, Somerset, aud Margaret Melow, Somerset 1780 

Brewer, Theodorus, Bergen, and Mary Berry 1790 

Brewer, William, Monmouth, and Lydia Herbert 1742 

Brewer, William, Reading Town, and Margaret Van Sickle, Rd'ng T'n. 1748 

Brewster, Daniel, Cumberland, and Prudence Reeves 1780 

Brewster, Francis, Cumberland, and Rebecca Peck 1758 

Breyan, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary White, Burlington 1746 

Brian, John, Burlington, and Mary Manus 1733 

Brian, Joseph, Salem, and Martha Vaughn. 1774 

Brian, Richard, Burlington, and Hannah Crockford, Burlington 1754 

Brian, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Connaro 1782 

Briane, Thomas, Gloucester, and Sarah Dunn, Gloucester 1727 

ririant, Robert, Gloucester, an 1 Rachel Ware, Gloucester 1 758 

Briarly, John, and Mary Lloyd 1768 

Brick, Ephriam, Cumberland, and Ruth Gallasby, Cumberland 1764 

Brick, Ephriam, Monmouth, and Mary Tilton 1765 

Brick, Joseph, Salem, aud Elizabeth Cairle 1736 

Brick, Joshua, Salem, and Ruth Rumsey, Salem 1737 

Brick, Joshua, Cumberland, and Lydia Peters, Cumberland, 1771 

] !rick, Joshua, Cumberland, and Mary Fithian 1786 

Brick, William, Salem, and Rachel Elwell, Salem 1731 

Brick, William, Salem, and Rachel Dare, Cumberland 1768 



Oct. 


2 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


1 


Jan. 


14 


Dec. 


8 


Aug. 


22 


Dec. 


12 


Jan. 


30 


April 


13 


Nov. 


13 


April 


18 


Sept. 


21 


April 


2 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


12 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


16 


June 


25 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


25 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


1 


April 


5 


Jan. 


27 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


28 


May 


19 


Sept. 


30 


April 


10 


Jan. 


6 


Aug. 


16 


Dec. 


6 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


25 


Jan. 


5 


Dec. 


7 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


14 


Sept. 


9 


April 


1 


July 


25 


Aug. 


5 


Mar. 


28 


June 


1 


Jam 


14 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



33 



1773 
1740 
1769 



Briggs, Abel, Burlington, and Lettice Woolston, Burlington 1773 

Briggs, David, Burliugton, and Hannah Ong 1759 

Briggs, George, Burlington, and Anne Woolston, Burlington 1734 

Briggs, George, Philadelphia, and Anne Clap 1773 

Briggs, Jobs, Piscataway, and Mary Beytenla, Piscataway 1742 

Briggs, John, and Sarah Smith 1701 

Briggs, John, Burlington, and Hannah Briggs, Burlington 1766 

Bright, James, Gloucester, and Martha Hartman, Gloucester 1729 

Bright, James, Gloucester, and Catherine Laypole, Gloucester 1765 

Bright, John, Gloucester, and Ellenor Long 1756 

Bright, Philip, Somerset, and Autye McKinuey 1768 

Bright, Thomas, Gloucester, and Ellen Vaneman, Gloucester 1753 

Bright, Thomas, Gloucester, and Isabell Supplee, Gloucester 1768 

Bright, William, Gloucester, and Eleanor Johnson, Gloucester. ... 1762 

Brightwell, Benjamin, Burlington, and Di adame Adams ,, f 1 ■ • ■ .1764 

Brimley, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and 1 S^iah. t^ooardj.ijiD.<L civ 1HQ 

Brinckerhoff, John, Bergen, and Sal ly Smitlk J$uaj^,jjSy 

Bringinham, Thomas, Burlington, a id Elinor Sullivan, Burlingtc n.. 

Brinkerhoff, Cornelius, Bergen, and Jannetie Kipp, Bergew 

Brinley, Sylvester, Monmouth, and Jargaret Woolley, Monmouth ...1752 
Britain Samuel, Staten Island, and 1 iWy De Young, New rurti. I . . . . 1764 

Britan, Richard, Burlington, and Rhoda Woodward 1767 

Brittan, Abraham, Monmouth, and Sarah Stilwell 1757 

Brittau, John, Kiugwood, and Hannah Opdike 1781 

Britten, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Abigail Hoff, Monmouth 1762 

Britton, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Dinah Robins, Middlesex 1750 

Britton, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Margaret Herung 1778 

Britton, William, Long Island, and Mary Collins, Monmouth 1743 

Broadwater, George, Philadelphia, and Mary Pepper, Philadelphia. ..1738 

Brocaw, Isaac, Somerset, and Antie Van Noorstrand, Somerset 1746 

Brock, Dauiel, Burlington, and Deborah Deacon 1784 

Brock, John, Burliugton, and Mary Brockney 1779 

Brodenck, Thomas, Burlington, and Parthenia Potter, Burlington 1756 

Broderick, James, Sussex, and Mary Rickey, Sussex 1774 

Brodnax, Robert, Bucks, Pa., and Christian Keene 1734 

Brodnax, William, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Wright, Bucks, Pa 1761 

Broguard, John, Burliugton, and Sarah Smith 1784 

Brokaw, Abraham, Somerset, and Judith Davis, Somerset 1751 

Brokaw, Bergun, Somerset, and Jane Mount 1779 

Brokaw, Hendrick, Somerset, and Elizabeth Beard 1782 

Brokaw, John, Somerset, and Arianche Van Nortwick 1781 

Brokaw, Peter, New Jersey, and Rebecca Hoff 1783 

Brokaw, Simon, Somerset, and Mary Mocklaw 1778 

Brook, Mathias, Burlington, and Rachel Reeves, Burlington 1750 

Brooke, Bower, Gloucester, and Mary Browne, Gloucester 1761 

Brookes, Stephen, Burlington, and Ann Elkinton, Burlington 1740 



Jan. 25 

Dec. 14 

Sept. 14 

Jan. 23 

Nov. 20 

Aug. 30 

Aug. 9 

July 23 

Aug. 20 

Jan. 12 

Nov. 26 

June 16 

July 29 



6 

is 



July 
Jan. 

July 14 

Mar. 19 

Nov. 3 

Sept. 17 

Mar. 17 

Nov. 17 

July 23 

June 10 

June 2 

July 15 

Jan. 17 

April 25 

Nov. 30 

July 1 

May 31 

Mar. 16 

Feb. 9 

Nov. 12 

April G 

Oct. 9 

July 14 

Jan. 7 

Aug. 26 

Mar. 29 



Nov. 4 

Dec. 2 

Dec. 12 

Oct. 7 

Sept. 19 

April 4 

Aug. 19 



34 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Brooks, David, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Parker 1778 

Brooks, Isaac, New Brunswick, and Mary Dotie, New Brunswick 1739 

Brooks, Isaac, Burlington, and Margaret Parker 1778 

Brooks, John, Chester, Pa., and Mary Clark, Chester, Pa 1749 

Brooks, John, Cumberland, and Mary Jenkins 1778 

Brooks, John, Burlington, and Susannah Garwood, Burliugton 17S1 

Brooks, Jonathan, Cape May, and Mary Kimme 1 778 

Brooks, Joseph, Sussex, and Dorothy Lander alias Palmer 1769 

Brooks, Oliver, New Jersey, and Anne Wetherel 1791 

Brooks, Samuel, Burlington, aud Mary Parker, Burlington ... 1782 

Brooks, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Ann Kuowles, Trenton 1778 

Brooks, William, Salem, and Isabel Furier 1745 

Brooks, William, Burlington, and Hannah Guinnell, Burlington 1758 

Brooks, William, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Hibbs 1782 

Broom, John, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Isdall, Burlington 1775 

Broom, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Grace Stackbouse, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Broom, Tbomas, Bristol, Pa., and Mary Scattergood. 1782 

Brotherton, William, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Riddle 1776 

Brower, William, Shrewsbury, aud Sarah Allen, Shrewsbury. 1751 

Brown, Abia, Burlington, and Margaret Sharp, Salem ,*..'. 1765 

Brown, Abraham, Chesterfield, and Susanna Richardson, Chesterfield. 1749 

Brown, Abraham, Burlington, and Jane Ridgway, Burlington 1774 

Brown, Alexander, Trenton, and Anne Bickham, Burlington 1774 

Brown, Andrew, Middlesex, and Hannah Reed, Middlesex 1744 

Brown, Andrew, Monmouth, and Sary Frances, Monmouth 1767 

Brown, Audrew, Hunterdon, and Mary Burt 1778 

Brown, Andrew, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Laboyteaur 1783 

Brown, Arthur, Jr.. Monmouth, and Jane Robertson, Monmouth 1746 

Brown. Caleb, New York, and Phebe Burge, Middletown 1752 

Brown, Carlisle, Middlesex, and Ann Williams, Essex 1762 

Brown, Clayton, Burlington, and Mary Robins. . 1749-50 

Brown, Daniel, Virginia, and Grace Thompson, Alloways Creek 1 750 

Brown, Edward, Burlington, aud Anne Wilkinson, Burlington 1750 

Brown, Elias, Oxford, Pa., and Elizabeth Dungan, Oxford, Pa 1774 

Brown, Elias, aud Mary Spence 1781 

Brown, Elisha, Philadelphia, and Mary Randolph 1783 

Brown, George, Middlesex, and Mary Alston 1 745 

Brown, George, Monmouth, aud Margaret Woolley, Monmouth 1755 

Brown, Henry, and Ann Richardson 1735 

Brown, Isaac, Philadelphia, aud Sarah Harrison, Philadelphia 1737 

Brown, Isaac, Essex, and Fythe Willis, Essex 1754 

Brown, Jacob, Monmouth, and Sarah Parker 1777 

Brown, Jacobus, New York, and Catharine Leasear, New York 1754 

Brown, James, and Agnes Hay, Woodbridge 1743 

Brown, James, Gloucester, and Alice Wood, Gloucester 1754 

Brown, Japhet, Burlington, and Rachel Brayman, Burlington 1773 



Dec. 


11 


Feb. 


27 


Nov. 


25 


May 


10 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


16 


July 


24 


April 


19 


Dec. 


7 


May 


1 


Aug. 


27 


Sept. 


26 


Oct. 


3 


June 


19 


Sept. 


23 


Dec. 


30 


April 


2 


Mar. 


25 


Mar. 


12 


July 


26 


Aug. 


22 


June 


8 


April 


23 


Nov. 


24 


Jan. 


16 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


16 


Mar. 


8 


June 


26 


May 


30 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


9 


April 


12 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


4 


Jan. 


22 


Oct. 


22 


June 


5 


Oct. 


16 


Oct. 


5 


May 


25 


April 


23 


Nov. 


27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



35 



Jereraiab, Monmouth, aud Rachel Hulit, Monmouth 17">5 

John, Burliugton, and Mary ( i irdon, Middlesex 1729 

John, Monmouth, and Barbery Thomson, MoDmouth 1743 

John, Burlington, and Margaret Robins, Monmouth 1750 

John, Somerset, and Margaret Aikman, Morris 1753 

John, Woodbridge, aud Esther Frazee, Elizabeth Town 1754 

John, Burlington, and Alice Coward 1759 

John, Burlington, and Deborah Claypoole, Willingborough 1766 

John, Jr., Essex, and Catherine Devoisnee, Essex 1767 

John, Cumberland, aud Hannah Scott, Cumberland 1774 

John, Burliugton, aud Mary Norcross, Burlington 1775 

John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Patou 1777 

John, Burlington, and Mary Page, Burlington 1780 

Jonathan, Burliugton, aud Hannah Bulong, Notingham 1748 

Joseph, Burliugton, and Anne Higgs 1759 

Joseph, Burlington, aud Hannah Tucker 1772 

Joseph, Burliugton, and Jane Esdel 1786 

Mathew, Sussex, and Anue Rankins 1768 

Nicholas, Monmouth, and Grace Jacocks, Monmouth 1741 

Peter, Philadelphia, and Priscilla Parrock, Philadelphia 1738 

Peter, Middlesex, and Hannah Scoby, Middlesex 1760 

Peter, Gloucester, and Amy Middletou, Gloucester 1767 

Preserve, Burlington, and Mary Dawson, Burlington 1742 

Robert, Middlesex, and Sarah Evelman, Monmouth 1745 

Robert, Gloucester, and Rachel Denney, Gloucester 1772 

Samuel, Somerset, and Mary Dunham, Somerset 1762 

Samuel, Monmouth, and Ellen Cutler 1762 

Samuel, Pennsylvania, and Martha Brelsford, Pennsylvania. . 1768 

Solomon, Monmouth, and Mary Craft. ... 1762 

Thomas, Woodbridge, and Frances Moores 1746 

Thomas, Woodbridge, and Mary Hadden, Woodbridge 1754 

Thomas, Cumberland, and Bathuithcoth Ogden, widow 1760 

Thomas, Cumberland, and Martha Peck, Cumberland 1762 

Thomas, Cumberland, and Rebecca Fithian 1 780 

Timothy, Hunterdon, aud Desire Freeman, Middlesex 1763 

William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Heddon, Monmouth 1738 

William, Monmouth, and Anne Watson, Monmouth 1 741 

William, Salem, and Sarah Vanneman 1758 

William, Middlesex, and Catherine Jolly, Middlesex 1765 

Zabulon, Burlington, and Bathsheba Moll 1759 

Browne, Caleb, Eastern Division, and Mary Browne, Burlington 1731 

Browne, James, Burlington, aud Sarah Liudon, Burlington 1737 

Browne, Joseph, Bergen, and Catharine Devinne 1782 

Browne, Thomas, Newark, and Sarah Carter 1778 

Browne, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Burrodail, Burlington.. . . 1758 
Browning, Edward, Gloucester, and Grace Oldale, Burlington 1751 



Oct. 18 
July 9 
Jan. 23 
Dec. 4 
•Jan. 17 
Aug. 5 
Feb. 7 
Oct. 13 
Feb. 5 
May 4 
July 25 
Nov. 21 
Mar. 27 
April 13 
Aug. 14 
April 15 
Mar. 15 
June 20 
April 9 
April 7 
Mar. 26 
Nov. 23 
Nov. 3 
Jan. 28 
Mar. 25 
July 26 
Aug. 7 
May 16 
Dec. 29 
Feb. 12 
April 4 
April 17 
Dec. 28 
May 29 
Feb. 23 
Feb. 15 
Dec. 12 
Sept. 23 
Aug. 7 
Jan. 17 
Nov. 17 
Jan. 25 
July 4 
Aug. 21 
Mar. 11 
July 8 



36 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Browning, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Vandergrift 1782 

Bruce, James, Middlesex, and Winifred Franklin, Burlington 1768 

Bruce, John, Monmouth, and Catherine Cook 1747 

Brumhy, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Clark 1777 

Brundridge, Thomas, Monmouth, and Jemima Wood ] 737 

Brush, Timothy, Jr., Hunterdon, and Catherine Lain, Somerset 1769 

Bruton, Joseph, Bristol, Pa., and Bridget Kelley, Bristol, Pa 1767 

Bryan, Aaron, Burlington, and Martha Hopewell . . . . 1783 

Bryan, Benjamin, Burlington, and Nancy Richardson 1780 

Bryan, Daniel, Philadelphia, and Aune Pugh, Philadelphia 1748 

Bryan, Haran, Burlington, and Johaunah Sikes, Burlington 1751 

Bryan, Heron, Burlington, and Jane Pratt, Burlington 1758 

Bryan, Heron, Burlington, and Rehecca Green, Northampton 1761 

Bryan, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Ritchie, Allentown , 1758 

Bryan, James, Burlington, and Ann Wilson, Burlington 1741 

Bryan, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Pancoast, Burlington 1764 

Bryan, Thomas, Gloucester, and Martha Middleton, Gloucester 1729 

Bryan, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Cox, Burlington 1730 

Bryan, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Haines, Burlington 1745 

Bryan, Thomas, Burlington, and Fanny Coxe, Burlington 1760 

Bryan, William, Monmouth, and Margaret Watson, Monmouth 1750 

Bryant, Valentine, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Heivy 1784 

Bryant, John, Gloucester, and Mary Dennis, Gloucester 1739 

Brynbery, Christian, Salem, and Ann Wright 1777 

Bryou, John, Monmouth, and Mary Mount, Monmouth 1760 

Buchanan, Arthur, Lancaster, Pa., and Dorcas Holt, Philadelphia ...1738 

Buck, Aaron, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Dillon, Shrewsbury 1759 

Buck, Enos, Cape May, and Elizabeth Crawford, Cape Maj 1773 

Buck, Ephraim, Cumberland, and Abigail Ogden, Cumberland 1769 

Buck, Ira, Cape May, and Sarah Hand, Cape May 1760 

Buck, John, Cumberland, and Lorainia Whitticar 1761 

Buck, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Wheaton 1766 

Buck, Joseph, Cape May, and Elizabeth Eldridge, Cape May 1759 

Buck, Joseph, Cumberland, and Ruth Dalen 1779 

Buck, Lot, Cape May, and Barsheba Foster 1 783 

Buck, Lot, Cape May, and Edmunds,! Cape May 1787 

Buck, Stephen, Cape May, and Judith Hewet 1780 

Buck, Thomas, Jr., Cape May, and Judith Edmunds, Cape May 1771 

Buckalew, David, Pennsylvania, and Pricilla Waslack, Pennsylvania. .1771 

Buckalew, Frederick, Perth Amboy, and Mary Rose, Perth Arnboy. 1750 

Buckalew, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Watson, Middlesex 1747 

Buckalew, James, Perth Amboy, and Ann Brittan, Perth Amboy 1751 

Buckalew, John, Amboy, and Isabell Dove, Lower Freehold 1731 

Buckalew, John, Middlesex, and Hester Praal, Staten Island 1762 



Oct. 


9 


Sept. 


19 


May 


5 


Dec. 


26 


Dec. 


22 


Dec. 


16 


Aug. 


30 


Dec. 


26 


Oct, 


18 


July 


25 


Aug. 


21 


July 


24 


Nov. 


28 


May 


26 


Oct. 


14 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


22 


July 


17 


Dec. 


31 


April 


2 


April 


17 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


11 


June 


7 


July 


22 


Sept. 


28 


May 


3 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


14 


June 


27 


Jan. 


25 


July 


10 


Mar. 


15 


May 


9 


Aug. 


15 


July 


4 


Jan. 


9 


Aug. 


7 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


25 



April 14 



i The bond is signed Jeremiah Edmunds. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 37 

Buckalew, Obadiah, Middlesex, and Martha Ellison, Middlesex 174G 

Buckalew, Peter, Middlesex, and Mary Bears, Middletown 174!) 

Buckalew, Peter, South Aruboy, and Catherine Bowue, Middletown. . . 1759 

Buckerlew, John, Middlesex, and Mary Allen, Middlesex 1745 

Buckerlew, Peter, Middlesex, and Nautchy Cornell 1784 

Buckhard, David, Burlington, and Mary McGuire, Burlington ... .... 1749 

Buckle, Richard, Gloucester, and Sarah Johnson, Gloucester 1729 

Buckler, Reuben, Sussex, and Elizabeth Haggerty, Sussex 1768 

Buckley, Richard, Gloucester, and Mary Curtis, Gloucester 1733 

Budd, David, Burlington, and Catherine Allen, Burlington 1738 

Budd, Eli, Burlington, and Anne Carman, Burlington , 1774 

Budd, George, Gloucester, and Deborah Jones. . 1780 

Budd, Isaac, Burlington, and Ruth Woolston, Burlington 1775 

Budd, John, Burlington, and Hannah King, Burlington 1750 

Budd, John, Salem, and Rosauna Shivers 1758 

Budd, John, Burlington, and Hannah Lippincott, Burlington 1764 

Budd, Jonathan, Burlington, and Ann Saxton 1777 

Budd, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail Shinn 1778 

Budd, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Fox 1781 

Budd, Levi, Burlington, and Mary Woolston, Burlington 1774 

Budd, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Gile, Northampton 1766 

Budd, Stacy, Burlington, and Sarah Munrow, Burlington 1763 

Budd, Thomas, and Jemima Leeds. 1735 

Budd, William, Burlington, and Susanna Coles, Gloucester 1738 

Budd, William, Burlington, and Lititia Hoff, Burlington 1767 

Buddell, William, Burlington, and Hannah Clarke, Burlington 1731 

Budden, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Carter, Burlington 1746 

Buddin, Joseph, Burlington, and Rebecca Packer, Burlington 1741 

Bulkeley, Richard, Philadelphia, and Mary Dennis, Philadelphia 1767 

Bull, Andrew, Salem, and Prudence Morris, Salem 1745 

Bullman, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Bard, Monmouth 1762 

Bullman, Thomas, Jr., Monmouth, and Mary Crage, Monmouth 1765 

Bullock, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stewart 1767 

Bullock, Thomas, Burlington, and Acsah Rockhill 1772 

Bullock, Thomas, Salem, and Susanna Logan, Salem 1763 

Bullus, Francis, Burlington, and Elizabeth Winnick 1791 

Bullus, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Toy, Burlington 1775 

Bully, Edward, Salem, and Ann Brooks, Salem 1736 

Bunn, Jonathan, Hunterdon, and Mary Shinn, Hunterdon 1776 

Bunn, Reuben, and Rachel Place, Woodbridge 1714 

Bunn, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Griggs, Perth Amboy. . .1773 

Bunnel, Moses, Monmouth, and Alice Imlay 1 74.9 

Bunnell, Isaac, Perth Amboy, and Grace Fox, Perth Amboy 1763 

Bunting, Aaron, Burlington, and Ann Stephenson 1770 

Bunting, Benjamin, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Logan 1758 

Bunting, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth Steward ] 772 



Feb. 


14 


Feb. 


2 


Aug. 


20 


June 


12 


April 


3 


Oct. 


21 


July 


1 


Dec. 


17 


July 


4 


Feb. 


6 


April 


2 


Feb. 


1 


Dec. 


6 


Dec. 


31 


Sept. 


7 


July 


28 


Oct. 


15 


Aug. 


6 


Oct. 


27 


Sept. 


1 


April 


14 


May 


20 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


28 


July 


18 


Mar. 


13 


May 


10 


Mar. 


27 


Aug. 


13 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


22 


Feb. 


14 


Dec. 


19 


Feb. 


26 


Jan. 


8 


July 


29 


Dec. 


3 


June 


3 


June 


18 


Aug. 


31 


Dec. 


12 


Dec. 


3 


Feb. 


21 


Dec. 


4 


Sept. 


8 



38 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bunting, Daniel, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Clayton 1767 

Bunting, Daniel, Burlington, and Nancy Lovit 1779 

Bunting, David, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Houghf 1757 

Bunting, John, Burlington, and Mary Carter, Burlington 1740 

Bunting, John, Jr., Burlington, and Patience Tillton 1768 

Bunting, Jonathan, Bucks, Pa., and Rebecca Johnston, Bucks, Pa 1772 

Bunting, Joshua, Burlington, and Amy Nutt 1 768 

Bunting, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Willitts, Monmouth 1739 

Bunting, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Harvey, Burlington 1755 

Bunting, William, Burlington, and Sarah Terrey, Burlington 1743 

Bunting, William, Burlington, and Anne Stewart 1779 

Burch, James, Cumberland, and Sidnea Scott 1789 

Burch, Jeremiah, Monmoutb, and Jane Young 1768 

Burck, James, Cumberland, and Sarah Elmer 1785 

Burdg, David, Middletown, and Patience Woolley, Shrewsbury 1746 

Burdg, Jonathan, Middletown, and Mary Morris, Middletown 1746 

Burdg, Bichard, Monmouth, and Susannah Wall, Monmouth 1743-4 

Burdg, William, Monmouth, and Joice Hance, Monmouth 1755 

Burdge, David, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Davis, Monmouth 1753 

Burdge, John, Middletown, and Ann Smith, Middletown 1754 

Burdge, Joseph, Monmouth, and Zelpha Gifford, Monmouth 1765 

Burdsal, Elijah, Burlington, and Mary Wills, Burlington 1765 

Burdsall, Jacob, Burlington, and Elizabeth Coles, Burlington 1730 

Burdsall, Nathan, Monmouth, and Abigail Willess, Monmouth 1752 

Burdsell, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Cox 1783 

Burgean, Abraham, New York, and Mary Fox, Perth Amboy 1764 

Burges, Samuel, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Done, Bucks. Pa 1764 

Burgess, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Lydia Leysum, Bucks, Pa 1751 

Burgin, John, Salem, and Margate Steele. Salem 1728 

Burgin, John, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Abel, Salem 1761 

Burgin, Joseph, Cumberland, and Sarah Morgan, Perth Amboy 1761 

Burgin, Joseph, Salem, and Jane Silver, Salem. 1691-2 

Burgin, Beubin, Cumberland, and Deborah Bowen .... 1787 

Burgis, Benjamin, Burlington, and Abigail Easslaud, Burlington 1731 

Burgis, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Lydia Scyssum, Bucks, Pa 1751 

Burk, Alexander, Burlington, and Mary McDonald, Burlington 1765 

Burk, William, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Gregory, Pennsylvania 1730 

Burke, John, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Kidd, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Burke, Buth, Burlington, and Mary Boe 1776 

Burne, William, Burlington, and Mary Robertson, Burlington 1765 

Burnet, Charles, Middlesex, and Mary Devall, Piscataway 1750 

Burnet, Peter, and Margaret Edwards, Shrewsbury 1756 

Burnett, John, Monmouth, and Joyce IronSj Monmouth 1763 

Burns, David, Cape May, and Sarah Long 1789 

Burns, James, Cumberland, and Abigail Haze 1778 

Burns, John, and Mary Cold, Staten Island 1745-6 



April 


29 


July 


12 


Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


16 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


10 


Sept. 


23 


May 


11 


April 


17 


Feb. 


29 


Nov. 


15 


Feb. 


3 


June 


25 


May 


9 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


28 


Aug. 


22 


Feb. 


18 


Jan. 


21 


June 


18 


April 


4 


Dec. 


13 


Nov. 


20 


June 


13 


April 


9 


June 


17 


July 


31 


Mar. 


2 


April 


13 


Mar. 


23 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


20 


June 


17 


Feb. 


6 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


6 


Jan. 


16 


Jan. 


18 


Mar. 


13 


Jan. 


17 


July 


26 


July 


1 


Dec. 


7 


Mar. 


18 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 39 

Bums, William, Trenton, and Elizabeth Smith 1733 

Burnside, James, Burlington, and Mary Hendricks, Burlington 1727 

Burnsides, James, Burlington, and Mary Seed, Burlington 1729 

Burr, Aaron, Bergen, and Theodosia Prevost 1782 

Burr, Henry, Burlington, and Mary OweD, Burlington 1736 

Burr, Henry, Burlington, and Abigail Bishop 1793 

Burr, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Davidson, Burlington 1738 

Burr, Joseph, Jr., Northampton, and Mary Mullen, Northampton 1749 

Burr, Robert, Burlington, and Christiana Gregory, Burlington 1770 

Burrongh, Isaac, Gloucester, and Rebecca Nicholson, Gloucester 1767 

Burrough, Isaac, Waterford, and Abigail Marshall 1771 

Burrough, Jacob, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Gill 1775 

Burrough, Thomas, Gloucester, and Rebecca Fish 1777 

Burroughs, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Hannah Wilkins . 1783 

Burroughs. John, Bucks, Pa., and Lydia Baker 1746 

Burroughs, William, Backs, Pa., and Mary Wright, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Burrow, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Webb, Perth Auiboy 1743 

Burrowes, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Charity Mullady 1771 

Burrowes, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Hannah Ashton, Hunterdon 1772 

Burrows, Edward, Middletown, and Deborah Shepherd, Middletown. . 1750 

Burrows, Israel, Hunterdon, and Alice Stillwell 1777 

Burrows, John, Middletown, and Hope Watson, Middletown 1749 

Burrows, Michael, Burlington, and Mary Carter, Burlington 1764 

Burrows, Michael, Burlington, and Isabel Jack, Burlington 1784 

Burrows, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Mercy Moore 1733 

Burtis, William, Monmouth, and Anne Longstreet 1764 

Burton, Charles, Chesterfield, and Anne Medcalf, Chesterfield 1731 

Burton, Jesse, Monmouth, and Catherine Myers, Monmouth 1772 

Burton, Samuel, Gloucester, and Barbery Steelman 1777 

Burwell, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Mary Robins, Hunterdon 1771 

Busby, Isaac, Burlington, and Rachel Sharp, Burlington 1743 

Busby, John, Burlington, and Sarah Ellis, Burlington .... 1758 

Bush, George, Easton, Pa., and Mary Van Cam pen 1786 

Bush, Oswald, Gloucester, and Christine Strechery 1782 

Bush, William, Somerset, and Esther Hortou 1777 

Bushkirk, Joris, Bergen, and Elizabeth Die, Bergen 1748 

Busson, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Cunningham 1766 

Bustido, John, New Brunswick, and Katherine Wetherall 1744 

Bustill, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Tonkan, Burlington 1687 

Butcher, Aaron, Cumberland, and Mary Ireland, Cumberland 1762 

Butcher, Aaron, Cumberland, and Phebe Moor 1778 

Butcher, John, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Ridgway, Burlington 1738 

Butcher, Jonathan, Bucks, Pa., and Anne Browne, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Butcher. Samuel, Philadelphia, and Susanna Marple 1736 

Butcher, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Anne Bisnett, Bucks, Pa.. 1765 

Butler, Abel, Burlington, and Sarah Marett, Burlington 1776 



Sept. 


25 


July 


19 


Oct. 


22 


July 


4 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


14 


Sept. 


4 


May 


15 


Sept. 


25 


Oct. 


2 


July 


12 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


8 


Oct, 


28 


April 


8 


Sept. 


9 


Feb. 


20 


Mar. 


4 


Feb. 


18 


April 


2 


Dec. 


29 


Dec. 


2 


May 


1 


May 


28 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


15 


Sept. 


17 


June 


2 


Dec. 


11 


Oct. 


29 


April 


5 


May 


9 


April 


8 


Jan. 


25 


June 


18 


Mar. 


29 


Dec. 


31 


Nov. 


14 


Jan. 


3 


July 


23 


April 


2 


Feb. 


23 


June 


6 


Aug. 


12 


June 


19 


Feb. 


14 



40 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Butler, Daniel, Monmouth, and Rachel Borden, Monmouth 1746-6 

Butler, Henry, Staten Island, and Belitie Johnson, Staten Island 1752 

Butler, James, Staten Island, and Susannah Johnson 1745 

Butler, James, and Elizabeth Stull 1749 

Butler, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Sommers 1762 

Butler, John, Burlington, and Susannah Kimpson, Burlington 1767 

Butler, Thomas, Staten Island, and Mary Coo, Staten Island 

Butler, William, Morris, and Joanna Bruen 1780 

Butterfield, John, Burlington, aud Rebecca Wood, Burlington 1740 

Butterworth, Benjamin, Burlington, and Anne Ogburn, Burlington 1729 

Butterworth, Benjamin, Burlington, and Ann McCarty, Burlington 1736 

Butterworth, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Likins, Burlington ...1757 

Butterworth, John, Gloucester, and Esther Evens, Gloucester 1729 

Button, Philip, Bucks, Pa., Mary Mason, Bucks, Pa 1739 

Buxton, James, Burlington, and Hannah Tallman, Burlington 1773 

Buzby, Daniel, Burlington, aud Mary Wells 1784 

Buzby, Isaac, and Naomi Pevon (?) 1776 

Buzby, Jabez, Burlington, and Grace Lippiucott 1768 

Buzby, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Austin 1795 

Buzby, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Burroughs 1779 

Byram, Francis, Cumberland, and Christian Liester, Cumberland 1773 

Byrne, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Dobson 1778 

Byrne, Patrick, Burlington, and Mary Ballenger, Burlington 1727 

Byrne, Patrick, Burlington, and Mary Murrell, Burlington 1741 

FEMALES. B 

Backhover, Hannah, and James Anderson, Morris 1779 

Backow, Hanuah, Cape May, and William Camilton, Cape May 1742 

Backover, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Henry Stevens, Bridgewater 1779 

Bacon, Dorcas, and Daniel Eldridge, Cumberland 1789 

Bacon, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Greese, Salem 1766 

Bacon, Elizabeth, and Abbit Sayre, Alloways Creek 1780 

Bacon, Esther, Alloways Creek, aud David Stretch, Alloways Creek. . . 1759 

Bacon, Mary, Cumberland, and Joseph Bowen, Cumberland 1761 

Bacon, Phebe, and Norton Ludletn, Cumberland 1779 

Bacon, Prudence, Cumberland, and Micajah Irelan, Cumberland 1776 

Bacon, Rachel, Greenwich, and Jonathan Walling, Greenwich 1774 

Bacon, Rachel, and John Howard, Salem 1774 

Bacon, Rachel, and Jacob Harris, Cumberland.. 1780 

Bacon, Sarah, Greenwich, and William Waithman, Cumberland 1775 

Badcock, Abiah, and John Badcock, Cape May 1778 

Badcock, Abigail, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Daniel Scull, Gt. Egg Harb'r.1768 

Badcock, Lydia, and Christopher Smith, Cape May 1774 

Badcock, Mary, Cape May, and Peter Corson, Cape May 1761 

Badcock, Melicent, aud Jacob Endieott, Gloucester 1769 

Badcock, Phebe, and Joseph Corson, Jr 1760 



Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


30 


Sept. 


12 


Sept. 


13 


Aug. 


5 


Oct. 


6 


Jan. 


11 


July 


29 


Sept. 


11 


Nov. 


18 


July 


26 


Mar. 


10 


Oct. 


27 


May 


20 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


15 


July 


17 


Mar. 


2 


July 


21 


Mar. 


19 


Mar. 


4 


May 


5 


Aug. 


13 


Jan. 


24 


Sept. 


24 


June 


26 


Jan. 


30 


Oct. 


25 


Oct. 


16 


July 


24 


Dec. 


22 


Nov. 


8 


May 


1 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


5 


Feb. 


29 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


16 


Jan. 


5 


Oct. 


24 


Jan. 


15 


Nov. 


10 


Sept. 


22 



marriage Licenses. 41 

Badcock, Rachel, Cape May, and Jacob Richards, Cape May 175 4 

Badcock, Sarah, Gloucester, and Nckeiniah Nicholson, Gloucester .... 1739 

Bailerjau, Jean, and James Chunn, Hunterdon 17G3 

Baillie, Mary, Alexandria, and John Sherrard, Alexandria 1774 

Baiubridge, Sarah, Maidenhead, and Theophilus Severns, Trenton. . . . 1738 

Baird, Ann, and Derrick Barkalow, Monmouth 1772 

Baird, Eleanor, and Abraham Voorbees. Somerset 1779 

Baird, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Henry Crusee, East Div. N. J 1755 

Baird, Phebe, and John Hoaglaud, Somerset 1780 

Baird, Rachel, Monmouth, and Daniel Logan, Monmouth 17-47 

Baird, Sarah, and James Tapscott, Upper Freehold 1772 

Baker, Agnes, Middlesex, and John Tomson, Middlesex 1749 

Bakehone, Hannah, and James Keer, Hunterdon 1775 

Baker, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Hugh Hutcbiu, Burlington 1730 

Baker, Frederick, Bucks, Pa., and James Shaw, Bucks, Pa 1742 

Baker, Hannah, Burlington, and William May, Burlington. . . 1741 

Baker, Hannah, and John Clevinger, Burlington 1742 

Baker, Hannah, Burlington, and Patrick Fox, Burlington 1772 

Baker, Lydia, and John Burroughs, Bucks, Pa 1746 

Baker, Maria, Pa., and Charles Biler, Pa 1728 

Baker, Mary, and Caleb Cramner 1760 

Baker, Mary, Woodbridge, and Charles Wright, Woodbridge 1760 

Baker, Phebe, Essex, and Henry Vail, Morris 1779 

Baker, Rachel, Burlington, and William Jewell, Burlington 1763 

Baker, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Borden, Burlington 1762 

Baker, Sarah, and Stacy Wright, Burlington 1768 

Baldwin, Elisabeth, and Samuel Titus, Hunterdon 1778 

Baldwin, Jemima, and Joseph Hoff, Hunterdon 1781 

Baldwin, Mary, and Cornelius Disosway, Staten Island 1765 

Ball, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Smith, Burlington . , . 1685 

Ball, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Aaron Hibbard, Philadelphia 1746 

Ball, Elizabeth, and Edward Haswell, Perth Amboy 1768 

Ballenger, Rebecca, Burlington, and Nathan Haines, Burlington 1756 

Ballenger, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Henry Sparks, Gloucester.. ....1750 

Ballenger, Elizabeth, and Joseph Austin, Burlington ...... 1782 

Ballenger, Mary, Burlington, and Patrick Byrne, Burlington 1727 

Ballenger, Rebecca, and David Price, Evesham 1777 

Ballenger, Bathsheba, and John Moore, Burlington 1777 

Ballinger, Charity, Burlington, and Joseph Eayre, Burlington 1767 

Ballinger, Mary, and William Dickinson, Gloucester 1776 

Bancraft, Anne, and John Elberson, Cape May.. 1780 

Bancraft, Martha, Cape May, and Silas Church, Cape May 1770 

Banks, Elizabeth, Pa., and Edward Hill, Pa 1728 

Banks, Anne, and John Tilt, Mount Holly 1784 

Bankson, Mary, Philadelphia, and John Clifton, Philadelphia 1740 

Bankson, Rebecca, Bucks, Pa., and Claus Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1734 



Sept. 


26 


June 


1 


Nov. 


22 


Jan. 


18 


Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


28 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


1 


July 


15 


Oct. 


24 


Jan. 


28 


July 


17 


Nov. 


25 


July 


6 


Feb. 


7 


Sept. 


12 


Mar. 


17 


June 


19 


April 


8 


July 


28 


July 


29 


Aug. 


21 


Nov. 


15 


Dec. 


12 


Feb. 


13 


June 


8 


Feb. 


13 


Nov. 


21 


Aug. 


13 


Aug. 


30 


July 


18 


Mar. 


31 


May 


21 


Jan. 


31 


April 


19 


May 


5 


May 


23 


May 


1 


Sept. 


5 


Nov. 


6 


June 


22 


Aug. 


1 


Aug. 


6 


Sept. 


16 


Sept. 


10 


Mar. 


30 



42 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bant, Willemyntje, Bergen, and Samuel Demarest, Bergen 1767 

Banta, Angenietie, and John Eckerseu, Bergen 1774 

Banta, Annatie, Bergen, and Hendrick Haring, Bergen 1763 

Banta, Cornelia, 1 Hackensack, and Gozer Adrianz, Perth Amboy 1743 

Banta, Hannah, Bergen, and John Aldington, Bergen 1770 

Banta, Hannah, and Richard Vreelandt, Hackensack 1783 

Banta, Hester, Hackensack, and Joseph Prinn, Hackensack 1750 

Banta, Jannet, and Roelof Bogart 1756 

Banta, Jenne, and Jacob J. Westervelt, Bergen 1768 

Banta, Margaret, Bergen, and David Ackerman, Bergen 1749 

Banta, Mary, and Isaac N. Kipp, Bergen 1779 

Banta, Nelly, Bergen, and Stephen Bourdett, Bergen 1764 

Banta, Wijntie, Bergen, and Samuel Durye, Bergen, 1744 

Banta, Vrowtje, Hackensack, and Jacobus Van Buskirk, Hackensack. . 1765 

Barbar, Sarah, and Jacob Beal, Hunterdon 1784 

Barbary, Mary, Hunterdon, and Gershom Lambert, Hunterdon 1776 

Barber, Ann, Sussex, and David Philips, Sussex 1770 

Barber, Elinor, and Owen Oilman, Salem 1731 

Barber, Keziab, and James Shepherd, Cumberland 1778 

Barber, Margaret, Hunterdon, and Isaiah Hudnutt, Hunterdon 1774 

Barber, Mary, Bucks Co., Pa., and Edmund Sands, Bucks Co., Pa. . .1770 

Barber, Mary, and John Garrison, Jr., Hunterdon 1780 

Barber, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Ellison, Perth Amboy 1750 

Barber, Sarah, and Joseph Shute, Gloucester 1776 

Barber, Susannah, Salem, and Joseph Banks, Salem 1762 

Barberice, Susannah, and John Johnston, Jr., Middlesex 1767 

Barbiss, Margaret, Burlington, and Jacob Borden, Burlington 1775 

Barcalow, Helena, Freehold, and Isaac Voorhees, Freehold 1754 

Barcalow, Mary, Monmouth, and Andrew Bowne, Monmouth 1765 

Barclay, Anne, Perth Amboy, and John Craig, Freehold 1749 

Bancroft, Elizabeth, Pa., and Charles Morgan, Pa 1727 

Bard, Mary, Monmouth, and Joseph Bullman, Monmouth 1762 

Bard, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Hunloke, Burlington 1771 

Bargin, Matilda, and Luke Covenhoven, Middlesex 1774 

Barenhof, Anne, and Peter Ward, Burlington 1763 

Barhyt, Margaret, Somerset, and Joseph Rose, New Jersey 1749 

Barkelow, Jane, Freehold, and Isaac Sutphen, Freehold 1753 

Barker, Elizabeth, and Latin Ware, Cumberland. 1782 

Barker, Hannah, Cumberland, and David Mulford, Cumberland 1771 

Barker, Mary, Cumberland, and Lewis Mulford, Cumberland 1773 

Barker, Sarah, and David Bacon, Cumberland 1786 

Barkley, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Andrew Hunter, Somerset 1779 

Barkolo, Jane, Monmouth, and Derrick Conine, Monmouth. . . 1762 

Barlow, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Michael Hinshaw, Cape May 1769 

l Cornelia Pieterse DeGroot, widow of Jacob Banta, of Hackensack. 



July 


27 


April 


2 


July 


5 


June 


11 


Dec. 


13 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


13 


Mar. 


31 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


1 


Aug. 


2 


Oct. 


24 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


15 


July 


12 


Jan. 


18 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


27 


April 


5 


Mar. 


29 


Jan. 


17 


Jan. 


25 


Nov. 


24 


Feb. 


16 


June 


26 


May 


29 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


21 


Sept. 


25 


Nov. 


18 


A2oril 


8 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


14 


Jan. 


10 


Sept. 


24 


July 


30 


Dec. 


19 


Oct. 


4 


Mar. 


7 


April 


18 


Aug. 


2 


Jan. 


30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 43 

Barlow, Mary, Cape May, ami Joseph Field, Cape May 1765 April 19 

Barncraft, Thankful, and Robert Edmonds, Cape May 1781 Feb. 27 

Barnes, Ann, and Arthur Micklevane, Gloucester 1772 Dec. 2 

Barnes, Deborah, Woodbridge, and Abraham Johnson, Woodbridge. . . 1765 April 3 

Barnes, Elizabeth, Freehold, and Samuel Rogers, Freehold 1763 Oct. 7 

Barnes, Sarah, Amwell, and Jacob Snider, Amwell ... 1771 Oct. 3 

Barnwell, Jane, Middlesex, and William Cain ogh, Perth Amboy 1744 Aug. 2 

Baron, Mary, Woodbridge, and Jonathan Clawson, Woodbridge 17(50 May 27 

Barrass, Ruth, Bucks, Pa., and Henry Cherry, Bucks, Pa 1731 Oct. 20 

Barratt, Edith, and Reuben Newcomb, Fairfield 1779 June 9 

Barrett, Sarah, and Richard Webster, Trenton 1778 April 18 

Barris, Margaret, Bucks, Pa., and John English, Burlington 1744 Sept. 10 

Barrit, Esther, Gloucester, and John Little, Cape May 1769 Aug. 29 

Barrit, Marcy, Gloucester, and Joseph Gee, Gloucester 1762 April 22 

Barrot, Rebeckah, Cumberland, and Ephraim Sheppard, Cumberland.. 1778 April 3 

Barry, Alice, Burlington, and James Moon, Burlington 1744 June 18 

Barry, Mary, Burlington, and Alexander Ferguson, Burlington 1757 April 18 

Bartholf, Annatje, Bergen, and Jacob Van Winkle, Bergen 1769 June 2 

Barthney, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Abraham Vengalden, Mid't'n. .1759 Jan. 8 

Barthson, Sarah, Salem, and John Linnsbury, Salem 1761 Nov. 18 

Barthson, Sarah, Salem, and Albert Bilderback, Salem 1792 Sept. 15 

Barton, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Thomas Down, Gloucester. ...... 1761 Jan. 29 

Barton, Euphen, Monmouth, and Benjamin Lawrence, Monmouth. . . . 1779 May 25 

Barton, Martha, Middlesex, and William Rives, Middlesex 1739 July 17 

Barton, Mary, Somerset, and William Carson, Somerset 1743 Dec. 8 

Barton, Rebecca, Amwell, and Benjamin Rnnyon, Amwell 1764 Jan. 21 

Barton, Susannah, Middlesex, and Zebulon Morford, Middlesex 1746 Jan. 12 

Barton, Cisley, and Benjamin Alliger, Redington 1780 Mar. 23 

Barton, Jane, Hunterdon, and George Biggs, Hunterdon 1773 Sept. 24 

Barton, Margaret, and Thomas Lee, Sussex 1781 Oct. 10 

Barwis, Rebecca, and Thomas Race, Bristol, Pa 1779 Oct. 26 

Basnett, Elizabeth, and Richard Dell 1698 An". 11 

Bass, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Pidgeon, Penna 1727 June 26 

Bassall, Sarah, and Hezekiah Belton, Salem 1756 June 3 

Bassett, Elizabeth, Salem, and Peter Keen, Salem 1747 June 20 

Basset, Mary, Acquackanonk, and Martinus Schoonmaker, Acquac'nk.1761 June 5 

Basset, Nancy, tssex, and Nicholas Vreelandt, Bergen 1760 Nov. 2 

Bassett, Hannah, and John Roberts, Gloucester 1791 April 2 

Bassett, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Middleton, Burlington 1761 Aug. 12 

Bassett, Rebecca, and William Waters, Pilesgrove 1752 April 27 

Bassnett, Mary, and Edward Hunloke 1691 Nov. 10 

Bate, Ann, Gloucester, and Josiah Shivers, Gloucester 1729 Feb. 9 

Bate, Rebecca, and Isaac Matlack, Gloucester 1733 May 28 

Bateman, Mary, Fairfield, and David Ogden, Fairfield 1759 Sept. 13 

Bates, Achsah, and Marmaduke Fort, Burlington 1777 May 29 

Bates, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Robert Braddock, Burlington 1737 Nov. 24 



44 New Jersey colonial documents. 

Bates, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Silas Lord, Burlington 1774 

Bates, Hannah, Gloucester, and Lippincott Remembrance, Gloucester. 1732 

Bates, Hannah, Moorestown, and Joseph Pearson, Moorestown 1772 

Bates, Mary, Gloucester, and Benjamin Hartley, Gloucester 1762 

Bates, Mercy, and Abraham Bennet, Gloucester 1782 

Bates, Polly, and Job Stockton, New Jersey 1780 

Bates, Priscilla, Gloucester, and Simeon Ellis, Gloucester 1760 

Bates, Rachel, Burlington, and John Rudderow, Burlington 1747 

Bates, Rachel, Gloucester, and David Clark, Gloucester , 1764 

Bates, Sarah, and George Ash, Burlington 1759 

Bates, Sarah, and Isaac Collins, Gloucester 1772 

Bathe, Anne, Burlington, and James Somerville, Burlington 1740 

Bath, Mary, Pa., and Henry Edwards, Pa 1736 

Bathford, Elizabeth, and William Grinding. Hunterdon 1769 

Batten, Ann, Gloucester, and Nathan Horner, Gloucester 1762 

Batten, Zillah, Gloucester, and John Gill, Gloucester 1765 

Batten, Zillah, and Thomas Flick, Gloucester. . . 1784 

Batton, Deborah, and John Somers, Upper Penns Neck. . 1783 

Bauer, Lydia, and Uriah Gandy, Cape May 1767 

Bayles, Amy, and Samuel Potts, Cranberry 1776 

Bayles, Ann, and James Chambers, Middlesex 1775 

Bayles, Isabella, and John Davis, Middlesex 1784 

Bayles, Mary, and Joseph O'Neale 1777 

Bayley, Margaret, Orange, N. Y., and William Graham, Orange, N. Y.1776 

Bayliffe, Jane, and Robert Rigg 1688 

Baylis, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Radford, Burlington 1730 

Bayly, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and Nathan Gumley, Burlington 1731 

Bayly, Mary, Pa., and Andrew Ellet, Pa 1727 

Beach, Hannah, Mendom, and Samuel Allen, Morris 1779 

Beach, Mary, Essex, and Ebenezer Foster, Essex 1750 

Beach, Sarah, Morris, and Daniel Babbit, Morris «. 1779 

Beagle, Martha, Morris, and Robert Carson, Morris. . . 1771 

Beakes, Mary, and Job Kirby, Monmouth 1790 

Beakes, Susanna, and Edward Southwood, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Beans, Elizabeth, Bucks Co., Pa., and Richard Sands, Bucks Co., Pa. .1749 

Beans, Rachel, Bucks, Pa., and William Hough, Bucks, Pa 1775 

Beam, Elsey, and William Kitchen, Hunterdon . 1782 

Beaman, Ann, Penns Neck, and Thomas Pennington, Penns Neck . . . 1749 

Beaman, Ann, and John Dunkin, Salem 1772 

Beard, Avie, Monmouth, and George Egger, Monmouth ... 1749 

Beard, Elizabeth, and Hendrick Brokaw, Somerset 1782 

Bears, Mary, Middletown, and Peter Buckalew, Middlesex 1749 

Beats, Rosety, and Isaac Atkinson, Burlington. 1781 

Beaty, Jane, Middlesex, and John Myer, Middlesex 1742 

Beauman, Margaret, Salem, and James Casey, Salem 1762 

Beaver, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Patrick Quin, Philadelphia 1736 



Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


29 


April 


12 


Nov. 


23 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


24 


Sept. 


12 


Mar. 


12 


Sept. 


24 


Feb. 


17 


Julv 


19 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


25 


Dec. 


14 


April 


8 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


Feb. 


23 


April 


23 


Dec. 


13 


May 


1 


July 


23 


May 


16 


Aug. 


22 


May 


11 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


2 


July 


3 


Aug. 


24 


May 


26 


July 


10 


Mar. 


10 


May 


30 


Nov. 


2 


June 


22 


May 


23 


Oct, 


26 


May 


7 


July 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Feb. 


2 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


1 


Dec. 


30 


July 


15 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 45 

Beaver, Margaret, and Abel Everitt, Hunterdon 1782 

Beaver?, Sarah, Sussex, and Abraham Oxford, Sussex 1762 

Bebout, Elizabeth, Staten Island, and John Winants, Staten Island. . . 1755 

Bebout, Sarah, and James Chappie 1771) 

Beck, Amy, New Jersey, and Joseph Norcross, New Jersey 1778 

Beck, Mary, and Asher Williams, Chesterfield 1763 

Beeket, Mary, Burlington, and Daniel Hopewell, Burlington. 1754 

Beekes, Rebecca, and Charles Axford 1735 

Beekman, Anne, New Brunswick, and Benjamin Dassigney, New Bwk. 1750 

Beekman, Charity, and Isaac Snedeker, Middlesex 1776 

Been), Angenitje, and John Bartrom, Bergen 1762 

Beenson, Catharineah, Gloucester, and Thomas Moor, Cape May 1740 

Beers, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Thomson, Monmouth 1743 

Beers, Hannah, Monmouth, and John Nickerson, Monmouth 1747 

Beesley, Hannah, Salem, and John Beesley, Jr., Salem 1776 

Beesley, Elizabeth, Salem, and William Tuft, Salem 1763 

Beesly, Gertrue, and Daniel Lithgow, Salem 1771 

Beets, Marj', Gloucester, and Lazarus Canning, Gloucester 1758 

Beettle, Sarah, Upper Penns Neck, and George Peterson, Up. Penns N. 1761 

Begele, Lydia, Monmouth, and Richard Cole, Monmouth 1766 

Beinet, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Matthew Roberts, Middletown Point. . 1759 
Belford, Hester, Bucks Co., Pa., and John Siddall, Bucks Co., Pa. . . 1765 

Belford, Martha, and Joseph Vanschtiyver, Burlington 1 776 

Bell, Abigail, and John Suiter, Gloucester 1783 

Bell, Mary, and Isaiah Covenover, Gloucester 1774 

Bell, Pricilla, and Nicholas Hoyle, Burlington 1777 

Bell, Sarah, Springfield, and Francis Shinn, Springfield 1763 

Bell, Tabitha, Burlington, and Isaac Harbert, Burlington 1765 

Bellanger, Mary, Cape May, and Adonijah Reeves, Cape May 1781 

Belles, Ester, Gloucester, and Daniel Martin, Gloucester 1730 

Bellows, Mary, Gloucester, and John Ervin, Gloxicester 1746 

Belmer, Elisabeth, and John Wilson, Somerset 1749 

Belton, Maiy, Gloucester, and John Eastluck, Gloucester 1737 

Belton, Lydomia, Gloucester, and John Dickinson, Salem 1747 

Bender, Catherine, Gloucester, and Isaac Hoffman, Gloucester 1765 

Benezet, Mary, and Joseph Wood, Georgia 1773 

Benham, Hendrica, and Jacob Vandike, Bucks Co., Pa 1768 

Benham, Mary, and Jonathan Clayton, Freehold 1759 

Bonmire, Amy, Monmouth, and James Feagin, Monmouth 1767 

Bennem, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Garret Covenhoven, Monmouth. . 1759 
Bennet Antie, Middlesex, and Frederick Vanlewen, Jr., Somerset. ... .1750 

Bennet, Aurionche, Monmouth, and Ezekiel Ellison, Monmouth 176-J 

Bennet, Charity, and William Penn .... 1785 

Bennet, Eleanor, Monmouth, and John Schenck, Monmouth 1750 

Bennet, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Clark, Burlington 1747 

Bennet, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and David Curtis, Jr., Monmouth. . . . 1747 



May 


12 


June 


29 


Sept. 


6 


Sept. 


2 


May 


23 


Nov. 


10 


July 


27 


Oct. 


13 


Oct. 


1 


June 


7 


April 


9 


May 


15 


May 


24 


June 


11 


April 


2 


Jan. 


2 


July 


11 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


20 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


19 


Feb. 


15 


Oct. 


29 


June 


2 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


14 


May 


24 


Aug. 


15 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


11 


Mav 


1 


May 


2 


June 


24 


Oct. 


27 


Sept. 


14 


July 


29 


Nov. 


10 


Dec. 


6 


June 


2 


Feb. 


26 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


6 


Jan. 


22 


June 


14 


Mav 


4 


May 


26 



46 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bennet, Eve, and Abraham Hand, Middlesex 1772 Aug. 3 

Bennet, Gbei tie, Monmouth, and William Cook, Monmouth 1743 Sept. 21 

Bennet, Hanna, Woolwich, and Job Thomas, Woolwich 1774 Jan. 20 

Bennet, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Borden, Monmouth 1757 Jan. 25 

Bemiet, Keziab, Monmouth, and Thomas Letts, Monmouth 1771 June 27 

Bennet, Mary, Monmouth, and William Pearce, Monmouth 1742-3 Feb. 7 

Bennet, Sarah, and John Fisb, Monmouth 1752 Jan. 13 

Bennet, Sarah, Fairfield, and Philip Shepherd, Fairfield 1761 July 6 

Bennet, Sarah, Burlington, and Daniel Toy, Burlington 1756 Dec. 29 

Bennet, Sarah, and John Tom, Burlington 1778 April 19 

Bennet, Susannah, Burlington, and John Edwards, Burlington 1746 May 6 

Bennett, Mary, Burlington, and David Evan Reece, Burlington 1733 Mar. 21 

Bennett, Mary, Burlington, and John Rogers, Burlington 1768 April 12 

Bennett, Mary, Monmouth, and Jonathan Lankins, Burlington 1779 Dec. 17 

Bennett, Sarah, and Robert Edwards 1701 Nov. 20 

Bennett, Thankfull, Burlington, and Noah Bishop, Burlington 1772 Nov. 3 

Bennit, Artilly, and Christopher Vanpelt, Monmouth 1751 Dec. 2 

Benuum, Ann, and Jesef Taylor, Lower Freehold 1762 Sept. 25 

Benton, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and Francis Dixon, Cumberland.... 1763 July 11 

Berdan, Cornelia, and John Gomez, Bergen 1786 Mar. 27 

Berdett, Mary, Bergen, and John Loazear, Bergen . . 1768 May 6 

Berdett, Sarah, and Benjamin Westerfelt, Bergen 1768 Oct. 27 

Bereman, Sevia, and Johnson Reeves, Cumberland 1777 Dec. 8 

Bergen, Alice, Somerset, and Conrad Ten Eick, Jr., Somerset 1757 Dec. 7 

Bergen, Sarah, John Hoagland, Somerset 1784 April 7 

Berger, Jane, Reading Town, and Andrew Johnson, Reading Town. . .1755 May 10 

Berndrow, Mary, and John Mack Collum, Somerset . . , 1768 Jan. 13 

Beroote, Bariche, Bergen, and Abraham Tures, Bergen 1749 Feb. 12 

Berry, Catherine, Morris, and Samuel Berry, Morris 1749 Oct. 30 

Berry, Elizabeth, and Thomas Thompson, Hunterdon 1768 Oct. 22 

Berry, Hanah, and Thomas Wilson, Burlington 1759 May 4 

Berry, Hannah, Hackensack, and Thomas Veil, Hackensack 1760 Nov. 17 

Berry, Hester, Morris, and James Bargne, Morris 1744 May 12 

Berry, Isabel, and Abram Vautugb, Tewksbury 1781 Dec. 22 

Berry, Margret, and Harp Van Riper, Essex 1762 April 22 

Berry, Mary, Somerset Co., and James Lockhart, Somerset 1752 Mar. 7 

Berry, Mary, and Theodorus Brewer, Bergen 1790 Sept. 28 

Berry, Polly, Essex, and John Degray, Bergen 1774 Jan. 21 

Berry, Sarah, and William Freeman, Woodbridge 1749 Dec. 7 

Berry, Sarah, Morris, and Peter Roome, Morris 1752 Mar. 25 

Berry, Sarah, Burlington, and John Atkinson, Burlington 1761 Feb. 25 

Berry, Sarah, Salem, and John Mecom, Salem 1763 Feb. 27 

Bersherer, Catherine, Somerset, and John Hall, Somerset 1750 Jan. 12 

Bertholf, Marrity, Orange, N. Y., and Peter Alyea, Orange, N. Y 1773 Mar. 1 

Bertholf, Mary, and Henry Wanmaker, Bergen 1780 Dec. 12 

Bertron, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Peter Keney, Somerset 1758 Mar. 30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 47 

Beryman, Hannah, and Joseph Vauinetre, Pilesgrove 17G0 

Besby, Virgin, Salem, and Benjamin Cross, Salem 1739 

Bessonett, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Nicholas Luzillier, Bucks, Pa. ..1741 

Best, Eleanor, Gloucester, and Peter Young, Gloucester 17(>1 

Best, Elizabeth, and William Cimeter 1708 

Beswick, Priscilla, and Abimelech Hudson 1G90 

Betron, Rebecca, Morris, and Samuel Wills, Morris 1758 

Betts, Elizabeth, and David Clark, Burlington 175G 

Bevau, Anne, Pa. , and John Sisom, Pa 1727 

Beverlin, Ann, and Timothy Dempson 1731 

Bevers, Elizabeth, and Samuel Kennedy, Jr., Sussex 17G8 

Bickham, Ann, Salem, and Peter Justice, Salem 1764 

Bickham, Anne, Burlington, and Alexander Brown, Trenton 1774 

Bickham, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and William Hamton, Gloucester. . . .1755 
Bickham, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and William Curuthers, Gloucester. .1761 

Bickley, Hannah, Philadelphia, and John Fordham, Philadelphia 1730 

Biddle, Mary, Trenton, and Elijah Bond, Trenton 1742 

Biddle, Sarah, and William Righton 1695 

Biddle, Sarah, Burlington, and John Monrow, Jr., Burlington 1767 

Bidgood, Sarah, Bucks, Pa, and Joshua Headley, Bucks, Pa 1748 

Bigalo, Mary, Morris, and Isaac Beach, Morris 1768 

Biggar, Ann, Bethlehem, and James Wilson, Bethlehem 1768 

Biggs, Betsy, and Nahor Yard, Trenton 1784 

Biggs, Mary, and James Bowen, Hunterdon 1785 

Biggs, Sarah, Burlington, and William Arthur, Burlington 1741 

Bilderback, Levenah, and John Crebs 1769 

Bilderback, Margaret, and William Phil pot, Salem 1774 

Bilderback, Margeth, and Andrew Senexon, Jr., Salem 1769 

Bilderback, Sarah, Salem, and Moses Hill, Salem. . . 1764 

Bilderback, Susanna, and Edward Test 1770 

Biles, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Abel Jenney, Maidenhead 1740 

Biles, Phebe, Philadelphia, and John Plasket, Philadelphia 1733 

Biles, Ruth, and John Watson, Jr., Nottingham 1771 

Billings, Charity, and Joshua Smith, Cape May 1770 

Billings, Judith, and Elihu Smith, Cape May 1774 

Billings, Temperance, Cape May, and Daniel Johnson, Cape May 1763 

Billins, Charity, and Seth Bowen 1778 

Bills, Content, Monmouth, and Samuel Trafford, Monmouth 1749 

Bills, Deborah, Monmouth, and Charles Matthews, Monmouth 1760 

Bills, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Corlis, Monmouth 1745 

Bills, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Stoffell Longstreet, Monmouth 1748 

Bills, Elizabeth, Freehold, and Carvel Wells, Freehold 1767 

Bills, Hannah, Monmouth, and William Jackson, Jr., Monmouth. . . .1757 

Bills, Johanna, Monmouth, and Benjamin Roogers, Monmouth 1740 

Bills, Lydia, Monmouth, and Moses Mount, Monmouth 1739 

Bills, Marah, Shrewsbury, and Silas Woolley, Shrewsbury 1754 



Oct. 


31 


Sept. 


25 


Mar. 


28 


Sept. 


30 


May 


7 


Mar. 


25 


Mar. 


7 


Sept. 


16 


Mar. 


27 


July 


27 


Oct. 


8 


Feb. 


13 


June 


8 


July 


3 


June 


22 


Sept. 


27 


Dec. 


13 


Oct. 


21 


June 


3 


Dec. 


27 


Sept. 


14 


Nov. 


7 


Mar. 


19 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


23 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


24 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


— 


Jan. 


30 


June 


5 


Oct. 


11 


April 


23 


Dec. 


3 


Sept. 


20 


May 


5 


May 


27 


Dec. 


29 


Feb. 


22 


Aug. 


17 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


24 


May 


19 


Dec. 


10 


May 


15 


Nov. 


21 



48 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bills, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Garmon, Monmouth 1755 

Bills, Patience, Monmouth, and Nathan Allen, Monmouth 1767 

Bilson, Sarah, and John Nefius, Somerset 1782 

Bilyer, Cathriue, and Jacob D. Berdan, Bergen 1783 

Bingham, Mary, Burlington, and George Elkincton, Burlington 1683 

Birch, Dorothy, Gloucester, and William Smith, Gloucester 1728 

Bird, Ann, Gloucester, and Isaac Gibson, Burlington 1750 

Bird, Ann, and Benjamin Audersou, Hunterdon 1772 

Bird, Elizabeth, Essex, and Jonathan Hamptou, Richmond 1740 

Bird, Lavina, Monmouth, and Richard Ridgeway, Monmouth 1751 

Bird, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Solomon Delgrass, Perth Amboy 1758 

Birdine, Mary, Atnwell, and George Taylor, Amwell 1 774 

Birdsall, Jane, Williugborough. and Robert Taylor, Willingborough. .1751 

Birdsell, Mary, Burlington, and William Jones, Burlington 1749 

Birdsill, Hannah, Northampton, and Joshua Woolstou, Northampton. . 1767 

Biset, Jane, Staten Island, and Nicholas Hillyer, New York 1771 

Bishop, Abigail, and William Payday, Cumberland 1754 

Bishop, Abigail, and Henry Burr, Jr., Burlington 1793 

Bishop, Ann, Burlington, and Ralph Smith, Burlington 1740 

Bishop, Anna, Burlingtou, and John Martin, Burlington 1772 

Bishop, Anne, Northampton, and Joseph Powell, Northampton 1765 

Bishop, Diadema, Burlington, and John Davis, Burlington 1762 

Bishop, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Hezikiah Rossell, Burlington 1761 

Bishop, Esther, and William Sink, Stow Creek 1784 

Bishop, Hannah, and Jacob Prickett, Burlington 1733 

Bishop, Leah, and Michael Baker, Burlington 1768 

Bishop, Levina, Burlington, and Nathaniel Babcock, Burlington 1760 

Bishop, Martha, Burlington, and Edward Stiles, Burlington 1761 

Bishop, Mary, Burlington, and William Atkinson, Burlington 1731 

Bishop, Mary, Burlington, and Andrew Bozorth, Burlington 1756 

Bishop, Mary, and Amos Atkinson, Burlington 1779 

Bishop, Rachel, Burlington, and Philip Micharr, Burlington 1758 

Bishop, Sarah, and William Foster, Burlington 1779 

Bishop, Sarah, and Jeremiah Vangildan, Cape May 17S0 

Bishop, Selma, and Joshua Stokes, Gloucester 1777 

Bisnett, Anne, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Butcher, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Bispham, Elizabeth, Burliugtou, and Samuel Bispham, Philadelphia. .1781 

Bispham, Sarah, Mount Holly, and Buddell Shiim, Burlington 1780 

Bisset, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and John Jolley, Jr., Perth Amboy 1756 

Bissit, Mary, and John Slover, South Amboy 1778 

Bittle, Lydia, Burlington, and Michael Howard, Burlington 1756 

Black, Achsiah, and Joseph Aaronsen, Burlington 1782 

Black, Ame, and Jonathan Kirby, Burlington 1768 

Black, Effey, and John Langford 1732 

Black, Elizabeth, and George Smith, Monmouth 1765 

Black, Sarah, and Thomas Aaronson, Burlington 1787 



July 12 

Dec. 24 

April 9 

Jan. 10 

Jan. 13 

Aug. 13 

Nov. 29 

Oct. 22 

Feb. 21 

May 21 

June 19 

June 20 

April 11 

Aug. 10 

May 18 

Aug. 6 

Aug. 6 

Nov. 14 

Nov. 3 

Nov. 26 

Nov. 9 

Mar. 8 

Oct. 1 

Nov. 18 

Sept. 20 

Dec. 17 

Nov. 12 

Mar. 14 

Feb. 3 

May 21 

Nov. 17 

Mar. 29 

Oct, 11 

Aug. 1 

Mar. 3 

June 19 

Aug. 21 

June 15 

April 27 

June 16 

Sept. 9 

Oct. 9 

June 11 

July 14 

Aug. 28 

July 24 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 49 

Blackbourn, Sarah, and Miebnel Willson, Burlington 1730 

Blackburn, Elizabeth, and Joseph Spavin, Philadelphia 1739 

Blackball), Jane, Philadelphia, and Isaac Dawson, Philadelphia 1738 

Blackledge, Eleanor, Essex, and Abraham Hetfield, Essex 1746 

Blackless, Hannah, and Joseph Greenwood 1759 

Blackley, Mary, and Hezekiah Woodruff, Morris 1776 

Blackshoe, Martha, Bucks Co., Pa., and George Barber, Bucks, Pa... 1729 

Blackwell, Amy, Somerset, and Samuel Leigh, Somerset 1774 

Blackwell, Elenor, and Sylvester Bills, Bucks Co., Pa 1782 

Blackwood, Margaret, and Jobn. Sell, Gloucester 1775 

Blackwood, Mary, Gloucester, and David Morgan, Gloucester 17G8 

Blackwood, Sarah, and David Morgan 1780 

Blain, Elizabeth, P#rth Amboy, and David Gosling, Perth Amboy 1756 

Blair, Elizabeth, and Hendrick Fisher, Somerset 1783 

Blair, Mary, and Elias Streaker, Burlington 1779 

Blake, Margaret, Bucks Co., Pa., and Joseph Dempsey, Bucks Co., Pa. 1740 

Blakeley, Elizabeth, and Thomas Poole, Middlesex 1747-8 

Blanchard, Mary, New Brunswick, and John Gifford, Perth Amboy. . .1713 

Blanchard, Maryan, and John How, Burlington 1782 

Blane, Mary, Middlesex, and Thomas Leadlie, Middlesex 1749 

Blanvelt, Brache, Orange, N. 1'., and Abraham Ackermau, Bergen. . . .17G3 
Blauvclt, Elizabeth, Orange, N. Y., and Wm. Feshie, Orange, N. Y. ..1762 

Blauvelt. Maria, and Peter Valentine, Orange, N. Y 1784 

Bletb, Margaret, Evesham, and Peter Paringer, Evesham 1763 

Blew, Elizabeth, and James Voorhees, Somerset 1778 

Bliss, Margaret, and Thomas Berkiushew, Burlington 1738 

Blizard, Naomi, and Thomas Gaudy, Cumberland 1779 

Blizard, Phebe, Cumberland, and David Gandy, Cumberland 17GI 

Blonk, Ann, and Samuel Witchell, Burlington 1779 

Bloodgood, Martha, Middlesex, and William Lorton, Middlesex 1760 

Bloodgood, Mary, South Amboy, and Ewbanks Rathbone 1758 

Bloomfield, Dorothy, Woodbridge, and John Jacquess, Woodbridge. . . 1751 

Bloomfield, Hope, Woodbridge, and James Ayres, Woodbridge 1743-4 

Bloomfield, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Thomas Hadden, Woodbridge. 1750 

Bloomfield, Mary, Middlesex, and John Piersou, Middlesex 1747 

Bloomfield, Mary, Middlesex, and Robert Martin, Middlesex 1758 

Bloomfield, Phebe, Middlesex, and Frazee Ayers, Middlesex 1749 

Bloomfield, Rachel, Middlesex, and David Kent, Middlesex 1744 

Bloomfield, Ruth, Middlesex, and Silas Walker, Middlesex 1762 

Bloomfield, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Dugel Campbell, Woodbridge. ..1756 

Blue, Jane, and Matthias Hullfish, Middlesex 1780 

Blumer, Gwyu, and Solomon Stinger, Alloways Creek 1771 

Boar, Aun, and Joseph Kees 1762 

B aard, Annas, and Cornelius Board, Bergen 1785 

Board, Elinor, and Peter Dey, Bergen 1786 

Board, Elizabeth, and Henry Post, Pumpton 1780 

4 - 



May 


4 


Jan. 


20 


May 


25 


Sept. 


17 


May 


19 


May 


11 


July 


29 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


12 


April 


7 


June 


20 


Jan. 


10 


June 


23 


Oct. 


12 


Oct. 


14 


Sept. 


20 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


3 


Nov. 


16 


Dec. 


29 


May 


5 


Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


8 


Aug. 


31 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


11 


Feb. 


23 


Sept. 


3 


July 


9 


Oct. 


2 


April 


1 


Dec. 


5 


Mar. 


13 


July 


21 


Dee. 


1 


Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


24 


Aug. 


15 


Jan. 


4 


Jan. 


31 


April 


22 


June 


15 


April 


30 


Aug. 


27 


May 


9 


June 


12 



50 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

BoCaw, Phebe, and John Field, Middlesex 1781 

Bodice, Ruth, Gloucester, and Garet Vanaman, Gloucester 1748 

Bodine, Elizabeth, Lebanon, and Edward Willett, Lebanon 1752 

Bodine, Margaret, Hunterdon, and Piter Schamp, Hunterdon 1744 

Bodoiue, Mary, and John Edgar, Bucks, Pa 1776 

Bodyne, Elizabeth, and Staples Thompson, Bristol, Pa 1777 

Bogar, Mary, Burlington, and William Flittraft, Burlington 1770 

Bogart, Elizabeth, and John Van Antwerp, OraDge Co., N. Y 1780 

Bogart, Helen, and William Strachan, Saddle River 1782 

Bogart, Jane, and Willett Tayler, Somerset 1783 

Bogart, Levina, Northampton, and Barnard Vanhorne, Northampton.. 1767 

Bogart, Lydia, and Isaac Ecret, Burlington .... 1778 

Bogart, Margaret, and William Campbell, New York * . . . 1788 

Bogart, Mary, Bridgwater, and Cornelius Simonson, Somerset 1779 

Bogart, Mary, and Abraham Garrison, Bergen . . 1780 

Bogart, Rachel, Burlington, and Jonathan Campbell, Burlington 1776 

Bogart, Sarah, and James Stryker, Somerset 1779 

Bogart, Willempje, Paramus, and Jacobus Rutan, Paramus 1765 

Bogert, Ann, and James Van Antwerp, Jr., Orange, N. Y 1783 

Bogert, Annetje, and Abraham Wright, New Barbadoes 1788 

Bogert, Antye, and Peter Demarest, Bergen 1784 

Bogert, Cornelia, and John A. Zabriskie, Bergen 1788 

Bogert, Eleanor, and William Leaycraft, Orange Co., N. Y 1783 

Bogert, Elizabeth, and Adoniah Schuyler, Pompton 1783 

Bogert, Margaret, and Abraham Haring, Bergen 1787 

Bogert, Polly, Bergen, and Thomas Van Dien, Bergen 1764 

Bogert, Sarah, and Isaac Rose, Bergen Co 1788 

Bogert, Wellemtje, Bergen, and Henry Zabriskie, Paramus 1771 

Boggs, Ann, and Robert Allen, Middlesex 1780 

Boggs, Rebecca, and Samuel Boggs, Salem 1730 

Bohannan, Mary, and William Kennedy, Philadelphia , 1764 

Bohert, Mariah, Bergen, and Stephen Terhuen, Bergen 1714 

Boice, Elizabeth, and Adam Peace, Monmouth 1769 

Boice, Siche, Middlesex, and Luck Voorhes, Middlesex 1746 

Boice, Trintie, Middlesex, and Nicasius Van Wikele, Somerset 1749 

Bolesberry, Anna, Monmouth, and Edward Bennet, Monmouth 1767 

Bolsworthy, Patience, Monmouth, and William Deney, Burlington 1761 

Bolten, Mary, Burlington, and Abel Kemble, Burlington 1768 

Bolton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Abraham Jones, Burlington 1773 

Bolton, Sarah, Burlington, and James Siddol, Burlington 1727 

Bond, Anne, Somerset, and Cornelius Vanderbek, Somerset 1752 

Bond, Mary, Monmouth, and Ralph Allen, Monmouth 1742 

Bond, Sarah, Somerset, and Levi Garish, Somerset 1751 

Bond, Susannah, Monmouth, and Nathaniel Slocum, Monmouth 1749 

Bouell, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Joseph Gregory, Salem 1727 

Bones, Rachel, Bergen, and Peter Bourdett, Bergen 1762 



Jan. 


22 


June 


18 


June 


19 


April 


7 


Nov. 


28 


April 


12 


Aug. 


7 


Mar. 


20 


Mar. 


20 


May 


•29 


Dec. 


29 


Aug. 


21 


June 


30 


Oct. 


12 


Jan. 




Feb. 


5 


Oct. 


18 


June 


1 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


IS 


May 


20 


April 


16 


Oct. 


16 


Aug. 


27 


Nov. 


20 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


15 


Dec. 


16 


Oct. 


27 


Jan. 


18 


April 


6 


Nov. 


1 


May 


31 


June 


9 


May 


27 


Oct. 


27 


July 


11 


Mar. 


14 


Aug. 


31 


Aug. 


31 


Oct. 


19 


May 


16 


May 


23 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


6 


June 


18 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 5 I 

Bong, Ruth, Middlesex, and Henry Guest 1748 Dec. 19 

Bonham, Ann, Shrewsbury, and Obadiab. Worthly, Shrewsbury 17G6 Oct. 25 

Bonham, Else, and Stephen Reed, Hunterdon 1782 May 4 

Bonham, Hester, Middletown, and Andrew Wilson, Jr., Middletown. . . 1751 Dec. 22 

Bonham, Mary, Shrewsbury, and William Sears, Shrewsbury 1758 Nov. 27 

Bonham, Mary, and Joseph Smith, Hunterdon 1769 Nov. 4 

Bonham, Mary, and John Davison, Hunterdon 1779 Feb. 16 

Bonham, Margaret, and Thomas Man, Gloucester 1776 Jan. 20 

Bonham, Sarah, and Albert Covenhoven, Hunterdon 1779 May 21 

Bounel, Hannah, and John Rogue, Morris Town 1781 Jan. 1 

Bonuell, Mary, Somerset, and William Tatem, Gloucester 1730 Jan. 14 

Bonnel, Sarah, Essex, and Samuel Roberts, Morris 1761 Sept. 28 

Bonuell, Hene Maria Moreten, and Cryten Foster, Gloucester 1769 Nov. 20 

Bonquett, Judith, New Brunswick, and Nathaniel Ogden, Elizabetht'wn. 1740 Dec. 24 

Bonsell, Sarah, and Aubrey Harry, Chester 1754 Jan. 14 

Boogart, Autie, Paramus. and John Van Vooihesse, Paramus 1765 Oct. 30 

Boone, Ann, and Thomas Dodd, Burlington 1754 May 8 

Boone, Jane, Elizabethtown, and David Thompson, Elizabethtown. . .1740 Nov. 29 

Boom, Mary, Middletown, and James Willson, Middletown 1757 June 30 

Booth, Elizabeth, and Daniel Huddy, Salem 1732 June 24 

Booth, Sarah, Salem, and William Drake, Salem 1774 Nov. 2 

Boram, Phebe, and Peter Young, Hunterdon 1784 Feb. 25 

Bord, Sarah, Bergen, and Walter Erwin 1751 Aug. 26 

Bordau, Eva, and J ames Connoor, Bergen 1765 May 15 

Borden, Abigail, Burlington, and Joseph Brackney, Burlington 1757 Feb. 14 

Borden, Abigail, Burlington, and Henry Bennet, Burlington 1774 Jan. 29 

Borden, Achsah, and Elijah Chapman, Burlington 1783 Mar. 27 

Borden, Amy, Hunterdon, and Philip Flick, Burlington 1754 Oct. 24 

Borden, Amye, Bordentown, and John Black, Philadelphia 1746 Sept. 3 

Borden, Elinor, and Henry Oldacres, Burlington 1732 Oct. 11 

Borden, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Douglass, Monmouth 1734 Jan. 9 

Borden, Hannah, Burlington, and John Lawrence, Monmouth 1731 April 26 

Borden, Hannah, Burlington, and William Mills, Burlington 1778 Dec. 5 

Borden, Hannah, Burliugton, and Samuel Swain, Burlington 1780 Mar. 30 

Borden, Hester, Middletown, and Benjamin Cooper, Middletown 1754 April 12 

Borden, Innocent, and John Bozworth, Burlington 1734 July 13 

Borden, Martha, Penns Neck, and George White, Deerfield 1772 Nov. ' 7 

Borden, Mary, Monmouth, and William Baker, Monmouth 1731 Nov. 27 

Borden, Mary, and Thomas Copperthwaite, Burlington 1733 Feb. 19 

Borden, Mary, Bordentown, and Thomas McKean, Newcastle, Del 1763 July 21 

Borden, Mary, Burlington, and Jeremiah Vausciver, Willingborough. . 1781 Mar. 28 

Borden, Patience, Burlington, and Benjamin Allen, Burlington 1737 Dec. 8 

Borden, Phebe, Hunterdon, and Benjamin Gardiner, Burlington 1737 May 18 

Borden, Rachel, Monmouth, and Daniel Butler, Monmouth 1745-6 Feb. 4 

Boardman, Nelly, and Daniel Beton, Middlesex 1752 May 10 

Borrodail, Hester, Burlington, and Thomas Vena*ble, Burlington 1756 Aug. 2 



52 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Borrodail, Sarah, Burlington, and Moses Branson, Burlington 1766 

Borrowe, Jemima, Perth Amboy, and Robert Wallace, Perth Amboy. .1719 

Borton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Seth Thomas, Burlington 1774 

Barton, Martha, and John Hollinshead, Burlington 1782 

Borton, Mary, Burlington, and John Lord, Gloucester 1750 

Borton, Mary, Burlington, and John Lord, Gloucester 1750 

Borton, Prudence, and Joseph Ridgway, Burlington 1736 

Borton, Rachel, and Joshua Borton, Burlington 1781 

Borton, Sarah, Burlington, and James Spencer, Burlington 1737 

Boss, Sarah, Hunterdon, and William Lair, Hunterdon 1776 

Bostedo, Elizabeth, and John Reichards, Monmouth .... 1756 

Bostedo, Judith, Monmouth, and Thomas Earl, Burlington 1736 

Botenhouse, Mary, and William Smith, Burlington 1780 

Boudet, Catey, and Edward Boylston, Bergen 1763 

Boulton, Mary, and Isaac King, Burlington 1768 

Bound, Anne, Freehold, and John Craig, Monmouth 1702 

Bourke, Sarah, aud Thomas Dikes, Burlington 1732 

Bourne, Sarah, Chester, Pa., and Nathaniel Pennock, Chester, Pa.... 1754 
Bourton, Sarah, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Lenard Wescot, Gt. Egg Harb'r. 1761 

Bowen, Abigail, and Nathaniel Clement, Gloucester 1763 

Bowen, Ann, Cumberland, and Jonadab Lockwell, Fairfield 1762 

Bowen, Deborah, and Reubiu Burgin, Cumberland 1787 

Bowen, Mary, and William Cafferty, Burlington 1771 

Bowen, Prudence, New Town, and Simeon Roberts, Philadelphia 1762 

Bowen, Rebekah, and Elisha Smith, Deerfield 1 778 

Bowen, Sarah, and Benjamin Moore, Burlington 1788 

Bowen, Temperance, Cape May, and Eli Stiles, Cape May 1769 

Bower, Anne, Monmouth, and Thomas Walton, Chesterfield 1766 

Bower, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Edward Austin, Philadelphia. ... 1737 

Bowerd, Leah, and Daniel Holmes, Monmouth 1752 

Bowers, Elizabeth, and Thomas Scott, Bristol, Pa 1773 

Bowers, Susanuah, and Jonathan Pitman, Burlington 1771 

Bowert, Catherine, Bergen, and Johannes Terheun, New Barbadoes. . .1766 

Bowes, Theodosia, Trenton, and Andrew Reed, Trenton 1740 

Bowger, Grace, Burlington, and Robert Fenton, Burlington 1762 

Bowiu, Hannah, Salem, and Nehemiah Hogben, Salem 1744 

Bowker, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Adams, Burlington 1771 

Bowkar, Hannah, and Jacob Ward, New Hanover 1784 

Bowker, Margaret, and William Gard, Burlington 1779 

Bowker, Mary, Burlington, and John Malsberry, Burlington 1736 

Bowker, Tamar, aud John Christian, Burlington 1778 

Bowlby, Mary, and Newbold Woolston, Mansfield 1775 

Bowler, Sarah, and Thomas Cunningham, Burlington 1713 

Bowman, Elizabeth, New Hanover, and Thomas Hendry, Gloucester. .1774 

Bowman, Frances, and John Bowne ] 692 

Bowman, Isabella, Burlington, and John Langford, Burlington 16S6 



Dec. 


5 


May 


6 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


23 


Feb. 


12 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


24 


Aug. 


1 


Jan. 


31 


April 


17 


Sept. 


30 


Aug. 


26 


May 


2 


Nov. 


4 


June 


1 


June 


19 


May 


28 


May 


30 


Dec. 


5 


June 


5 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


7 


June 


14 


May 


2 


Nov. 


17 


July 


22 


June 


14 


Sept. 


27 


Feb. 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


Oct. 


22 


Jan. 


19 


Dec. 


6 


Aug. 


9 


Dec. 


3 


Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


18 


Mar. 


13 


April 


7 


Mar. 


15 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Bowms, Anne, Somerset, and James McCreedy, Somerset 1742 

Bown, Catherine, Monmouth, and John McClese, Monmouth 1739 

Bowne, Easter, Monmouth, and Thomas Morford, Monmouth 1752 

Bowne, Anna, Middletowu, and Jo.hu Wall, Middletown 1753 

Bowne, Aune, Bucks, Pa., and Jouathau Butcher, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Bowne, Catherine, Middletown, and William Crawford, Middletown. .1756 
Bowne, Catherine, Middletown, and Peter Buckalew, South Amboy. ..1759 

Bowne, Catharine, Hunterdon, and Joseph Mattisen, Hunterdon 1768 

Bowne, Deborah, Monmouth, and John Patterson, Monmouth 1744 

Bowne, Lydia, Monmouth, and John Worthly, Monmouth 1747 

Bowne, Lydia, Monmouth, and James Grover, Jr., Monmouth 1752 

Bowne, Mary Anne, Monmouth, and Gersham B:illmau, Monmouth. .. 1761 

Bowne, Rachel, Middletown, and John Wall, Middletown 1751 

Bowne, Lydia, Middletown, and John Whitlock. ...... 1758 

Bowyer, Ruth, Philadelphia, and Samuel Bonham, Burlington 1747 

Boyce, Hannah, Amwell, and Andrew Sterling, Atnwell. 1773 

Boyce, Lydia, Middlesex, and John Funtine, Middlesex 1759 

Boyd, Martha, and James Ewiug, Cumberland 1778 

Boyle, Jane, and Joseph Dairy tuple, Morris 1745 

Boyles, Susannah, and Allan Simpson, Barnardstown 1781 

Boytenla, Mary, Piscataway, and Job3 Briggs, Piscataway 1742 

Bozorth, Bathsheba, Evesham, and Ihoinas Simmons, Burlington 1746 

Bozworth, Elizabeth, and John Springer, Burlington 1733 

Bozworth, Mary, Burlington, and Richard Langercan, Burlington 1741 

Brackemidge, Anne, and Mark Thomson, Sussex 1768 

Brackenridge, ■Martha, and Hugh Hughes, Philadelphia 1764 

Brackney, Abigail, and Thomas Middleton, Burlington 1784 

Brackney, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Bevis, Burlington 1741 

Brackney, Janet, and Jacob Keeler, Burlington 1777 

Bradberry, Elizabeth, Essex, and Abram Vanreype, Essex 1747 

Braddock, Hannah, Evesham, and John Painter, Evesham 1735 

Braden, Aune, Sussex, and James Crooks, Sussex 1773 

Bradford, Anne, Middlesex, and William Mersgen, New York City 1742 

Bradtield, Ruth, Nottingham, and Benjamin Robins, Nottingham 1771 

Bradgate, Aune, and John Reeve 1695 

Bradshaw, Rachel, Burlington, and Richard Cox, Burlington 1775 

Bradway, Sarah, and William Adams, Jr., Salem 1764 

Bradway, Sarah, aucl Jonathan Bradway, Mannington 1777 

Brady, Mary, and Josiah Stratton, Evesham 1777 

Braiden, Elizabeth, and Steward Martin, Sussex , 1772 

Braithwaite, Agues, Trenton, and Robert Booth, Trenton .1772 

Bralesford, Lydia, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph White, Bucks, Pa. 1731 

Bramsford, Joyce, Bucks, Pa., and John Bessonet, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Brand, Rebecca, Monmouth, and James Davis, Monmouth 1765 

Brandenburg, Margaret, Burlington, and George Hoffee, Burlington. . . 1775 
Brandros, Hannah, and James Hughes, Gloucester 1768 



53 



Jan. 


22 


Dec. 


21 


April 


20 


June 


15 


June 


6 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


20 


May 


5 


Oct, 


31 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


9 


April 


30 


Aug. 


7 


May- 


29 


Dec. 


18 


July 


4 


Oct. 


15 


May 


21 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


20 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


24 


April 


29 


Nov. 


1 


July 


25 


Oct, 


6 


June 


24 


April 


17 


Nov. 


28 


June 


9 


Aug. 


4 


Oct. 


23 


Mar. 


19 


July 


22 


Oct. 


12 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


15 


Mar, 


1 


Nov. 


5 


Aug. 


13 


Dec. 


21 


July 


1 


Sept. 


21 


Oct. 


16 



54 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Braning, Martha, and Samuel Allen, Barlington 1760 

Brannagan, Rebecca, Middlesex, and Patrick Magee, Somerset 1778 

Branniu, Catherin, Monmouth, and Benjamin Hance, Monmouth 1762 

BranniD, Martha, and Thomas Alcott, Builington 1780 

Branson, Lydia, and Daniel Wood, Deptford 1773 

Branson, Sarah, and David Hurley, Monmouth. v 1757 

Brant, Susanna, EUzabethtown, and John Oliver, Elizabethtown 1748 

Brass, Rachel, Barlington, and Thomas Kindell, Burlington 1750 

Brass, Sarah, and Michael Hans Smith, Essex 1711 

Brathwaite, Mary, Salem, and John Fry, Salem 1727 

Bray, Anne, Middlesex, and Reune Runyon, Jr., Middlesex 1765 

Bray, Elisabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Liquar, Monmouth 1717 

Bray, Mary, and Reuben Kellogg, Cumberland .1781 

Bray, Susannah, Monmouth, and John Smalley, Piscataway 1742 

Bray, Sarah, and Joseph Leonard, Monmouth 1 773 

Brayding, Ann, and Elias Marsh, Jr., Middlesex 1773 

Brayman, Mary, Barlington, and Solomon Watkins, Burlington 1734 

Brayman, Eliza, and Samuel Herd, Burlington 176S 

Brayman, Rachel, Burlington, and Japhet Brown, Burlington 1773 

Brayman, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Zane. Gloucester 1762 

Brazinton, Olive, Barlington, and John Fullingsby, Burlington 1774 

Breach, Ann, Gloucester, and Samuel Estlack, Gloucester 1733 

Breach, Sarah, Gloucester, and Edward Hampton, Gloucester 1741 

Breasor, Margaret, Gloucester, and Hezekiah Lee, Gloucester 1755 

Brelsford, Esther, Middletown, and John Harvey, Bucks, Pa 1774 

Brelsford, Martha, Pennsylvania, and Samuel Brown, Pennsylvania. . . 1768 

Brelsfoard, Rachel, Bristol, Pa., and Jesse Lewis, Bristol, Pa 1764 

Bremen, Catherine, and Henry Flinner, Burlington: 1784 

Breton, Elizabeth, and John Clayton, Burlington 1746 

Brewster, Anne, Cumberland, and John Hunt, Cumberland 1779 

Brewer, Anney, Monmouth, and James Johnson, Monmouth 1761 

Brewer, Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Jeremiah Pearce, Shrewsbury . . . 1755 

Brewer, Margaret, Monmouth, and Philip Marks, Monmouth 1760 

Brewer, Mary, Monmouth, and Edmund Lafetra, Monmouth 1744 

Brewer, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas Blackwell, Hunterdon 1764 

Brewer, Patience, Somerset, and Joseph Stilwell, Somerset 

Brewer, Rachel, Monmouth, and James Lippincott, Monmouth 1750 June 22 

Brewster, Deborah, Greenwich, and Samuel Ward, Cumberland 17 

Brewster, Ruth, Greenwich, and Ladis Walling, Cumberland 1775 

Brian, Elizabeth, and John Plummer, Salem ... 1 778 

Brian, Margaret, Burlington, and Michael Coweu, Burlington 1763 

Briant, Ann, Gloucester, and William Parker, Gloucester 1766 

Briant, Elizabeth, Elizabeth, aud William Roberson, Elizabeth 1751 

Briant, Mary, and Robert Fr'd Price, Gloucester 1784 

Briant, Rachel, Gloucester, and William Hewitt, Gloucester 1745 

Briant, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and John Cresson, Philadelphia 1736 



Nov. 


12 


July 


22 


Feb. 


6 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


8 


Dec. 


8 


Sept. 


13 


Jan. 


8 


May 


4 


June 


8 


Oct. 


9 


Jan. 


1 


Feb. 


7 


Oct. 


12 


Mar. 


19 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


27 


Aug. 


30 


Dec. 


5 


Oct, 


29 


Aug. 


8 


May 


26 


May 


11 


May 


16 


Aug. 


8 


July 


14 


June 


21 


May 


28 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


25 


Mav 


3 


Oct. 


20 


Dec. 


4 



Sept, 


25 


May 


19 


Aug. 


10 


June 


o0 


Oct. 


17 


Jan. 


14 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 5 5 

Brick, Ruth, and James Marshall, Cumberland 1791 Nov. 21 

Briggs, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Benjamin Hollden, Cape May 1739 Dec. 18 

Briggs, Emelia, and David Anderson, Burlington 1783 Sept. 5 

Briggs, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Leeton, Gloucester 1730 Sept. 21 

Brigqs, Hannah, Burlington, and John Briggs, Burlington 1766 Aug. 9 

Briggs, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Croshaw, Burlington 1771 April 25 

Briggs, Theodocia, and Samuel King, Burlington 1757 Jan. 28 

Bright, Catherine, and Jacob Hugg, Gloucester 1778 Dec. 8 

Bright, Margaret, Philadelphia, and Gideon Badcock, Gloucester 1773 Feb. 23 

Bright, Martha, Gloucester, and Robert Bramer, Gloucester 17-41 Jan. 7 

Bright, Sarah, and Nicholas Ridner 1785 July 5 

Brigs, Auu, and Michael Leonard, Burlington 1782 June 20 

Brinckerhoff, Antie, Bergen, and John Durie, Bergen 1 774 Aug. 27 

Brinkerhoff, Lenah, Bergen, and Jacob De Groot, Bergen 1771 Nov. 9 

Briudley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Allen, Monmouth 1767 Mar. 21 

Brindley, Euphame, Monmouth, and John Morris, Monmouth 1 763 April 29 

Bringley, Kezia, and Samuel 06born, Monmouth 1751 May 18 

Brinley, Elizabeth, and John Mount, Jr., Monmouth 1745 Aug. 27 

Brinley, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Wardell, Monmouth 1749 July 8 

Brinn, Amey, Gloucester, and Michael Chew, Gloucester 1733 Dec. 29 

Bristow, Catharine, Burlingtou, and John Miller, Burlington 1766 April 29 

Britaiu, Susanna, Burlington, and John Bowen, Burlington *. . . . 1774 July 19 

Brittain, Abigail, Burlington, and Thomas Nugen, Burlington 1772 April 29 

Brittain, Anne, Monmouth, and John Guinness, Burlington 1749 May 24 

Brittain, Lydia, and John Titus, Perth Am boy 1742 June 30 

Brittain, Rachel, Kings Co., N. Y., and Samuel Dorsett 1739 Oct. 27 

Brittain, Sidney, Bucks Co., Pa., and Robert Smith, Bucks Co., Pa. . .1771 Oct. 28 

Brittan, Ann, Perth Arnboy, and James Buckalew, Perth Amboy 1751 Oct. 15 

Biittau, Anne, and Nicholas Bellville, New Jersey 1780 Jan. 10 

Britton, Elisabeth, Monmouth, and Mindert McClean, Monmouth . . . 1762 May 4 
Britton, Hannah, Bucks Co., Pa., and Nicholas Larzelen, Bucks Co., Pa. 1766 Mar. 11 

Britton, Mary, and Benajah King, Burlington 1784 Jan. 29 

Britton, Rebeckah, Monmouth, and Abraham Warrick, Upper Freehold. 1750 Dec. 29 

Britton, Sarah, Middlesex, and Lewis Morris, Middlesex 1750 Aug. 10 

Britton, Sarah, and William Williams, Upper Freehold 1762 Jan. 19 

Britton, Sarah, and John Robinson, Somerset 1779 Dec. 11 

Broadgate, Sarah, Philadelphia, and John Green, Philadelphia 1738 May 6 

Broadhome, Venah, Springfield, and Joseph Nutt, Mansfield 1750 Sept. 25 

Brocaw, Jaunetje, Somerset, and Teunis Middagh, Somerset 1750 July 26 

Brock, Martha, Burlington, and Andrew Anderson, Burlington 1762 Feb. 1 

Brock, Mary, Burlington, and Ralph Woodward, Burlington 1758 May 18 

Brock, Sophia, Burlington, and Timothy Bishop, Burlington 1764 Mar. 13 

Brockney, Mary, and John Brock, Burlington 1779 Feb. 9 

Brokaw, Catherine, and Jeremiah Fisher 1769 Dec. 9 

Brokaw, Magdaline, and Tunis Van Middleswarth, Somerset 1781 June 18 

Brokaw, Mary, Somerset, and Benjamin Taylor, Somerset. 1742 Nov. 29 



56 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Brokaw, Mary, and William Lane, Somerset 1781 

Bromley, Martha, Burlington, and William Barnes, Burlington 1682 

Brookes, Lucy, and Josiah Garlick, Cape May 1738 

Brookfield, Elizabeth, and Matthias Johnston 1746 

Brookfield, Mary, Burlington, and Isaac Prickett, Burlington 1739 

Brookin, Sarah, and John Frizilier, Perth Amboy 1757 

Brooks, Aun, Salem, and Edward Bully, Salem 1736 

Brooks, Catherine, and James Freeman, Middlesex 1768 

Brooks, Elizabeth, and Nicholas Taylor 1747 

Brooks, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Brauin, Burlington 1771 

Brooks, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joshua Topping, Burlington 1773 

Brooks, Garthvey, Evesham, and Abraham Merit, Evesham 1785 

Brooks, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Stephen Simmons, Philadelphia. .1738 

Brooks, Jane, Woodbridge, and Francis Walker, Woodbridge 1744 

Brooks, Judeth, and William Mason, Cape May 1766 

Brooks, Mary, and Obadiah McClutch, Burlington 1784 

Brooks, Phebe, and Moses Harris 1779 

Brooks, Phebe, and Isaac Jenkins, Cumberland 1780 

Brooks, Temperance, Cumberland, and Joseph Shepherd, Cumberland. 1766 

Brotherton, Ann, and Aaron Bounel, Morris 1772 

Brouyn, Elena, and Jacobes Myer, Bergen 1765 

Brower, Leah, Hackensack, and James Stagg, Hackensack 1765 

Brower, Mary, Bergen, and John Heten, Bergen 1785 

Brower, Tannics, Middlesex, and Cornelius Tunison, New Jersey 1719 

Browers, Jane, and James Ennis, Bergen 1782 

Brown, Agnes, Middlesex, and Daniel Moores, Middlesex 1747 

Brown, Ann, Burlington, and Audrew Cunningham, Burlington 1754 

Brown, Ann, Burlington, and Thomas Stiles, Chester 1772 

Brown, Anne, Burlington, and Robert Pidgeon, Monmouth 1783 

Brown, Barsheba, Monmouth, and Samuel Morrell, Middlesex 1761 

Brown, Bartha, Fairfield, and Thomas Whitecar, Fairfield 1761 

Brown, Catherine, Somerset, and Charles Beekman, Jr., New York. . . .1742 

Brown, Catherine, Monmouth, and John Holmes, Monmouth 1761 

Brown, Christina, Woodbridge, and John Cutler, Woodbridge 1752 

Brown, Elizabeth, New Brunswick, and John Geddemau, New Brwk. .1751 

Brown, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Nathan Maxson, Monmouth 1764 

Brown, Elizabeth, and Elias Coleman, Hunterdon 1786 

Brown, Hannah, Burlington, and John Ridgway, Burlington 1727 

Brown, Hannah, Philadelphia, aud Henry Finney, Philadelphia 1739 

Brown, Hannah, and Gabriel Swain, Mansfield 1778 

Brown, Hannah, and Abijah Moore, Hunterdon 1780 

Brown, Hiley, and John Lamb, Essex 1792 

Brown, Isabell, Evesham, and Samuel Swain, Evesham 1765 

Brown, Jane, Burlington, and William Nutt, Burlington 1757 

Brown, Jane, Monmouth, and Daniel Morgan, Middlesex 1759 

Brown, Jane, and Cornelius Carr, Bucks, Pa 1768 



Nov. 


3 


Feb. 


13 


Sept. 


14 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


21 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


3 


Sept. 


15 


Dec. 


21 


Oct, 


1 


Nov. 


11 


Feb. 


12 


April 


11 


April 


30 


Nov. 


10 


May 


3 


Nov. 


26 


April 


4 


May 


1 


April 


13 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


11 


Sept. 


23 


April 


29 


May 


23 


Dec. 


2 


June 


12 


Oct. 


19 


Dec. 


24 


April 


24 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


12 


Aug. 


3 


Nov. 


22 


July 


5 


April 


27 


Mar. 


3 


Mav 


5 


Oct. 


25 


Mar. 


12 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


30 


Oct. 


3 


Mar. 


1 


May 


3 


Aug. 


26 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



57 



Brown, Keziah, and Thomas Reeves, Gloucester 1777 

Brown, Lenb, and Francis Ellis, Burlington 1754 

Brown, Margaret, New Brunswick, and Henry Davis, New Bnmsw'k. .1740 

Brown, Margaret, Burlington, and Job Clevenger, Burlington 1772 

Brown, Margaret, and Ebeuezer Flick, Gloucester 1783 

Brown, Margaret, and Benjamin Archer, New York 17!- 4 

Brown, Martha, Burlington, and Jonathan Teely, Burlington 1758 

Brown, Mary, Bucks Co., Pa., and Daniel Thompson, Bucks Co., Pa. .1757 

Brown, Mary, Middlesex, and Moses Groom, Middlesex 17G5 

Brown, Mary, Cumberland, and John Fithian, Cumberland 1765 

Brown, Mary, and John Dancer, Middlesex 1769 

Brown, Mary, and Andrew Gautier, Jr ... 1772 

Brown, Mary, and John Warne, South Amboy 1773 

Brown, Mary, Fairfield, and Philip Walters, Cumberland 1777 

Brown, Mary, and John Pencock, Evesham 1784 

Brown, Neomy, Burlington, and James Killgore, Burlington 1730 

Brown, Prudence, Burlington, and Samuel Cooper, Gloucester 17G7 

Brown, Rachel, and John Almond, Salem 1785 

Brown, Rebecca, and John Brilford, Backs, Pa 17G0 

Brown, Rebecca, and Jeremiah Bennett, Burlington 1746 

Brown, Rebecca, Northampton, and Job Shreve, Northampton 1761 

Brown, Rhoda, and Joseph Champion, Gloucester 1784 

Brown, Sarah, Monmontb, and Josiah Steward, Monmouth 1740 

Brown, Sarah, Burlington, and John Gibbs, Burlington 1765 

Brown, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and Robert Potter, Shrewsbury 17G5 

Brown, Sarah, Freehold, and Audrew Reed, Freehold 1767 

Brown, Sarah, Monmouth, and Andrew Moore, Monmouth 1772 

Brown, Sarah, and William McNeilus 1760 

Brown, Susannah, Hackensack, and John Rickman, Hackensack 1760 

Brown, Theodosia, Monmouth, and Joseph Grover, Monmouth 1742 

Browne, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Knight, Burlington 1686 

Browne, Margaret, Monmouth, and Marcus Hedden, Monmouth 1738 

Browne, Martha, Burlington, and Josiah Steward, Burlington 1728 

Browne, Martha, and Abraham Thomas, Shrewsbury 1732 

Browne, Mary, Burlington, and Caleb Browne, Eastern Div 1731 

Browne, Mary, Gloucester, and Bower Brooks, Gloucester 1761 

Browning. Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Green, Gloucester 1737 

Browning, Mary, Chester, and John Chambers, Chester 1733 

Brucar, Catharine, Somerset, and Josiah Pattison, Trenton 1728 

Bruen, Joanna, and William Butler, Morris 1780 

Bruen Sarah, and Alpheus Haws 1779 

Bruing, Rachel, Essex, and John Gwiuness, Morris 1772 

Brundidge, Jemima, Burlington, and Benjamin Inman, Burlington. . .1739 

Branson, Anne, Somerset, and William Davidson, Middlesex 1744 

Branson, Mary, Somerset, and Adrian Beekman, Middlesex 1740 

Brush, Keziah, and John Stout, Jr., Hunterdon 1782 



Nov. 18 

Oct. 7 

July 14 

Mar. 4 

Feb. 27 

June 14 

June 22 

Aug. 2 

Feb. 7 

Sept. 26 

June 13 

Oct. 6 

June 9 

Oct, 18 

July 14 

Dec. 14 

Feb. 2 

Aug. 15 

Nov. 13 

Jan. 27 

Aug. 11 

Jan. 15 

Mar. 8 

Mar. 10 
April 17 

Sept. 28 

Jan. 18 

Dec. 20 

June 12 

Mar. 4 

Aug. 12 

July 27 

Jan. 21 

Sept. 9 

Nov. 17 
April 4 

July 9 

Feb. 25 

May 21 

Jan. 11 

May 22 

Feb. 28 

Sept. 11 

Nov. 17 

Jan. 5 

Dec. 7 



58 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bruyn, Helena, and John Lines, Bergen 1779 Nov. 27 

Bruyn, Hyutje, Essex, and Francis Mintrose, Essex 1741 Dec. 1 

Bryan, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jonathan Hough, Burlington 1741 May 30 

Bryan, Esther, Burlington, and Cornelius Morford, Burlington 1761 Dec. 21 

Bryan, Johanna, Sussex, and William Craty, Sussex 1769 May 18 

Bryan, Mary, and 'ihomas Raynolds, Burliugton 1769 Jan. 4 

Bryan, Rebecca, Mount Holly, and David Antram, Burlington 1773 Feb. 8 

Bryan, Sarah, Burlington, and Philip Kenny, Burlington . 1736 Feb. 3 

Bryant, Anne, Somerset, and Michael Higgins, Somerset 1727 Nov. 8 

Bryant, Anny, and Daniel Bateman, Cumberland 1779 Sept. 28 

Bryant, Drewsilla, Gloucester, and Henry Garner, Gloucester 1765 April 30 

Bryant, Jane, Deptford, and David Shrane, Deptford 1752 Oct. 19 

Bryant, Mary, Gloucester, and James Marriage, Gloucester 1762 Mar. 17 

Bryant, Rachel, and Josiah Ketcham, Hunterdon 17b4 Dec. 4 

Bryant, Sarah, Burlington, and John Fennimore, Burlington 1730 Dec. 3 

Bryant, Sarah, Deptford, and Samuel Leeds, Deptford 1737 Feb. 25 

Bryant, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Cosens, Gloucester 1761 May 13 

Buchanan, Elizabeth, and John Inskeep, Burlington 1758 June 26 

Buchanan, Margaret, and John Case, Hunterdon 1780 Aug. 8 

Buck, Abigail, Cape May, and Samuel Crowell, Cape May 1763 Dec. 29 

Buck, Lydia, Cape May, and Ananias Osborne, Cape May 1738 June 9 

Buck, Lidia, and Azariah Hewet, Cape May 1775 June 12 

Buck, Marcy, and John Taylor, Cape May 1759 Dec. 29 

Buck, Mary, Cape May, and Hope Willets, Burlington 1730 June 20 

Buck, Mary, Cape May, and John Hand, Cape May 1769 July 28 

Buck, Sarah, and John Hand, Cape May 17— April 17 

Buckalew, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Barney Carney, Perth Amboy. .. .1754 Sept. 9 

Buckalew, Elizabeth, and James Applcgate, Middlesex 1744 Feb. 21 

Buckalew, Mary, Perth Amboy, and George Johnson, Perth Amboy. .1759 July 4 

Buckalew, Mary, and Daniel Hollinshead, Monmouth 1762 Jan. 25 

Buckalew, Priscilla, and John Roberts, South Amboy 1757 Dec. 24 

Buckalew, Susannah, Middlesex, and Walter Carr, Middlesex 1747 Dec. 28 

Bucke, Abigail, and Abiah Shaw, Cumberland 1778 June 23 

Buckelew, Ann, and Gilbert Sherrer, Middlesex 1780 Sept. 19 

Buckelew, Margaret, Middlesex, and Francis Bloodgood, Middlesex. .. 1764 Dec. 15 

Buckelew, Rachel, Perth Amboy, and Richard Clawson, Perth Amboy. 1764 April 5 

Buckley, Martha, Salem, and John Hues, Salem . . 1690 April 24 

Buckman, Phebe, Pa., and Joseph Kelley, Pa 1768 April 9 

Buckston, Rachael, and Joseph Bonteuhouse, Gloucester, 1762 May 3 

Budd, Anne, Burlington, and Benjamin Stringer, Burlington 1731 Dec. 29 

Budd, Catharine, Morris, and David Gould, Morris 1761 Jan. 6 

Budd, Elizabeth, Northampton, and Thomas Reynolds, Northampton.. 1759 June 23 

Budd, Elizabeth, New Hanover, and Vincent Shinn, New Hanover — 1772 Sept. 5 

Budd, Hannah, Burlington, and Jonathan Reeves, Burlington 1736 Mar. 18 

Budd, Lydia, Burliugton, and Moses Gaskill, Burlington 1774 Sept. 1 

Budd, Mary, Morris, and James Adkins, Morris 1751 May 4 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 59 

Budd, Rachel, Burlington, and William Bradford, Jr., Philadelphia.. . 1742 Aug. 18 

Budd, Rebecca, and Joseph Lamb, Burlington 1738 Mar. 28 

Budd, Rebeckah, and James Sterling. Burlington 1785 Nov. 9 

Budd, Sarah, Burlington, and John Gosling, Burlington 1736 Dec. 13 

Budd, Theodosia, and William Keeler, Burlington 1785 Jan. 17 

Baffin, Anne, Mansfield, and Moses Nutt, Mansfield 1772 Feb. 3 

Baffin, Grace, Burlington, and Thomas Kyrlin, Burlington 1741 Mar. 29 

Baffin, Mary, and Edward Rockhill, Mansfield 17G3 Sept. 10 

Bull, Dorothy, Salem, and Brian Conelly, Salem 1731 July 27 

Bullen, Mary, Evesham, and Isaac Strattan, Evesham 1782 Dec. 25 

Bullers, Ann, and Joseph Ellis, Burlington 1785 Jan. 17 

Bullmau, Gitty, and Joseph Baker, Hunterdon 1785 Aug. 13 

Bullman, Sarah, Philadelphia, and William Rider, Philadelphia 1730 Sept. 11 

Bulong, Hannah, Nottingham, and Jonathan Brown, Burlington 1748 April 13 

Bulmer, Magdalen, Somerset, and John Kastner, Somerset 1748 June 15 

Bumstead, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Joseph Durborn, Philadelphia. 1736 July 8 

Bunn, Auue, and John Vroom, Somerset 1783 May 18 

BunD, Rachel, and Abraham Owen, Evesham 1784 Jan. 14 

Bowling, Mary, and John Woodmansee, Upper Freehold 1778 April 27 

Bunting, Phebe, Bucks Co., Pa., and Frances Wasley, Bucks Co., Pa. .1749 Dec. 5 

Bunting, Rachel, Burlington, and William Miller, Burlington 1735 May 31 

Bunting, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Thome, Burlington 1740 April 14 

Bunting, Sarah, Birliugton, and John Howard, Philadelphia. 1749 Oct. 16 

Bunting. Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Lawrence Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1751 Mar. 25 

Bunting, Sarah, and Benjamin Gilbert, Burlington 1772 Mar. 14 

Bunyan, Mary, and Michael Bailler, Hunterdon 1774 Jan. 19 

Burch, Margaret, and Abraham Reeves, Cape May 1769 Nov. 25 

Burck, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Duffill, Gloucester .1754 May 15 

Burck, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Duffill, Gloucester 1755 May 12 

Bardell, Ruth, Burlington, and John Collins, Burlington 1771 April 4 

Burden, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Cjrlies, Monmouth 1767 Jan. 28 

Burden, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Green, Gloucester 1774 Mar. 24 

Burden, Hannah, and John Hankins, Burlington 1778 Oct. 23 

Burden, Mary, Salem, and John Lewis, Salem 1730 Nov. 18 

Burden, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Pintard, Monmouth 1761 April 23 

Burden, Mary, and John Doughton, Gloucester 1770 May 17 

Burden, Ruth, Philadelphia, and George Noarth, Philadelphia 1737 May 14 

Burdge, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Dorset, Monmouth. 1771 Jan. 21 

Burdge, Lidia, Momnouth, and John Gifford, Monmouth 1767 April 7 

Burdsal, Avis, and Samuel Fort, Burlington 1768 Aug. 29 

Burdsall, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Benjamin Cooper, Gloucester 1734 Feb. 25 

Burdsall, Sarah, and William Pettit, Bucks Co., Pa 1770 Oct. 2 

Burdsell, Mary, Stafford, and Timothy Willets, Shrewsbury'. 1762 Sept. 28 

Burge, Deborah, Middletown, and James Pew, Middletown 1741 Jan. 21 

Burge, Phebe, Middletown, and Caleb Brown, New York 1762 Oct. 18 

Burge, Rejoice, and Francis Harris, Burlington 1774 Oct. 17 



60 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Burge, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and Jonathan Conrey, Middletown 1759 May 5 

Burger, Sarah, and Andries Ten Eick, Somerset 1781 Feb. 15 

Barges, Rebecca, Pennsylvania, and Joseph Church, Pannsylvauia. . .1736 Nov. 17 

Barges, Sarah, and Samuel Price, Sussex 1770 Oct. 13 

Burgess, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Guerrat, Burlington 1765 July 4 

Burgess, Margaret, Pennsylvania, and Joseph Jackson, Pennsylvania. .1728 Sept. 9 

Burgis, Sarah, Pennsylvania, and Mathew Johnson, Pennsylvania. .... 1756 May 22 

Bnrk, Anne, Gloucester, and John Chambers, Burlington 1767 Oct. 8 

Burk, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and John Race, Middletown 1766 April 23 

Burk, Dorsa, Monmouth, and Thomas Emans, Monmouth 1760 July 19 

Bark, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Samuel Baxter, Gloucester 1780 May 25 

Burkin, Catharine, Burlington, and John Mathes Sberso, Burlington. .1742 Mar. 21 

Burleigh, Abigail, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Simson, Bucks, Pa 1741 Mar. 25 

Burne, Abigail, Gloucester, and Robert Turner, Gloucester 1738 Jan. 8 

Burne, Mary, Gloucester, and John Price, Gloucester 1737 Nov. 8 

Burne, Mary, Hanover, and Peter Stevensen, Springfield 1774 June 8 

Burnes, Sarah, and Job Lippincott, Burlington 1779 Mar. 29 

Burnet, Marcy, and Philip Snalbaker, Gloucester 1758 April 25 

Burnett, Mary, Morris, and Stephen Jackson, Morris 1768 Dec. 19 

Burus, Anna, and Peter Welsh, Nottingham 1778 June 3 

Bums, Elinor, and Job Shinn, Springfield . 1776 Nov. 4 

Burns, Hannah, and Mark Minser, Burlington, 1784 Mar. 10 

Burns, Margaret, Middlesex, and Amaziah Davidson, Middlesex 1761 May 25 

Bums, Sarah, Northampton, and William Reeves, Northampton 1747 Nov. 21 

Burr, Ann, and George Deacon, Burlington 1757 Jan. 29 

Burr, Beulah, Burlington, and Reynold Wharton, Builington 1782 May 27 

Burr, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Abraham Hewlinge, Burlington 1774 Sept. 5 

Burr, Martha, and John Clapp, Burlington 1779 Mar. 17 

Burr, Mary, Burlington, and Isaiah Shinn, Burlington 1770 Aug. 2 

Burr, Mary, Burlington, and George Harris, Burlington 1774 May 2 

Burr, Priscilla, Burlington, and Thomas Kemble, Burlington 1773 Nov. 5 

Burr, Rebekah, and Levi Bond, Cumberland 1782 Jan. 7 

Burr, Rebecca, and Isaiah Bishop, Gloucester 1782 Aug. 29 

Burr, Susannah, Philadelphia, and Uriah Woohuan, Philadelphia 1769 Mar. 2 

Burrodail, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Browne, Burlington 1758 Mar. 11 

Burroughs, Esther, and William Bidgood, Burlington 1733 Feb. 5 

Burroughs, Hannah, Gloucester, and Simuel Parr, Burlington 1733 July 16 

Burroughs, Hannah, Bucks Co., Pa., and James Thornton, Bucks Co., Pa. 1764 June 27 

Burroughs, Hannah, and Joseph Mickle, Gloucester 1771 Dec. 23 

Burroughs, Mary, and Henry Cook, Hunterdon 1 782 June 29 

Burroughs, Priscilla, Gloucester, and James Cooper, Gloucester 176S Dec. 12 

Burroughs. Sarah, Gloucester, aud Isaac Mickle, Gloucester 1746 Sept. 19 

Burroughs, Sarah, and William Buzby, Gloucester 1779 July 21 

Burroughs, Susanuab, and Abraham Hazelton, Burlington 1756 June 7 

Burrows, Elizabeth, aud George Leawert, Cumberland 1778 Oct. 27 

Burrows, Martha, and Stephen Moore, Hunterdon 1781 Feb. 13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 6l 

Burrows, Priscilln, Salem, and Ebeuezer Bowers, Salem 1730 

Burr, Mary, and Andrew Brown, Hunterdon 1778 

Burt, Sarah, and John Eulon, Fairfield 1782 

Burtis, Ann, and John Martin, East New Jersey 1703 

Burtis, Mary, Burlington, and Robert Wortbington, Philadelphia 1729 

Burtis, Mary, Hunterdon, and Job Soger, Hunterdon 1770 

Burtis, Sarah, and Henry Wagman, Chesterfield 1767 

Burtis, Susannah, Middlesex, and John Bayley, Middlesex 1747 

Burtis, Susannah, and John Ewan, Burlington 1770 

Burton, Elizabeth, and Arthur Maguineas, Monmouth 17G3 

Burton, Mary, and John Hutson, Burlington 1794 

Busby, Elizabeth, and Richard Painter, Philadelphia 1732 

Busb, Catberine, and Anthony Beam, Bergen 1783 

Bush, Martha, Bergen, and Morris Earle, Bergen 1751 

Butcher, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Peak, Burlington 17G0 

Butcher, Elizabeth, and Joseph Hancock, Cumberland 1785 

Butcher, Esther, and John Snode, Waterford 1773 

Butcher, Mary, and Joseph Morgan, Jr., Burlington 1789 

Butcher, Prudence, Gloucester, and Joseph Kaighiu, Gloucester 17G7 

Butler, Anne. Burlington, and George Hulme, Burlington., 1774 

Butler, Bubory, and Joseph Scott, Penns Neck 1777 

Butler, Bellitje, and Isaac Lewis, Richmond Co., N. Y 1767 

Butler, Betsy, and Edmod Rainier, Burlington 1781 

Butler, Eleanor, Staten Island, and John Slaght, Staten Island 1764 

Butler, Elizabeth, Staten Island, and Charles Leforge, Staten Island. .1757 

Butler, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Jones, Burlington 1759 

Butler, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Stephen Pricket, Perth Amboy. .1768 

Butler, Margaret, and Joseph James, Cumberland 1748 

Butler, Margaret, and Daniel Simpking 1748 

Butler, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Roberts, Philadelphia 174S 

Butler, Mary, and John Horner, Burlington 1758 

Butler, Mary, and Gilbert Totten, Staten Island 1769 

Butler, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph English, Jr., Burlington 1769 

Butler, Rachel, Burlington, and John Scrogg, Burlington 1 748 

Butler, Rhodes, Shrewsbury, and William Pottet, Shrewsbury 1766 

Butler, Sarah, Burlington, and James Hammell, Burlington 1742 

Butler, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Kelsey, Burlington 1782 

Butterfield, Ann, and Samuel Radford, Burlington 17 8 

Butterfield, Sarah, Burlington, and Aaron Mires, Burlington 1771 

Butterworth, Anne, Burlington, and John Cross, Burlington 1784 

Butterworth, Esther, and Alexander Beal, Gloucester 1746 

Butterworth, Hannah, New Jersey, and John Mackie, Philadelphia. . . . 1770 

Battler, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Isaac Collen, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Buttler, Mary, and Joseph Hollinshead, Burlington 1787 

Buzby, Hannah, and Miles Evens 1783 

Byard, Rocly, and James Leeds, Gloucester 1785 



May 


1 


Jan. 


16 


Dec. 


10 


May 


23 


July 


31 


Mar. 


31 


June 


20 


Mar. 


30 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


11 


Sept. 


15 


Jan. 


27 


Aug. 


23 


Dec. 


18 


April 


25 


Dec. 


4 


Feb. 


23 


Mar. 


2 


May 


31 


May 


17 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


4 


April 


2 


Oct. 


25 


Jan. 


16 


•Jan. 


11 


Feb. 


1 


Feb. 


1 


Sept. 


21 


July 


8 


Jan. 


*23 


Oct. 


27 


Aug. 


17 


Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


23 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


24 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


26 


Mar. 


1 


June 


18 


Feb. 


28 



62 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Byram, Ann, Morris, and Peter Condit, Morris 1768 

Byram, Phebe, and Edward Mills, Morris 1778 

Byram, Rebeka, and Phineas Chidester, Morris 1780 

Byrme, Mary, Mount Holly, and Joseph Porter, Mount Holly 1781 

MALES. C 

Cafferty, William, Burlington, and Mary Bowen 1771 

Caffery, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Catharine Sinclair 1783 

Cahalin, James, Salem, and Rachel Howell, Salem 1761 

Cahill, James, Burlington, and Jane Taylor, Burlington 1768 

Cahoon, Samuel, Gloucester, and Hannah Davis, Gloucester 1770 

Cail, Daniel, Burlington, and Thankfull Fanning, Burlington 1770 

Cain, Edmund, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Peirson 1780 

Caldwell, Hugh, Gloucester, and Jane Cox 1736 

Caldwell, William, Gloucester, and Nancy Chew 1778 

Calkins, Abuer, Sussex, and Sarah White 1786 

Callahan, John, and Elizabeth Kidd , 1765 

Cambel, Cornelius, Salem, and Rachel White, Salem 1764 

Cambell, John, Perth Amboy, and Hester Weller, Perth Amboy 1731 

Camburn, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Crammer, Monmouth 1763 

Camel, Charles, Gloucester, and Susanna Francis, Gloucester 1750 

Cameron, John, Essex, and Jane Chambers, Essex .... 1763-8 

Camilton, William, Cape May, and Hannah Backon, Cape May 1742 

Camong, Lazarus, Gloucester, and Mary Beets, Gloucester 1758 

Camp, John, Gloucester, and Elender Ingersoll, Gloucester 1740 

Camp, John, Gloucester, and Jane Goldin 1780 

Campbell, Alexander, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Leigh, Perth Amboy. 1742 

Campbell, Arthur, Philadelphia, and Mary Esdall, Burlington 1764 

( Jampbell, Charles, Salem, and Jane McKuight 1732 

Campbell, Christopher, Bergen, and Dirreckie Verveele, Orange, N. Y.1766 
Campbell, Dugel, Woodbridge, and Sarah Bloomfield, Woodbridge.. . . 1756 

Campbell, George, Bei'gen, and Anuatie Outwater, Bergen 1767 

Campbell, George, Bergen, and Johannah Singer 1732 

Campbell, George, Hunterdon, and Catherine Smith 1779 

Campbell, Jacob, Bergen, and Altche Westervelt, Bergen 1774 

Campbell, James, Sussex, and Mary Johnson, Sussex 1772 

Campbell, John, Jr., Monmouth, and Rachel Walker, Monmouth 1746 

Campbell, John, Gloucester, and Jane Dickson, Gloucester 1754 

Campbell, John, Woodbridge, and Mary Eastwood, Piscataway 1758 

Campbell, John, Monmouth, aud Hendrica Coveuhoven ] 761 

Campbell, Johu, Burlington, and Mary Eyre, Burliugton 1765 

Campbell, Jonathan, Burlingtou, aud Rachel Bogart, Burlington 1776 

Campbell, Neil, Middlesex, and Jannet McDauiel, Woodbridge 176) 

Campbell, Neil, Middlesex, and Rachel Cothiel, Middlesex 1763 

Campbell, William, Somerset, and Sarah Harris 1 781 

Campbell, William, New York, Margaret Bogarfc . ; 1788 



May- 


19 


May 


9 


Mar. 


20 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


19 


Sept. 


9 


June 


29 


May 


9 


June 


1 


Feb. 


14 


April 


29 


Dec. 


17 


April 


27 


June 


1 


May 


5 


Mar. 


29 


Oct. 


13 


Jan. 


22 


May 


17 


Sept. 


24 


Aug. 


18 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


31 


Jan. 


7 


Sept. 


11 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


23 


Jan. 


31 


Dec. 


8 


Sept. 


17 


Mar. 


23 


April 


23 


Mar. 


2 


Jan. 


22 


Oct. 


9 


July 


5 


Nov. 


30 


June 


10 


Feb. 


5 


April 


2 


Jan. 


10 


Sept. 


29 


June 


30 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 63 

Canady, Patrick, l Salem, ami Judith Morrison, Salem 1771 

Cane, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Tice, Gloucester 1761 

Cann, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Sherrin 1789 

Cannaday, John, and Ruth Howell 1780 

Cannon, David, Staten Island, and Altie Prall, Staten Island 1749 

Cannon, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Jackson, Philadelphia 1738 

Cappell, Charles, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Guyaut 1778 

Car, Joseph, Jr., Freehold, and Eles Hamton, Freehold 1756 

Carbines, Francis, Somerset, and Mary Stout, Somerset 1770 

Card, William. Perth Atnboy, and Anne Fleming, Perth Amboy 1739 

Carhart, Philip, Hunterdon, and Elenor Thompson, Perth Amboy 1757 

Carhart, Samuel, Middletown, and Elizabeth Dorsett, Middletown 1764 

Carkhuff, Henry, Hunterdon, and Catherine Fenner 1767 

Carl, Uriah, Monmouth, and Judith Huun, Monmouth. ... 1755 

Carlile, Robert, Readingtown, and Abigail Geddes, W'oodbridge 1757 

Carlile William, Monmouth, and Hannah Taylor, Monmouth 1764 

Carll, Constantiue, Cape May, and Sarah White 1762 

Carll, Phineas, Cumberland, and Rachel Mills, Cumberland 1760 

Carll, Phineas, Salem, and Elizabeth Harneck 1757 

Carll, William, Cumberland, and Sarah Ewing, Cumberland 1773 

Carly, Owen, Gloucester, and Esther Watson, Burlington 1712 

Carmack, David, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Parker 1773 

Carmack, David, Salem, and Hannah Lecroy 1775 

Carmalt, Jonathan, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Richardson, Phila 1727 

Carman, Aaron, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stevenson, Burlington 1759 

Carman, Benjamin, Middletown, and Susanna Thomson, Perth Amb. .1763 

Carman, Elijah, Hunterdon, and Jane James 1780 

Carman, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Heritage, Burlington 1771 

Carman, James, Middlesex, and Margaret Presmeal, Middlesex 1742 

Carman, James, Perth Amboy, and Mary Thompson, Perth Amboy 1756 

Carman, John, Burlington, and Anne Stockdon, Burlington 1744 

Carman, John, and Catherine White, Middletown 1748-9 

Carman, Richard, and Abigail Fitz Randolph 1742 

Carman, Samuel, Middlesex, and Margaret Moores, Middlesex 1740 

Carman, Samuel, Middletown, and Mary W T ilson, Middletown 1748 

Carman, Stephen, Woodbridge, and Isabell Moores, Woodbridge 1748 

Carman Stephen, Middlesex, and Margaret Carman 1769 

Carmau, William, Monmouth, and Anna Walker, Monmouth 1767 

Cam, Leonard, Morris, and Catherine Hill 1778 

Carney, Barney, Perth Amboy, and Anne Buckalew, Perth Amboy 17- "4 

Carney, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Bridget Scantlin, Hunterdon 1769 

Carney, Philip, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Thompson 1777 

Carney, William, and Mary Arnal, Egg Harbor 1750 

Carnogh, William, Perth Amboy, and Jane Barnwell, Middlesex 1744 

l So signed, but in the body of the bond the name is entered as Kennedy. 



Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


24 


Jan. 


17 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


14 


Aug. 


19 


Feb. 


3 


Feb. 


18 


Mar. 


14 


Nov. 


9 


July 


25 


June 


30 


Nov. 


23 


July 


9 


April 


26 


April 


16 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


7 


May 


18 


May 


24 


Aug. 


20 


July 


3 


Jan. 


18 


Nov. 


23 


April 


7 


Oct. 


10 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


1 


May 


12 


Feb. 


15 


Feb. 


25 


July 


21 


Dec. 


12 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


16 


Sept. 


6 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


17 


Sept. 


9 


April 


. 16 


Nov. 


16 


May 


3 


Aug. 


2 



64 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Carpenter, John, Gloucester, and Mary Eldridge 1784 Dec. 6 

Carpenter, John, Trenton, and Sarah Smith 1785 Jan. 26 

Carpenter, Joshua, Philadelphia, and Bridgett Rambo, Philadelphia . .1738 April 17 

Carpenter, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Tonkin, Burlington 1774 April 12 

Carpenter, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Thompson 1767 July 29 

Carr, Adam, Burlington, and Elizabeth Yard, Burlington 1710 July 25 

Carr, Cornelius, B:.cks, Pa., and Jane Brown 1768 Aug. 26 

Carr, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Mauley 1779 Jan. 1 

Carr, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Peed 1779 Mar. 2 

Carr, Peter, Bergen, and Esther Schuyler 1786 Sept. 23 

Carr, Walter, Middlesex, and Susannah Buckalew, Middlesex 1747 Dec. 28 

Carrathurs, Obailiah, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Venables, CumbTd..l768 

Carruthers, James, Bucks, Pa., and Kachel Clarke, Bucks, Pa 1733 July 24 

Carruthers, James, Salem, and Lydia Roberts, Cjhansie .1733 Dec. 6 

Carson, Daniel, Cranberry, and Rachel Richards, Perth Amboy 1755 Sept. 27 

CarsoD, Robert, Morris, and Martha Beagle, Morris 1771 July 10 

Carson, Thomas, Cape May, and Elizabeth Murray, Cape May 1730 April 26 

Carson, William, Somerset, and Mary Barton, Somerset 1743 Dec. 8 

Carslake, William, Burlington, and Abigail Rockhill. . 1782 Nov. 28 

Carstlake, David, Burlington, and Anne Thomas, Burlington. .., 1774 Jan. 29 

Cart, Goodson, Middlesex, and Deborah Knewling, Middlesex 1765 July 27 

Carter, Barnaby, South Amboy, Catherine Starkey, S:>uth Amboy 1760 Oct. 3 

Carter, Daniel, Salem, and Rebecca Van Meter, Salem 1752 May 20 

Carter, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Ann Dilks, Jr 1757 Mar. 3 

Carter, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Luallen 17»1 June 18 

Carter, Joseph, Backs, Pa., and Catherine Duncan, Pennsylvania 1731 Nov. 16 

Carter, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Gaskill 1757 Jan. 2 

Carter, Martin, New Castle, Del., and Jane Sherron, Salem 1759 June 11 

Carter, Micajah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Saint 1741 Nov. 7 

Carter, Micajah, Burlington, and Susannah Ewau, Burlington 1744 Feb. 12 

Carter, Mijah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Saint 1741 Dec. 7 

Carter, Robert, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Thomas, Bucks, Pa 1733 Aug. 30 

Carte}', Charles, Burlington, and Hannah Caskey, Burlington 17c 6 Sept. 18 

Cartey, Daniel, Burlington, and Hope Shivers, Gloucester 1775 Nov. 16 

Cirtey, Daniel, Burlington, and Ann Shivers 1777 Nov. 4 

Cartj 7 , Owen, Gloucester, and Esther Watson, Burlington 1742 Aug. 20 

Caruthers, James, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Saunders 1785 May 12 

Carutbers, Richard, Cumberland, and Mary Ewiug 1780 Dec. 16 

Carver, Jacob, Philadelphia, and Sarah Townsend, Philadelphia 1753 July 14 

Carver, Seth, Egg Harbor, and Mary Smith 1766 June 21 

Cary, John, Jr., Morris, and Hannah Lyon 1778 Dec. 28 

Case, J. Wheeler, Dutchess, N. Y., and Mary Evertsen, Woodbridge.. .1763 June 10 

Case, John, Hunterdon, and Margaret Buchanan 1780 Aug. 8 

Case, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Rue, Bucks, Pa 1734 Aug. 22 

Casey, Henry, Hunterdon, and Jane Frazier 1768 Feb. 24 

Casey, James, Salem, and Margaret Beauman, Salem 1762 Dec. 30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 65 

Casney, Peter, Somerset, and Margaret Coinpton, Somerset. . 1776 

Casparsou, Anthony, Salem, aud Elizabeth Redstreak, Salem 1739 

Casseday, James, Burlington, and Rachel Dennis 1758 

Casseday, John, Bergen, and 1 lannah Peterson 1781 

Cassey, John, Middletown, and Catherine Mclutire, Middletown Point. 1747 

Cassler, George, Middletown, and Anne Van Skiack, Freehold 17C0 

Cassoday, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Khaney, Monmouth 1768 

Castle, Edward, Gloucester, and Ann Norton, Gloucester 1746 

Castner, Daniel, Jr., Somerset, and Mary Thompson, Somerset 1775 

Castner, John, Somerset, and Sarah Compton, Somerset 1754 

Castner, John, Somerset, and Katherine Reemer, Somerset 1783 

Cathcart, John, Gloucester, and Susannah Skinner 1779 

Caton, Robert, Burlington, and Ann Tuckniss, Burlington 1760 

Cattell, James, Burlington, and Ann Rogers, Burlington 1738 

Cattell, James, Gloucester, and Hope Gaskill, Gloucester 1763 

Cattell, James, Gloucester, and Mercy Middleton 1774 

Cattell, Jonas, Burlington, and Mary Pratt, Burlington 1740 

Cattell, Jonas, Gloucester, and Sarah Stevenson, Gloucester 1750 

Cattell, Nathan, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Marshall 1780 

Cauten, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Buttler, Bucks, Pa 1730 

Cavalier, Peter, Burlington, and Ann Tearney, Burlington 1739 

( Javalier, David, Little Egg Harbor, and Mary Cramer 1782 

Cavanagh, John, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Horn 1779 

Cawley, John, Bucks, Pa., and Ellenor Earl, Burlington 1729 

Cawood, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Anne Letts, Perth Amboy 1751 

Cayler, Henry, Burlington, and Charity Southard, Burlington 1767 

Chadwick, Francis, Monmouth, and Hnldah Faber, Monmouth 1764 

Chadwick, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Light 1688 

Chadwick, John, Monmouth, and Patience Johnson, Monmouth 1763 

Chadwick, William, Monmouth, and Peacable Tabor, Monmouth 1761 

Challener, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Powell, Burlington 1728 

Challoner,! John, Burlington, and Ann Lucking, Burlington 17(52 

Chamberlain, John, Monmouth, and Mary Gant, Monmouth 1749 

Chamberlain, Thomas, Monmouth, and Catherine Gant, Monmouth. . .1747 
Chamberlain, William, Monmouth, and Catherine Longstreet, Mon. . .1746 

Chamberlin, Godfrey, Hunterdon, and Mercy Moore 1779 

Chamberlin, Joseph, Middlesex 1769 

Chamberlin, Lewis, Hunterdon, and Mary Hagerman, Somerset 1773 

Chamberlin, Richard, Gloucester, aud Melesent Risley 1772 

< hamberlin, Uriah, Am well, and Mary Pipinger, Reading Town 1773 

Chamberlin, William, Hunterdon, and Aune Parks, Hunterdon 1771 

Chambers, David, Allentown, Pa., aud Sarah Sloan 1768 

Chambers, James, Middlesex, and Ann Bayles 1775 

Chambers, John, Chester, and Mary Browning, Chester 1733 

1 Query: Chalmer. 
5 



Feb. 


1 


Oct. 


15 


May 


23 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


14 


Sept. 


10 


Jan. 


4 


July 


7 


May 


8 


Nov. 


11 


June 


16 


July 


27 


Dec. 


9 


May 


18 


July 


27 


Feb. 


26 


Jan. 


10 


July 


10 


Mar. 


14 


Mar. 


26 


Feb. 


11 


Sept. 


19 


Jan. 


2 


April 


26 


July 


7 


Aug. 


25 


Nov. 


1 


May 


10 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


7 


Nov. 


12 


May 


5 


Dec. 


1 


May 


4 


Dec. 


22 


Aug. 


17 


May 


30 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


23 


Jan. 


2 


Mar. 


6 


April 


13 


Dec. 


13 


Feb. 


25 



66 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Chambers, John, Philadelphia, and Mary Meickles 1736 Dec. 14 

Chambers, John, Trenton, and Susannah Carter, Trenton 1746 July 31 

Chambers, John, Monmouth, and Charity Patten, Monmouth 1750 April 12 

Chambers, John, Burlington, and Anne Bark, Gloucester 1767 Oct. 8 

Chambers, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Shores, Burlington 1736 Nov. 17 

Chambers, Joseph, Monmouth, and Azenbeth Wing, Monmouth 1757 July 18 

Chambers, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Welsh, Burlington 1761 Oct. 21 

Chambers, Nicholas, New Jersey, and Susanna Wolcott, New Jersey. . . 1743 July 19 

Chambless, Jacob, Salem, and Rhodi Wheltall 1750 Jan. 15 

Chamless, James, Salem, and Jane Cluney 1772 May 26 

Chamblin, William, Monmouth, and Zilpha Dennis, Monmouth 1763 July 18 

Champion, Elias, Gloucester, and Mary Steelman, Gloucester 1735 Dec. 15 

Champion, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Engersol, Gloucester 1755 Mar. 5 

Champion, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rachel Collins, Gloucester. ...... 1770 Dec. 17 

Champion, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rhoda Brown 1784 Jan. 15 

Champion, Nathaniel, Gloucester, and Catharine Scull 1762 July 24 

Champion, Peter, Gloucester, and Hannah Thackera, Gloucester 1740 Oct. 14 

Champion, Peter, Gloucester, and Anne Ellis, Gloucester 1746 June 14 

Champion, Samuel, Gloucester, and Sarah Dilks, Gloucester 1746 Dec. 18 

CkamjMon, Thomas, Gloucester, and Abigail Townsend, Gloucester. . .1763 May 5 

Champion, Thomas, Gloucester, and Phebe Smith 1784 June 11 

Champneys, William, Salem, and Ann Watson, Salem 1772 Jan. 9 

Chandler, Amos, Monmouth, and Dorothy White, Monmouth 1739 April 30 

Chandler, Solomon, and Margaret Evoll 1779 Sept. 18 

Channen, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Furniss 1780 Mar. 11 

Chapman, Abraham, Burlington, and Margaret Imlay 1767 Aug. 1 

Chapman, Edward, Burlington, and Bathsheba Heulings, Burlington. 1741 Oct. 22 

Chapman, Elijah, Burlington, and Achsah Borden 1783 Mar. 27 

Chapman, James, Trenton, and Mary Fulford 1777 April 23 

Chapman, Joseph, Burlington, and Martha Stewart 1757 Mar. 24 

Chapman, Lewis, Burlington, and Hannah Giberson 1777 April 16 

Chapman, Robert, Jr., Burlington, and Susanna Ireton, Burlington. . .1728 Jan. 14 

Chappell, John, Philadelphia, and Mary Mason, Philadelphia 1730 Dec. 24 

Chappie, James, and Sarah Bebout 1779 Sept. 2 

Chappie, Thomas, and Mary Godwin ... 1779 J une 24 

Chappie, Thomas, Bergen, and Mary Hopper 1787 Dec. 6 

Chasey, John, Monmouth, and Adray Mount, Middletown 1760 Mar. 27 

Chatlin, Abishai, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Chester 1785 May 30 

Chatliu, Abraham, Gloucester, and Jane Caldwell, Gloucester 1746 Feb. 2 

Chatlin, Abraham, Gloucester, and Dorcas Hughes, Gloucester 1752 April 28 

Chatlin, Abraham, Gloucester, and Phebe Ward 1756 Mar. 31 

Chatlin, Abraham, Jr., Gloucester, and Ruth Wood, Gloucester 1760 July 22 

Chatlin, Francis, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Clarke, Salem 1760 July 22 

Chatlin, John, Gloucester, and Priscilla Hugg, Gloucester 1740 May 15 

Chatlin, Nixon, Gloucester, and Hannah Cox, Gloucester 1749 May 23 

Cheasey, Pearce, Middletown, and Martha Walling, Middletown 1753 Jan. 29 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 67 

Cheeseman, Elijah, Gloucester, and Hannah Warrick 1779 

Cheeseman, Joseph, Gloucester, and .Sarah String 1782 

Cheeseman, Thomas, Gloucester, and Sarah Colemans, Gloucester. .. .1727 

Cheeseman, William, Salem, and Sarah Newman 1772 

Cheesman, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Kasiah Lawrence, Gloucester. . 1730 

Cheesmau, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Auua Vantiue, Middlesex 1751 

Cheesman, Banjamiu, Jr., Gloucester, and Mary Ashbrook, Gloucester. 1753 

Cheesman, Joseph, Middlesex, and Lydia Parent, Middlesex. . 1740 

Cheesman, Joseph H., Gloucester; and Mary Vanneman 1790 

Cheesman, Peter, Gloucester, and Martha Hedyer, Gloucester. , 17G0 

Cheesman, Reuben, Gloucester, and Sarah Ogden, Cumberland 1759 

Cheesman, Richard, Gloucester, and Deborah Hedyer, Gloucester. .. .1763 
Cheesman, Thomas, Gloucester, and Marabeth Hedyer, Gloucester. . .1771 

Cheesmau, Uriah, Gloucester, and Hannah Rowand, Gloucester 1719 

Cheesman, William, Jr., Middlesex, and Mary Alders, Middlesex.. .. 1717-8 

Chemaly, Michael, Burlington, and Judith Alloways 1783 

Chemard, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Jones, Burlington 1771 

Chemelar, Michael, Burlington, and Elizabeth Mineau, Burlington. .. 17G2 

Cherry, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Ruth Barrass, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Cheseman, Richard, Gloucester, and Hannah Cheseman, Gloucester. .1746 

Cheshire, Samuel, Burlington, and Ann Robins, Burlington 1740 

Chesnut, John, Pennsylvania, and Catherine Greg, Woodbridge 1748 

Chester, John, Cape May, and Sarah Lane, Cape May 1741 

Chester, John, Cape May, and Sarah Vanluden, Cape May ... 1761 

Chester, Josepb, Cape May, and Mary Regains 1773 

Chester, Samuel, Gloucester, and Young, Gloucester 1748 

Chester, Samuel, New Jersey, and Fanny Johnson 1777 

Cheston, John, Hunterdon, and Amy Walker , . 1769 

Chew, Aaron, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Wood 1775 

Chew, Aaron, Gloucester, and Hannah Gardner 1783 

Chew, Constantine, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Leonard, Gloucester. . .1763 

Chew, David, Gloucester, and Hannah Stilly, Gloucester 1767 

Chew, Jeffery, Gloucester, and Amy Driver, Gloucester 1732 

Chew, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Hannah Ashbrook, Gloucester 1745 

Chew, John, Gloucester, and Ann Jennings, Gloucester 1739 

Chew, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elinor Holt 1742 

Chew, Michael, Gloucester, and Amey Brinn, Gloucester 1733 

Chew, Richard, Gloucester, and Ann Alberson, Gloucester 1766 

Chew, Robert, Gloucester, and Ann Tice 1778 

Chew, Samuel, Gloucester, and Margaret Turner, Gloucester 1765 

Chew, Thomas, Gloucester, and Rachel Maniage 1778 

Chew, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Allinson, Mount Holly 1774 

Cbidester, Phineas, Morris, and Rebeka Byram 1780 

Child, Thomas, Bucks, Pa. , and Mary Kirkbride 1785 

Chivers, James, Burlington, and Rebecca Doster, Burlington 1741 

Christian, John, Burlington, and Tamas Bowker 1778 



April 


19 


Dec. 


18 


May 


11 


Aug. 


12 


Sept. 


19 


Oct. 


8 


June 


13 


Mar. 


11 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


30 


Nov. 


29 


July 


18 


Mar. 


27 


May 


11 


Feb. 


19 


Aug. 


28 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


12 


Oct. 


20 


June 


14 


Sept. 


13 


May 


11 


April 


13 


Aug. 


11 


June 


30 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


2 


April 


13 


Feb. 


14 


Oct. 


4 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


29 


Aug. 


15 


Oct. 


22 


April 


3 


Dec. 


13 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


23 


Aug. 


26 


Nov. 


28 


April 


21 


Mar. 


20 


Nov. 


3 


April 


1 


Mar. 


13 



68 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Christie, Andrew, Bergen, and Abigail Hopper, Bergen 1768 

Christie, Daniel, Bergen, and Heyltie Erhert, Bergen 1770 

Christie, John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Liroe 1780 

Christie, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Wakefield 1776 

Christopher, Barret, Hunterdon, and Fhebe Moore 1763 

Christopher, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Deborah Hunt .... 1785 

Christopher, Jesse, Hunterdon, and Massey Guiles 1779 

Chubb, Thomas, Burlington, and Susanna Owen, Burlington 1758 

Chubb, Voicall, Philadelphia, Sarah Peace, Trenton 1745 

Chum, Matthew, Hunterdon, and Mary Skillman 1768 

Chuinard, David, and Mary Sharp 1784 

Chumard, George, Burlington, and Mary Allen, Burlington 1782 

Chumard, William, Burlington, and Jane Kendall, Burlington . 1773 

Chumard, William, Burlington, and Mary Winton, Monmouth 1776 

Chunu, James, Hunterdon, and Jean Barlenjau 1763 

Church, Edward, Bristol, Pa., and Sarah Antrim, Mansfield 1765 

Church, John, Philadelphia, and Mary Pay, Gloucester 1784 

Church, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Rebecca Burges, Pennsylvania. . . . 1736 

Church, Samuel, Gloucester, and Dorothy Edwards, Gloucester 1737 

Church, Silas, Cape May, and Martha Bancroft, Cape May 1770 

Church, William, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Grant, Philadelphia. . . . 1730 

Chrissoriw, Abraham, Long Island, and Jannetie Nefies, Somerset 1747 

Cimeter, William, and Elizabeth Best 176S 

Ciser, John, New York, and Mary Scigoler, Middletown. 1764 

Clap, John, Burlington, and Mary Grimes, Burlington 1784 

Clap, John, Burlington, Martha Grimes, Burlington 1782 

Clap, William, Burlington, Rebecca Wright 1768 

Clapp, George, Burlington, and Rebecca Shinn, Burlington 1761 

Clapp, John, Burlington, and Martha Burr. 1779 

Clark, Alexander, Monmouth, and Mary Hoff, Monmouth 1763 

Clark, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Susannah Mean, Monmouth 1746 

Clark, Charles, Cumberland, and Ruth Scott, Cumberland 1769 

Clark, Cornelius, Salem, and Elizabeth Reay 1758 

Clark, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Mary Grandin 1769 

Clark, Daniel, Cumberland, and Anna Holmes, Cumberland 1761 

Clark, David, Burlington, and Elizabeth Betts 1756 

Clark, David, Gloucester, and Rachel Bates, Gloucester 1764 - 

Clark, Elijah, Gloucester, and Jane Lardner, Gloucester 1756 

Clark, James, Salem, and Catheriua Carney 1755 

Clark, James, Cumberland, and Sarah Ogden, Cumberland 1769 

Clark, James, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Totterson, Hunterdon 1775 

Clark, James, Salem, Elizabeth Van Lear 1784 

Clark, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Green 1747 

Clark, John, Bucks, Pa., and Amy Merriott, Bordentown 1774 

Clark, John, Burlington, and Sarah Hamilton 1778 

Clark, John, Gloucester, and Mary Daniels 1783 



Mar. 


20 


Oct. 


9 


June 


16 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


13 


Sept, 


18 


Feb. 


13 


April 


12 


Sept. 


5 


April 


2 


Feb. 


4 


Nov. 


21 


Oct. 


4 


Jan. 


12 


Nov. 


22 


Feb. 


1 


July 


15 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


9 


Aug. 


1 


Mar. 


18 


May 


1 


May 


7 


Sept. 


12 


Oct. 


16 


Dec. 


19 


Jan. 


30 


Sept. 


23 


Mar. 


17 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


5 


Nov. 


21 


June 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Aug. 


11 


Sept, 


16 


Mar. 


12 


April 


29 


Nov. 


20 


June 


20 


Oct. 


14 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


22 


Dec. 


13 


Jan. 


29 


Dec. 


19 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 69 

Clark, Joseph, Bristol, Pa., aud Elizabeth Knight, Bristol, Pa 1749 April 25 

Clark, Joseph, and Rebecca Floyd 1775 Mar. 23 

Clark, Joshua, Cumberland, aud Eunice Devall 1759 Oct. 24 

Clark, Josiah, Gloucester, and Phebe Early 1775 May 1 

Clark, Levi, Gloucester, aud Elizabeth Spencer, Gloucester 1764 Dec. 14 

Clark, Levi, aud Nancy Oar 1776 Mar. 13 

Clark, Richard, Moumouth, and Eleanor Smith, Monmouth 1750 July 26 

Clark, Noah, Essex, aud Patience Lamb 1 769 June 5 

Clark, Robert, Salem, aud Sara Mecum 1786 April 15 

Clark, Samuel, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Bennet 1747 May 14 

Clark, Samuel, Monmouth, and Uphame Carman, Monmouth 1767 May 17 

Clark, Stephen, Cumberland, and Tabitha Nixon, Cumberland 1761 Oct. 28 

Clark, Thomas, Gloucester, aud Ruth Huttoro, Gloucester 1746 Aug. 20 

Clark, Thomas, Salem, aud Sarah Noah, Salem 1773 Jan. 28 

Clark, Wheeler, Bucks, Pa., aud Erauces Morgan, Bucks, Pa 1759 May 22 

Clark, William, Monmouth, and Katharine Romine, Monmouth 1745 April 12 

Clark, William, Jr., Gloucester, aud Susaunah Attmore 1763 Mar. 28 

Clark, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Punner 1778 April 10 

Clark, William, Burlingtou, and Mary Donnell 1779 Dec. 16 

Clarke, Henry, Chester, Pa., and Mary Hood, Chester, Pa 1731 Nov. 18 

Clarke, Thomas, and Margaret Duehurst 1692 Nov. 2 

Clarkson, James, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Keller, Philadelphia. . .1727 June 19 

Clarkson, James, Middlesex, aud Margaret FitzRandolph 1743 Dec. 26 

Clarkson, James, Woodbridge, aud Elizabeth C aldington 1744 Feb. 5 

Clarkson, John, Middlesex, and Maryan Noe 1768 May 28 

Clarkson, Robert, Woodbridge, and Rebscca Fitz Randolph, Woodb'g.1758 Aug. 7 

Clauts, Jacob, Springfield, and Sarah Farmer 1779 June 3 

Clava, Benjamin Moses, Gloucester, Sarah McDonald 1773 Jan. 26 

Ciawson, Jonathan, Woodbridge, aud Mary Baron, Woodbridge 1760 May 27 

Clawsou, Richard, Perth Ainboy, aud Rachel Buckelew, Perth Amboy.1764 April 5 

Ciawson, William, Piscataway, aud Elizabeth Van Sickle 1745 June 17 

Claypool, David, Burlington, and Rebecca Ward, Burlington 1780 Nov. 28 

Claypool, Wingfield, Burlington, and Mary Pool 1782 Feb. 21 

Claypoole, Abraham, New Hanover, Hope Fennimore, Springfield 1774 Dec. 7 

Clayton, David, Jr., Monmouth, and Rebekah Taylor, Monmouth. . (?) 1746 

Clayton, David, Jr., Monmouth, and Rebekah Tompson, Monmouth. .1745 Dec. 24 

Clayton, Edward, Monmouth, and Sarah Throckmorton, Monmouth .. 1765 Dec. 4 

Clayton, James, Burlington, and Rebecca Hutchins 1771 Aug. 8 

Clayton, John, Monmouth, and Haunah Compton, Monmouth 1743 Mar. 29 

Clayton, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Breton 1746 June 21 

Clayton, John, Freehold, aud' Anne Clayton, Freehold 1764 May 22 

Clayton, Jonathan, Freehold, and Mary Beuham 1759 Dec. 6 

Clayton, Joseph, Freehold, aud Sarah Combs, Middlesex 1761 April 25 

Clayton, Joseph, Burlingtou, and Aun Stevenson 1769 Jan. 4 

Clayton, Parnel, Burlington, and Content Woolley, Shrewsbury 1731 Dec. 9 

Cleador, Itchecomb, Staten Island, and Alice Sealoff, Stateu Island. . .1748 July 23 



JO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Clear, Jasper, and Susannah Peterson 1784 

Cleaveland, George, Burlington, and Hannah Rogers, Burlington 1756 

Cleaver, John, Cumberland, and Jemima Draper 1780 

Cleyton, David, Monmouth, and Mary Scothom 1759 

Clement, Jacob, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Tyley 1741 

Clement, Jacob, Gloucester, and Charity Kaighin, Gloucester 1769 

Clement, Nathaniel, Gloucester, and Abigail Bowen 1768 

Clement, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Tyley 1737 

Clement, Thomas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Rolf 1774 

Clemer, Conrad, Burlington, and Mary White, Burlington 1735 

Clevenger, Abraham, Monmoutb, and Mary Pitman 17G0 

Clevenger, Job, Burlington, and Margaret Brown, Burlington 1772 

Clevenger, John, Monmouth, and Mary Horner 1760 

Clevenger, Thomas, and Nellie Larkins 1762 

Clevenger, William, Burlington, and Mercy Asson 1750 

Clevinger, Abraham, Burlington, and Jane Piatt, Burlington 1742 

Clevinger, George, Burlington, and Deliverance Horner. 1737 

Clevinger, John, Burlington, and Hannah Baker 1742 

Clevinger, Zachariah, New Hanover, and Mary Gaskell, New Hanov'r.1778 

Cleverley, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Pierce 1730 

Clifton, John, Philadelphia, and Mary Bankson, Philadelphia 1740 

Clifton, Nathan, Burlington, and Mary Robinson 1780 

Clifton, Samuel, Burlington, and Susannah Castle 1761 

Clinhuff, Ephraim, Burlington, and Rebecca Strallein, Burlington .... 1762 

Cliver, John, and Mary Warren 1781 

Oliver, Peter, Springfield, and Sarah Collins 1781 

Clonts, Jacob, Northampton, and Susannah Chemilly 1782 

Clymer, Christopher, Philadelphia, and Deborah Fitzwater 1734 

Coahlan, Patrick, Burlington, and Catharine Sill, Burlington 1750 

Coakley, James, New Jersey, and Mary Flannagan 1778 

Coate, Daniel, Burlington, and Sarah Mills, Burlington 1766 

Coate, John, Gloucester, and Milisent Maps 1774 

Coate, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Leek, Burlington 1754 

Coats, Henry, Burlington, and Rachel Jones, Burlington 1783 

Coats, John, Hunterdon, and Esther Doughty, Hunterdon 1729 

Coats, William, Hunterdon, and Leanah Low 1781 

Cob, Jacob, Burlington, and Catherine Mitchel, Burlington 1741 

Cobb, Samuel, Morris, and Sarah Southard, Morris 1773 

Cochran, John, Essex, and Mary White, Bergen 1740 

Cochran, John, Hunterdon, and Phebe Henderson, Monmouth 1763 

Cochran, Peter, N. Brunsw'k, and Elizabeth Vannorden, N. Brunsw'k. 1739 

Cochran, Richard, Middlesex, and Mary Antill, Middlesex 1764 

Cock, Jacob, Somerset, and Abigail McClow 1780 

Cock, Jacob, Somerset, and Blandeua Jarolamon 1782 

Cock, Henry, Somerset, and Mary Hall, Somerset 1759 

Cock, Peter, Gloucester, and Beata Lock, Salem 1738 



Nov. 


24 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


11 


April 


6 


Oct. 


17 


Sept. 


9 


Dec. 


5 


May 


30 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


2 


Mar. 


9 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


9 


Aug. 


7 


Aug. 


17 


July 


26 


July 


19 


Mar. 


17 


Nov. 


9 


May 


28 


Sept. 


10 


Nov. 


21 


Feb. 


6 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


8 


Aug. 


26 


April 


15 


Feb. 


3 


July 


23 


April 


27 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


14 


July 


22 


Sept. 


13 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


20 


Sept. 


1 


Mar. 


19 


Oct. 


15 


May 


15 


Nov. 


8 


April 


12 


Jan. 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 7 1 

Coddington, David, Woodbridge, and Aim Stone, Woodbridge 1750 

Coddington, James, Middlesex, and Experience Randolph 1781 

Coddington, Samuel, Woodb'dge, and Mary FitzRandolph, Woodb'dge. 1756 
Codington, Joseph, Woodbridge, and Margaret Lewis, Woodbridge .... 1756 

Coffey, Joseph, Burlington, and Patience Tatem, Gloucester. . . 1768 

Coffing, James, Gloucester, and Mary Whitehall 1732 

Colcott, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Ewiug, Burlington 1771 

Cole, Andrew, Northampton, and Mary Mitchell 1773 

Cole, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Charity Coursen, Hunterdon 1752 

Cole, David, Hunterdon, and Beula Yansant 1775 

Cole, John, Hunterdon, and Maritie Low, Hunterdon 1749 

Cole, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Lippincott, Burlington 1767 

Cole, Barent, Bergen, and Mary Demarest, Bergen 1767 

Cole, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Wood, Gloucester 1731 

Cole, Richard, Monmouth, and Lydia Begele, Monmouth 1766 

Cole, Thomas, Somerset, and Leentye Vanetta, Somerset 1751 

Coleman, Elias, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Brown 1786 

Coleman, Nathaniel, and Nancy Evans Smart 1777 

Coles, Job, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Tomlius, Gloucester 1771 

Coles, Richard, Philadelphia, and Sarah Shepherd, Cumberland 1759 

Coles, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Matlack, Burlington 1767 

Coles, Thomas, Gloucester, Hannah Stokes, Burlington 1732 

Coles, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Smith, Monmouth. 1767 

Colfax, William, Bergen, and Esther Schuyler 1783 

Collard, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Woolley, Monmouth 1743 

Collen, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Buttler, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Collinge, Joseph, Middletown, and Mary Roberts, Middletown 1749 

Collins, Abijah, Gloucester, and Hope Coles 1785 

Collins, Abraham, Burlington, and Alley Smart. 1787 

Collins, Amos, Gloucester, and Ann Stiles. 1771 

Collins, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Aune Hedges, Gloucester 1735 

Collins, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Desire Rulon, Stafford 1756 

Collins, Charles, Burlington, and Ruth Starkey, Burlington 17-18 

Collins, David, Middlesex, and Margaret Clawson 1745 

Collins, David, Burlington, and Ann Harding, Burlington 1775 

Collins, Ebenezer, Monmouth, and Ann Woodmansie, Monmouth 1748 

Collins, Ebenezer, Piscataway, and Rachel Folsom, Piscataway 1751 

Collins, Edward, Gloucester, and Phebe Matlack 1791 

Collins, Edward Johnston, Gloucester, and Jane Collins 1783 

Collins, George, Burlington, and Joanna Roche, Burlington 1731 

Collins, Isaac, Gloucester, and Sarah Bates 1772 

Collins, Isaac, New Brunswick, and Mary Robinson, New Brunswick. .1774 
Collins, James, New Brunswick, and Margaret Vanzant, New Brw'k. . . 1748 

Collins, Job, Burlington, and Mary Haines, Burlington 1774 

Collins, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Moore, Burlington 1737 

Collins, John, Middletown, and Anne Johnson, Middletown 175S 



Oct. 


11 


July 


9 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


19 


Jan. 


20 


July 


2 


Jan. 


7 


July 


29 


Aug. 


11 


Oct. 


24 


Mar. 


19 


Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


2 


Dec. 


6 


April 


3 


Mar. 


3 


July 


4 


Feb. 


7 


Jan. 


22 


May 


4 


July 


29 


Jan. 


14 


Aug. 


27 


Aug. 


20 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


3 


July 


15 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


29 


May 


17 


Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


29 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


16 


Dec. 


27 


July 


29 


Feb. 


10 


Aug. 


6 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


17 


Sept. 


23 


Dec. 


26 


Mar. 


17 


Feb. 


27 


Dec. 


IS 



72 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Collins, John, Gloucester, and Patience Alberson, Gloucester 1766 

Collins, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Harbert, Monmouth 1767 

Collins, John, Gloucester, and Mary Rifflin 1769 

Collius, John, Burlington, and Ruth Burdell, Burlington 1771 

Collins, John, Gloucester, and Catharine Champion 1777 

Collins, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Cole. 1781 

Collins, Joseph, Gloucester, and Susannah Hutchinson 1784 

Collins, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Griffith 1759 

Collins, William, New Jersey, and Susanna Gordon 1778 

Collins, Zebulon, Middlesex, and Mary Johnston, Middlesex 1746 

Colman, Charles, Monmouth, and Catherine Lippincott, Monmouth. . .1764 

Colsher, Matthew, Somerset, and Ann Huff 1768 

Colver, Nathan, Stafford, and Phebe Stockaw, Stafford 1749 

Col vin, Philip, and Grace Holeman 1739 

Comback, Peter, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Rue 1784 

Combes, Robert, Woodbridge, and Margaret Loofbourrow, Woodb'dge.1753 

Combes, Robert, Middlesex, and Hulda Combes, Pennington 1772 

Combs, Coleman, Hunterdon, and Mary Peirce 1770 

Combs, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Abrahams, Perth Amboy 1748 

Combs, John, Jr., Perth Amboy, and Sarah Abrahams, Perth Amboy. 1753 

Combs, Jonathan, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Reed, Freehold 1741 

Combs, Jonathan, Perth Amboy, and Sarah Tilton, Monmouth 1743 

Compton, Cornelius, Middletown, and Lydia Crawford, Middletown. . .1756 
Compton, Cornelius, Jr., Middletown, and Hannah Mount, Mid'twn. .1756 

Compton, Daniel, Woodbridge, and Rachel Paine, Woodbridge 1758 

Compton, Gabriel, Middlesex, and Mary Carrington 1760 

Compton, Ichabod, Monmouth, and Aun Gordon 1773 

Compton, Jacob, Monmouth, and Valuriah Clayton, Monmouth 1763 

Compton, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Morgan, Middlesex 1763 

Compton, Richard, Jr., Monmouth, and Elizabeth Cox, Monmouth. .. .1727 

Compton, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Deboogh, Monmouth 1747 

Compton, Richard, Somerset, and Sytie Hoglen, Somerset., 1719 

Compton, Richard, Somerset, and Lenty Eoo, Somerset 1775 

Compton, Richard, Middlesex, and Sarah Clear 1781 

Compton, Samuel, Woodbridge, and Mary Kemble, Woodbridge 1748 

Compton, Samuel, Piscataway, and Sarah Tharp, Piscataway 1753 

Compton, William, Freehold, and Mary Smith, Perth Amboy 1749 

Compton, William, Middletown, and Sarah Sweed, Middletown 1762 

Compton, Zebulon, Somerset, and Sarah Tunison 1764 

Conarro, Joseph, Burlington, and Valaria Moore, Burlington 1761 

Conarroe, Jacob, New Jersey, and Sarah Johnson 1782 

Conarrow, Andrew, Jr., Burlington, and Keziah Johnston, Burlington. 1756 

Conawey, James, Cape May, and Susannah Corson, Cape May 1741 

Condict, Zenus, Morris, and Joanna Person 1779 

Condit, Peter, Morris, and Ann Byram, Morris 1768 

Condon, James, Burlington, and Isabella Pittman, Burlington 1762 



Oct. 


3 


Nov. 


4 


Aug. 


14 


April 


4 


May 


31 


May 


4 


Aug. 


27 


May 


21 


Oct. 


30 


July 


11 


Nov. 


14 


June 


15 


Dec. 


1 


Mar. 


22 


Sept. 


4 


Mar. 


25 


Feb. 


10 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


24 


June 


3 


June 


9 


July 


30 


Dec. 


23 


Aug. 


11 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


6 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


15 


July 


27 


July 


11 


Aug. 


31 


July 


23 


Feb. 


13 


July 


31 


June 


15 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


14 


Oct. 


3 


Aug. 


24 


May 


10 


May 


14 


Feb. 


6 


May 


19 


Jan. 


21 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 73 

Oondrick, John, Burlington, and Sarah Alton, Burlington 17G3 

Coneley, John, Gloucester, and Rebecca Seeds, 1 Gloucester 1765 

Conelly, Brian, Salem, and Dorothy Bull, Salem 1731 

Conerow, Andrew, Burlington, and Rebecca Arnold, Burlington 17'27 

Congleton, Henry, Salern, and Ann Peterson 1777 

Conine Derrick, Monmouth, and Jane Barkolo, Monmouth 1762 

Conine, Jacob, Somerset, and Mary Clover, Somerset 1764 

Conine, Philip, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Dally, New Brunswick. .1742 

Conklin, Stephen, Jr., Morris, and Rachel Lindsley 1778 

Conklin, William, Morris, and Rebecca Whitaker, Somerset 1778 

Conn, Samuel, Springfield, and Pamelia Carter, Springfield 1771 

Couuel, John, Cape May, and Sarah Simkins 1763 

Connelley, John, Philadelphia, and Aun Little, Monmouth 1780 

Conner, George, Monmouth, and Rachel Knox „ 1780 

Conner, James, Monmouth, and Mary Smith, Monmonth .... 1739 

Conner, William, Cape May, and Sarah Eldridge 1789 

Connet, James, Somerset, and Aun Harris, Middlesex 1761 

Connolly, Alexander, New Brunswick, and Mary Longfiekl, New Bwk..l747 

Connor, Timothy, Piscataway, and Mary Folsom, Piscataway 1750 

Connove, James, Bergen, and Eva Bordan 1765 

Conover, Elias, Monmouth, and Anna Fish 1780 

Conrey, John, Middletown, and Mary Morris, Middletown 1751 

Conrey, Jonathan, Middletown, and Sarah B urge, Shrewsbury 1759 

Conrey, Peter, Freehold, and Margaret Strickling, Freehold 1760 

Conrow, Darling, Burlington, and Sarah Elkinton 1778 

Conrow, Darnel, Burlington, and Deliverance Stoakes, Burlington 1733 

Conrow, George, Burlington, and Naomy Tomlinsun 1788 

Conves, John, New Brunswick, and Sarah Roberts, Middletown 1743 

Converse, Conrad, Somerset, and Esther Parsell, Somerset 1750 

Cook, Abiel, Jr., Monmouth, and Mary Thomson 1765 

Cook, Asher, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Green, Monmouth 1764 

Cook, Edward P., Monmouth, and Lidy Chandler, Monmouth 1757 

Cook, George, Monmouth, and Susannah Reece 1762 

Cook, Henry, Hunterdon, and Mary Burroughs 1782 

Cook, Job, Burlington, and Mary Warrick 1772 

Cook, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Woolley, Monmouth 1749 

Cook, John, Pennsylvania, and Mary Anderson, Freehold 1761 

Cook, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Green, Monmouth 1748 

Cook. Michael, Monmouth, and Sarah Tallman, Monmouth 1757 

Cook, Richard, Hunterdon, and Anne Ashlee 1783 

Cook, Silas, Monmouth, and Mary Russell, Monmouth 1746 

Cook, Silas, Monmouth, and Patience Sheareman, Monmouth 1761 

Cook, Stacey, Burlington, and Jaue Deacon 1782 

Cook, Syvanus, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Rulong 1777 



May 


5 


Jan. 


22 


July 


27 


Mar. 


29 


May 


15 


Aug. 


2 


May 


29 


Dec. 


15 


May 


7 


Dec. 


7 


April 


6 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


30 


Mar. 




Aug. 


25 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


12 


July 


31 


Jan. 


31 


May 


18 


Oct, 


14 


Sept. 


14 


May 


5 


Oct. 


13 


Aug. 


24 


Mar. 


16 


June 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


27 


June 


17 


Mar. 


31 


Dec. 


12 


April 


15 


June 


28 


May 


17 


Dec. 


29 


Nov. 


17 


April 


29 


Feb. 


28 


May 


13 


Oct. 


15 


May 


25 


April 


9 


Aug. 


14 



l Query; Leeds. 



74 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Cook, Tessher, Monmouth, and Mary Ribet, Monmouth 1764 Feb. 22 

Cook, William, Monmouth, and Ghertie Bennet, Monmouth 1743 Sept. 21 

Cooke, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth "Webb 1759 May 31 

Cooke, John, Sussex, and Elizabeth Crooks 17G8 June 18 

Cooke, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Driver, Burlington 1730 May 12 

Cool, Isaac, Somerset, and Mary Corle .- 1781 Aug. 25 

Coole, John, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Rose 1743-4 Mar. 6 

Cooper, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Hannah Carlile, Philadelphia 1729 June 10 

Cooper, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Burdsall, Gloucester 1734 Feb. 25 

Cooper, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Catherine Heaviland, Monmouth. . 1753 Oct. 31 

Cooper, Benjamin, Middletown, and Hester Borden, Middletown 1754 April 12 

Cooper, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hopewell, Burlington. . . 1759 Mar. 6 

Cooper, Daniel, Jr., Morris, and Catherine Hankinson, Freehold 1751 April 13 

Cooper, Daniel, Morris, and Grace Manning, Essex 1768 Mar. 11 

Cooper, Daniel, and Deborah Middleton, Burlington 1797 July 28 

Cooper, Ebenezer, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Williams, Perth Amboy. 1751 June 22 

Cooper, Ezekiel, Monmouth, and Sarah Layton, Monmouth ...1766- Sept. 4 

Cooper, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Sherman, Bucks, Pa 1732 July 8 

Cooper, Henry, Burlington, and Elizabeth Curtis, Burlington 1735 May 13 

Cooper, Jacob, Burlington, and Rachel Peppit, Burlington 1767 Mar. 10 

Cooper, James, Middletown, and Catherine Vandeventer, Middlet'n.. 1743-4 Mar. 21 

Cooper, James, Gloucester, and Sarah Erwiu, Gloucester 1761 Mar. 27 

Cooper, James, Gloucester, and Priscilla Burroughs, Gloucester 1763 Dec. 12 

Cooper, John, Monmouth, and Mary Jacobs, Monmouth 1743 Oct, 31 

Cooper, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Eayre, Burlington. 1783 May 1 

Cooper, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Tharpe, Monmouth 1767 Mar. 19 

Cooper, Joseph, Monmouth, and Deborah Taylor, Monmouth 1741 Dec. 

Cooper, Joseph, Bristol, Pa., and Hannah Lovett 1731 May 30 

Cooper, Nathan, Morris, and Elizabeth Marsh, Essex 1749 Jan. 20 

Cooper, Nathan, Morris, and Martha Dickenson, Perth Amboy 1751 June 4 

Cooper, Richard, Bergen, and Hannah Cooper 1787 May 1 1 

Cooper, Samuel, Gloucester, and Prudence Brown, Burlington 1767 Feb. 2 

Cooper, Thomas, Monmouth, and Priscilla Wright, Monmouth 1749 Nov. 6 

Cooper, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Cooper 1758 Sept. 13 

Cooper, William S., Gloucester, and Mary Cheeseman, Gloucester 1749 Sept. 21 

Cooper, William, Gloucester, and Ann Folwell, Burlington 1768 May 4 

Cooper, William, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Fenimore, Burlington. .1774 Nov. 12 

Cope, John, Salem, and Mary Richardson 1775 Feb. 10 

Copner, Cornelius, and Margaret Peterson, Salem 1732 June 15 

Copperthwaite, Hugh, Burlington, and Hannah Atkinson, Burlington. 1737 April 19 

Copperthwaite, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Spicer 1778 Nov. 29 

Copperthwaite, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Borden 1733 Feb. 19 

Coppock, Bartholomew, Burlington, and Amy Cox, Burlington 1730 Aug. 4 

Coppock, Moses, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Lester, Bucks, Pa 1740 Sept. 22 

Corammore, William, Jr., Egg Harbor, and Miriam Stoakham 1746 Nov. 21 

Corbett, Joseph, Salem, and Susanna Philpot, Salem 1769 Dec. 28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 75 

Cordeary, Isaac, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Jonston 1755 Aug. 2 

Cordery, Clemeut, Gloucester, and Mary Parker 1784 June 14 

Core, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Sutts 1780 Dec. 20 

Corey, John, Cape May, and Johannah Hand, Cape May 1762 June 14 

Corey, Peter, Burlington, and Martha Walker, Burlington 1784 April 29 

Corlies, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Burden, Monmouth 1767 Jan. 28 

Corlies, Timothy, Monmouth, and Hannah Williams, Monmouth 1762 July 14 

Corlies, Uriah, Monmouth, and Anna Dunham, Amboy 1752 June 22 

Corlis, George, Salem, and Margaret Watson, Salem 1762 Dec. 21 

Corlis, John, Monmouth, and Rachel White , . . 1779 May 31 

Corlis, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bills, Monmouth 1745 Aug. 17 

Corlis, William, Burlington, and Ann Cox, Middlesex 175G June 3 

Corliss, Jacob, Sale'm, and Deborah Stretch 1791 Mar. 28 

Corliss, William, Burlington, and Ann Davis, Burlington 1767 July 13 

Com, Lawrence, Cumberland, and Mary Smith 1781 Nov. 27 

Cornel, Cornelius, Middlesex, and Gerrabratie Gulick, Somerset 1751 June 12 

Cornel, Jacobus, Bergen, and Lenah Hartie, Orange, N. Y 1761 Mar. 21 

Cornel, Job, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Worden, Shrewsbury 1755 May 30 

Cornel, William, Somerset, and Sarah Wykoff 1781 Jan. 7 

Cornell, Albert, N. York, and Sarah Dugroot 1763 Jan. 26 

Cornell, Jacob, Somerset, and Elizabeth Kennade 1779 Nov. 27 

Cornell, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Sarah Cook 1785 Sept. 18 

Cornell, Peter, Middlesex, and Nelly Terhoon 1780 Nov. 29 

Cornwell, William, Gloucester, and Berthena Tiler 1782 May 13 

Cony, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Haines, Salem. .... 1770 Sept. 20 

Corry, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Marriott 1733 July 4 

Corrj', William, Burlington, and Martha Roy, Burlington 1766 Jan. 11 

Corsen, Rem, Cape May, and Hannah Stillwell 1759 Jan. 17 

Corshan, Joshua, and Margaret Willson 1764 Dec. 19 

Corshun, Joshua, Somerset, and Mary Probasco 1779 June 21 

Corson, Abner, Cape May, and Mary Smith, Cape May 1773 April 5 

Corson, Christian, Staten Island, and Hannah Kidney, Essex 1761 July 10 

Corson, Darmenas, Cape May, and Rachel Wilits 1778 Oct. 26 

Corson, Darius, Cape May, and Martha Mackey 1778 June 4 

Corson, Henry, Caps May, and Elizabeth Young 1788 Feb. 21 

Corson, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Mary Creasey 1763 Sept. 24 

Corson, John, Jr., Cape May, and Mary Goff, Cumberland 1761 Dec. 19 

Corson, Joseph, Cape May, and Rachel Corsen, Cape May 1759 Jan. 22 

Corson, Joseph, Jr., and Phebe Badcock 1760 Sept. 22 

Corson, Levi, Cape May, and Margaret Hand, Cape May 1766 Dec. 23 

Corson, Promenas, Cape May, and Mary Lea. 1774 April 12 

Corson, Promenas, Cape May, and Priscilla Cresesse 1774 Nov. 1 

Corson, Peter, Cape May, and Martha Edwards, Cape May 1757 Feb. 10 

Corson, Peter, Cape May and Elizabeth Godfrey, Cape May 1763 July 20 

Corson, Peter, Cape May, and Mary Badcock, Cape May 1761 Jan. 15 

Corson, Philip, Cape May, and Lydia Cawson 1784 Aug. 20 



; :(> NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Corwin, Joseph, Morris, and Mary Wcrtman 1778 

Corwine, Richard, Hunterdon, and Sarah Snider 1779 

Cossehoom, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Anne Venables 1761 

Cossman, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Front, Monmouth 1756 

Costigin, Francis, Jr., Trenton, and Jean Carr, Hunterdon 1769 

Costill, Hugh, Burlington, and Hannah Hilliar 1787 

Costive, Joseph, Burlington and Anna Sharp. 1759 

Cosure, Benjamin B., Gloucester, and Nehomy Shaw 1784 

Cotauck, William, Sussex, and Sarah Williamson 1773 

Cotheal, Alexander, Middlesex, and Eliles McDaniel, Middlesex 1764 

Cothell, Henry, Middlesex, and Sarah Crew, Middlesex 1763 

Cotter, William, Phila., and Kathrina Price, alias Miller, Phila 1737 

Cottnam, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Ann Pearce .' . . 1764 

Cotterell, Nicholas, Middletown, and Anne Roberts, Middletown 1752 

Cotterell, Gershom, Freehold, and Catherine Layton, Shrewsbury 1757 

Cottrel, John, Middletown, and Elizabeth Herbert, Middletown 1749 

Cottrell, John, Monmouth, and Hester Layton, Monmouth 1762 

Cottrel, Robert, Monmouth, and Rachel Rogers, Monmouth 1766 

Coughleton, Allen, Salem, and Sarah Vickery, Salem 1761 

Couke, George, and Lena Leek 1778 

Coulten, Zacheriah, Middlesex, and Ann Cox, Monmouth 1750 

Coulter, James, Gloucester, and Ann Parsons, Gloucester 1771 

Coulton, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Mary Williams, Philadelphia 1771 

Courson, Christian, Staten Island, and Ann Clandenning 1747 

Couvert, Isaac, Sussex, and Margaret Shaver 1768 

Cove, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ambruster 1778 

Covell, Samuel, Monmouth, and Jane Cahale 1784 

Covenhoven, Albert, Monmouth, and Mary Vandorn, Monmouth 1745 

Covenhoven, Albert, Monmouth, and Patience Covenhoven, Monm'th.1765 

Covenhoven, Albert, Hunterdon, and Sarah Benham 1779 

Covenhoven, Benjamin, Freehold, and Catherine Wycoffe 1750 

Covenhoven, Cornelius, Freehold, and Anne Williamson, Freehold 1750 

Covenhoven, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Elenah Williamson, Monm'th. 1756 

Covenhoven, Cornelius, Middletown, and Jane Denise, Freehold 1758 

Covenhoven, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Mary Hendrickson, Monm'th. 1767 

Covenhoven, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Mary Logan 1770 

Covenhoven, Daniel, Monmouth, and Helena Taylor, Monmouth 1757 

Covenhoven, Garret, Monmouth, and Nelly Schanck, Monmouth 1744 

Covenhoven, Garret, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bennerse, Monmouth. 1759 

Covenhoven, Isaac, Freehold, and Hannah Morford, Freehold 1756 

Covenhoven, John, Monmouth, and Mary Vandorn, Monmouth 1750 

Covenhoven, John, Middletown, and Nelly WyckofT, Freehold 1755 

Covenhoven, John, Middlesex, and Lydia Predmore, Middlesex 1752 

Covenhoven, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Hankinson, Monmouth. 1756 

Covenhoven, Luke, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Johnson, Somerset 1739 

Covenhoven, Luke, Middlesex, and Matiha Bargin 1774 



Mar. 


27 


Jan. 


14 


Aug. 


24 


June 


9 


Mar. 


2 


April 


2 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


16 


Dec. 


8 


Oct. 


11 


Feb. 


10 


Aug. 


20 


June 


11 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


12 


April 


10 


Jan. 


6 


Jan. 


22 


Feb. 


12 


Oct. 


31 


Dec. 


25 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


15 


May 


7 


Oct. 


22 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


29 


May 


22 


Nov. 


21 


May 


21 


Feb. 


5 


May 


28 


June 


5 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


12 


July 


10 


Aug. 


15 


July 


17 


Feb. 


26 


Mar. 


9 


Nov. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


Aug. 


14 


Feb. 


3 


Oct. 


26 


Nov. 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. JJ 

Covenhoveu, Matthias, Middletown, and Williamtic Covenhoven, Mid. 1749 

Covenhoven, Peter, Monmouth, aud Anne Davis, Monmouth 1749 

Covenhoveu, Peter, Micklletown, and Catherine Dehart, Freehold. . . . 1749 
Covenhoven, Peter, Monmouth, and Hannah Forman, Monmouth. .. .1756 

Covenhoveu, Roelf, Somerset, and Elizabeth Jobnson 1778 

Covenhoven, William, Monmouth, and Anne Covenhoven, Monm'th. 1743-4 
Covenhoveu, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Suydam, Monmouth .... 1754 

Covenhoveu, William, Middlesex, and Catherine Dye, Middlesex 1761 

Covenhover, David, Monmouth, and Ida Wyckoff, Monmouth 1753 

Covenover, Isaah, Gloucester, and Mary Bell 1774 

Covenover, Micajah, Cape May, and Deborah Stanton, Gloucester. .1750-1 

Covenover, Peter, Gloucester, and Priscilla Smith, Gloucester 1761 

Covenover, Peter, Gloucester, and Rebecca Woodward 1773 

Covert, Francis, Monmouth, and Sarah Read, Monmouth 1744 

Covert, Morris, Hunterdon, and Christina Seins 1773 

Covert, Peter, Essex, and Mary Clawson, Middlesex 1753 

Cowell, Joseph, and Catherine Case . 1769 

Cowen, Michael, Burlington, and Margaret Brian, Burlington 1763 

Cowgill, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Sarah Ward 1754 

Cowgill, Edmund, Burlington, and Mary Johnson, Burlington 1736 

Cowgill, George, Burlington, and Elizabeth Sowden, Burlington 1776 

Cowgill, Jacob, Burlington, and Parthena Imley 1777 

Cowgill, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ridgway 1761 

Cowgill, Nehemiah, Burlington, aud Esther Davis 1738 

Cowl, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Rachel Warrick 1780 

Cowman, John, Essex, and Autie Van Winkle, Essex 1760 

Cownover, John, Gloucester, and Letishew Clark 1778 

Cowperthwaite, John, Monmouth, and Anu Potter 1758 

Cowperthwaite, William, Burlington, aud Hope Shreve, Burlington. . . 1767 
Cowro, Darling, Perth Amboy, and Sarah Compton, Middletown ... 1761 

Cox, Andrew, Gloucester, and Mary Lock, Gloucester. 1760 

Cox, Asher, Monmouth, and Rebecca Holmes 1768 

Cox, Charles, Gloucester, and Rebecca Vaneman, Salem. , „ 1761 

Cox, David, New York, and Mary Liveton, Middlesex 1762 

Cox, Gabriel, Salem, and Sarah Elvill 1779 

Cox, James, Monmouth, aud Haunah Robins, Monmouth 1 745 

Cox, James, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Cox, Monmouth 1769 

Cox, John, Burlington, and Abigail Ellis, Gloucester ] 744 

Cox, John, Somerset, and Phebe Lindly, Essex 1751 

Cox, John, Middlesex, and Mary Pileon, Middlesex 1757 

Cox, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Holman 1768 

Cox, John.l Monmouth, aud Margaret Morris, Monmouth 1769 

Cox, John, Burlington, and Haunah Smith, Burlington 1780 

Cox, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Haines, Burlington 1761 

i John Cox Minor. The bond is bound up in Book M, and not in Book C, 



July 


27 


Feb. 


5 


July 


27 


June 


9 


June 


17 


Mar. 


16 


May 


28 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


4 


June 


16 


Nov. 


3 


Mar. 


11 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


19 


Aug. 


10 


May 


31 


Aug. 


3 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


15 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


1 


Jan. 


7 


Feb. 


13 


Oct. 


3u 


Aug. 


23 


Feb. 


4 


Sept. 


16 


June 


30 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


30 


Jan. 


31 


Nov. 


1 


Feb. 


25 


Sept. 


30 


July 


31 


April 


28 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


25 


Aug. 


31 



78 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Cox, Joseph, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Chamberlain 1768 

Cox, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Wardell 1770 

Cox, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Charity Formal) 1775 

Cox, Lougfield, Shrewsbury, and Anne Sears, Shrewsbury 1751 

Cox, Morris, Monmouth, and Catharine Hutchinson 1773 

Cox, Moses, Gloucester, and Letitia Fisher, Gloucester 1754 

Cox, Moses, Gloucester, and Mary Nale 1774 

Cox, Nathaniel, Monmouth, and Rachel Vahan 1761 

Cox, Nathaniel, Monmouth, and Mary Evans .... 1772 

Cox, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Newbury 1730 

Cox, Richard, Monmouth, and Mercy Taylor, Monmouth 1750 

Cox, Richard, Burlington, and Rachel Bradshaw, Burlington 1775 

Cox, Samuel, Burlington, and Barbara Salar. . 1756 

Cox, Samuel, Middlesex, and Sarah Coleman 1764 

Cox, Samuel, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Emley, New Hanover 1774 

Cox, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hopewell, Burlington 1775 

Cox, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Corlis, Shrewsbury 1749 

Cox, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Ward, Burlington 1750 

Cox, Thomas, Monmouth, and Deborah Taylor 1767 

Cox, William, Burlington, and Rachel Mason, Burlington 1761 

Cox, William, Middlesex, and Lytie Selover, Middlesex. .' 1752 

Coxe, William, Jr., Philadelphia, and Rachel Smith 1789 

Coyll, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Delaney, Middlesex 1749 

Coyne, John,l Gloucester, and Rebecca Turner 1775 

Cozens, George, Gloucester, and Ellena Chester, Gloucester 1727 

Cozens, George, Gloucester, and Barbara Downs 1783 

Cozens, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Cassell, Philadelphia . . 1768 

Cozens, Samuel, Gloucester, and Hannah Cheesman, Gloucester 1753 

Cozens, Samuel, Gloucester, and Catherine Cox, Gloucester 1754 

Cozens, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Richards 1760 

Cozens, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Bryant, Gloucester 1761 

Craddock, David, Burlington, and Sarah Nammock 1759 

Craddock, John, Monmouth, and Mary O'Daniel, Monmouth 1745 

Craddock, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Armstrong, Monmouth. . .1749 
Craddock, William, Monmouth, and Hannah Hamson, Monmouth . . . 1745 

Craft, George, Burlington, aud Mary Lanuiug 1760 

Craft Gershom, Burlington, and Lydia Hancock 1741 

Craft, James, Jr., Burlington, and Mary English, Burlington 1740 

Craft, James, Burlington, and Margaret Rockhill ... .1758 

Craft, John, Mansfield, and Sarah Rockhill, Mansfield 1772 

Craft, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Lanning, Burlington 1763 

Craft, William, Salem, and Mary Morgan, Salem 1739 

Craig, Elias, Salem, and Mary Dunlap 1773 



Feb. 


18 


Jan. 


6 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


5 


June 


21 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


10 


Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


19 


June 


18 


Jan. 


19 


Oct, 


12 


Dec. 


10 


May 


31 


Oct. 


17 


Nov. 


2 


Sept. 


20 


Mar. 


21 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


25 


April 


4 


Jan. 


1 


April 


18 


Jan. 


17 


Oct. 


22 


Aug. 


27 


April 


23 


Mar. 


2 


Sept. 


15 


May 


13 


Dec. 


17 


Dec. 


21 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


14 


Nov. 


25 


Oct. 


21 


July 


19 


Mar. 


19 


Dec. 


29 


April 


6 


May 


25 



i So signed, but entered in the body of the bond as John Kine, and the bond is bound up 
in Book K. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



79 



1 
12 



Craig, John, Freehold, and Arme Barclay, Perth Arnboy 1749 Nov. 21 

Craig, John, Monmouth, and Jane Reid, Monmouth 1760 May 27 

Craig, John, Monmouth, and Anne Bound, Freehold 17G2 June 1 

Craig, Thomas, Freehold, and Mary Truex, Freehold , 1748 July 5 

Craig, Timothy, Elizabeth Town, and Jane Stewart 1746 Feb. 17 

Craig, William, Monmouth, and Eleanor Rhe, Monmouth 1753 May 28 

Craig, William, Salem, and Letitia Noblight 1773 Mar. 9 

Cramer, David, Burlington, and Rachel Allen 1767 June 8 

Cramer, Isaac, Burlington, and Rebecca Jones, Burlington 1765 July 1 

Cramer, Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Abiah Tuttle 1738 Sept. 19 

Cramer, John, Burlington, and Margaret Smith, Burlington 1757 June 23 

Cramer, Josiah, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Allen, Monmouth 1750 Sept. 4 

Cramer, Josiah, Little Egg Harbor, and Sarah Wilkinson, Woodb'dge.1751 Aug. 10 

Cramer, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Perkins, Burlington 1757 Oct. 10 

Cramer, Samuel, Burlington, and Lydia Conn 1784 June 16 

Cramer, Seemon, Burlington, and Phebe Devinny, Burlington 1766 June 12 

Cramer, Seemore, Burlington, and Mary Smith, Burlington. . 1737 June 23 

Cramer, Stephen, Burlington, and Sarah Little, Burlington 1749 Oct. 31 

Cramer, Stephen, Lit. Egg Harb., and Ruth Loveland, Lit. Egg Har. .1761 Oct. 

Cramer, William, Monmouth, and Lydia Wainwright, Monmouth 1737 Oct. 

Cramer, William, Burlington, and Hannah Leeds, Gloucester 1774 Mar. 14 

Crammer, John, and Mary Oldman 1 756 Bee. 8 

Cramer, Caleb, and Mary Baker 1760 July 29 

Crandel, William, Cape May, and Thankful Williams 1777 Dec. 22 

Crane, Ichabod, Morris, and Mary Miller, Essex 1782 April 17 

Crane, Job, Essex, and Elizabeth Pierce 1786 Aug. 25 

Crane, Joseph, Essex, and Susanna Ross 1772 April 16 

Crane, Ruf us, Essex, and Charity Campbell 1779 Mar. 13 

Crane, Uzal, Morris, and Sarah Pierson, Morris 1778 Nov. 3 

Craty, William, Sussex, and Johanna Bryan, Sussex. . . ., 1769 May 18 

Craven, John, Salem, and Phebe Smith 1764 April 18 

Craven, Richard Wheat, Cumberland, and Rhoda Shephard, Cumbl'd.1766 Oct. 10 

Craven, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Mary Carpenter 1781 Feb. 6 

Crawford, Audrew, and Eleanor Johnson , . 1767 June 6 

Crawford, Gideon, Freehold, and Helena Taylor, Middletown 1754 Dec. 15 

Crawford, James, Freehold, and Margaret Warne, Freehold 1756 Oct. 26 

Crawford, James, Philadelphia, and Mary Stidden, Philadelphia 1761 Mar. 5 

Crawford, Job, Monmouth, and Aune Morrice, Monmouth 1766 Nov. 25 

Crawford, John, Gloucester, and Anne Kelly. 1783 July 13 

Crawford, Joseph, Gloucester, and Amy Hillman 1777 July 23 

Crawford, Richard, Jr., Middletown, and Catherine Shepherd, M'dt'n 1751 Sept. 17 

Crawford, Samuel, Monmouth, and Naomi Vanbrakel, Monmouth 1 740 Dec. 3 

Crawford, William, Middletown, and Catherine Bowne, Middletown. .. 1756 Dec. 27 

Crayne, John, Burlington, and Mary Ellwell, Salem 1727 Feb. 19 

Creag, William, Salem, and Margaret Dickinson 1754 Aug. 19 

Crebs, John, and Levenah Bilderback 1769 Feb. 23 



8o NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Creby, Hugh, Burlington, and Abigail Smart 17G5 

Creek, James, and Francis Churches 1688 

Creighton, Hugh, Gloucester, and Mary French 1759 

Creiner, Hendrick, Middlesex, and Mary Wright 1761 

Cresan, Joshua, New Brunswick and Sarah Grigs, New Brunswick 1752 

Cresse, David, Cape May, and Patience Stiles, Cape May 1769 

Cresse, Israel, Cape May, and Haunah Goff, Cape May 1761 

Cresse, John, Cape May, and Beulah Ludlam, Cape May 1739 

Cresse, Jonathan, Cape May, aud Naomi Hand, Cape May 1763 

Cresse, Josiah, Cape May, and Mary Holding 1737 

Cresse, Lewis, Cape May, and Elizabeth Lirdlam, Cape May 1740 

Cresse, Nathan, Cape May, and Anne Erexison 1774 

Cresse, Zebulon, Cape May, and Rhoda Goff, Cape May 1764 

Cressie, Philip, Cape May, and Experience Smith 1763 

Cresson, John, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Briant, Philadelphia 1736 

Creveling, Henry, Hunterdon, and Sarah Weller, Sussex 1770 

Crim, Peter, Gloucester, and Sarah Hamilton, Gloucester 1769 

Cripps, Nathaniel, aud Grace Whitten 1694 

Crispen, Joshua, Burlington, and Rachel Lippincott 1779 

Crispin, Benjamin, Burlington, and Rachel West, Burlington 1784 

Crispin, Jacob, Burlington, and Ann Chub 1781 

Crispin, Jonathan, Burlington, and Hewlings, Burlington 1770 

Crispin, Seth, Burlington, and Hannah Strattan 1779 

Cristy, William, Sussex, and Sarah Caldwell 1768 

Crockett, John, Burlington, and Catherine Grapevine 1779 

Crolius, George, New York, and Catherine Coolbagh, New York 1763 

Cromwell, John, Cape May, and Ruth Hand, Cape May 1737 

Cronders, Nathan, Burlington, and Dorothy Easely 1 786 

Cronin, James, Bristol, Pa., aud Catharine Murry. 1787 

Crooks, James, Sussex, and Anne Braden, Sussex 1773 

Crooks, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Voto 1783 

Crosbie, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Grace Cannon 1778 

Croshaw, Isaiah, Burlington, and Ann Leeds, Northampton 1779 

Croshaw, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Briggs, Burlington .1771 

Croshaw, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Whitton 1783 

Crosier, John, Pennsylvania, aud Ruth Rannals, Pennsylvania 1776 

Cross, Benjamin, Salem, and Virgin Besby, Salem , . . . . 1739 

Cross, John, Burlington, and Anne Butterworth, Burlington 1784 

Crothan, Thomas, Burlington, and Dorothy Weaver, Burlington 1765 

Crow, David, Middlesex, aud Sarah Laforce, Piscataway 1765 

Crow, John, Middlesex, aud Martha Thornton, Middlesex 1765 

Crow, Samuel, Middlesex, aud Elizabeth Tusley, Middlesex 1751 

Crow, Samuel, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Potter, Middlesex 1764 

Crowell, Jacob, Cape May, aud Jane Edwards, Cape May 1731 

Crowell, Jacob, Cape May, aud Rachel Edwards, Cape May 1764 

Crowell, James, Woodbridge, and Francis Fitz Randolph, Woodbridge.1759 



June 


19 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


10 


May 


23 


Oct. 


21 


Sept. 


27 


Nov. 


3 


May 


18 


July 


1 


Sept. 


26 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


24 


Sept. 


14 


Feb. 


20 


Aug. 


7 


July 


12 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


9 


May 


10 


Feb. 


16 


July 


18 


May 


14 


Dec. 


8 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


20 


May 


7 


April 


22 


Nov. 


30 


June 


12 


Aug. 


4 


Feb. 


26 


Sept. 


26 


April 


3 


April 


25 


Mar. 


18 


Mar. 


8 


Sept. 


25 


Dec. 


5 


Mar. 


7 


April 


16 


Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


21 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


15 


April 


9 


Jan. 


17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Crowell, John, Cape May, and Experience Hughes, Cape May 1770 

Crowell, Josinh, Cape May, and Sarah Eldridge, Cape May 1764 

Crowell, Samuel, Cape May, and Phebe Smith 1759 

Crowell, Samuel, Sussex, and Mary Woolverton, Sussex 1762 

Crowell, Samuel, Cape May, and Abigail Buck, Cape May 1763 

Crowell, Thomas, Middlesex, and Christian Presgrove 1746 

Crowell, Thomas, Cape May. and Sarah Sehilliuks, Cape May 1771 

Crow-ford, Henry, Gloucester, and Elizabeth McColloch 1754 

Crozer, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Jane Schuyler. 1787 

Crum, Benjamin, Cape May, and Martha Matthews 1780 

Cruse, Abraham, Staten Island, and Elenor Stoutenburg, Staten Island. 1768 

Crusee, Henry, East Div. N. J., Elizabeth Baird, Somerset 1755 

Cubberly, Isaac, Burlington, and Auue Hooper, Middlesex 1740 

Cubberly, James, Burlington, and Auue Minging, Burlington 1745 

Cubberley, James, Burlington, and Anne Ford, Burlington 1777 

Culver, Nathaniel, New Brunswick, and Elsie Letts, Perth Amboy ... 1761 

Cuming, Johu, Trenton, and Susannah Loveland, Trenton. 1742 

dimming, Robert, Monmouth, and Mary Noble, Monmouth 1746 

Cunningham, Audrew, Burlington, and Aun Brown, Burlington 1754 

Cunningham, Archibald, Philadelphia, and Mary Reynolds, Middlesex. 1771 
Cunningham, George, Burlington, and Sarah Vandergrift ........ 1788 

Cunningham, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ervine 1781 

Cunningham, Joseph, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Jones, Monmouth. . .1746 

Cunningham, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Bowles 1748 

Cunningham, William, Bordentown, and Elizabeth Ridgeway, Bdtwn 1757 

Curlies, Uriah, Shrewsbury, and Exercise Allen, Shrewsbury 1746 

Curbs, Samuel, Monmouth, and Laviua Harbert, Monmouth 1758 

Currie, Robert, Gloucester, and Jane Mdlvane 1769 

Currey, William, Burlington, and Martha Rogers 1 749 

Currey, William, Salem, and Ruth Smith 1786 

Curry, Johu, New York, and Ann Montgomerie, Perth Amboy 1763 

Curry, John. Salem, and Gene Lowderback ... 1775 

Curtis, David, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Price, Monmouth 1766 

Curti-, David, Jr., Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bennet, Monmouth. .. 1747 

Curtis, John. Monmouth, and Mary Davis, Monmouth 1746 

Curtis, John, Capt. Boumaus C \, and Sarah Wood, Burlington 1781 

Curtis, Obadiah, Hunterdon, and Ann Yard . 1789 

Curtis, Robert, Burlington, and Jane Carter, Burlington 1776 

Curtis, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Taylor, Monmouth 1766 

Curtis, Thoroa«, Burlington, and Abigail Conrow, Burlington 1767 

Curnthers, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Bickham, Gloucester. ..1761 

Cutler, John, Woodbridge, and Christian Brown, Woodbridge 17" 2 

Cutler, Joseph, Woodbridge, and Ann Cmitaiu, Woodbridge 1752 

Cutler, Richard, Woodbridge, and Rachel Vahdeventer, Somerset. . . . 1757 
Cutler, Richard, Jr., Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Foord, Woodbridge. 1750 
Cutler, Thomas, Burlington, and, Martha Thomson, Burlington .... 1766 April 29 
6 



Feb. 


13 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


7 


Oct. 


2 


Dec. 


29 


Feb. 


14 


Jan. 


15 


April 


6 


Dec. 


19 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


21 


Dec. 


1 


Dec. 


7 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


8 


Feb. 


6 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


8 


June 


12 


Sept. 


18 


Feb. 


20 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


15 


April 


29 


May 


23 


May 


17 


Mar. 


6 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


8 


Dec. 


27 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


8 


.May 


26 


Mar. 


31 


Feb. 


5 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


5 


Mar. 


4 


Sept. 


1 


June 


22 


Nov. 


22 


July 


7 


Aug. 


10 


April 


3 



82 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Cutting, Leonard, New York, and Ann Frances Gombauld, Monm'th. . 176 L 
Cuyper, Thomas, Orange, N. Y., and Pietertye Van Houten 1781 

FEMALES. C 

Cadmus, Jane, and Garret Van Riper, Saddle River 1790 

Cadmus, Jannetje, Bergen, and Jacob Vreeland, Bergen 1770 

Cadmus, Preyntje, Bergen, and Isaac Van Giesen, Bergen 1770 

Cabale, Jane, and Samuel Covell, Monmouth 1784 

Cahoon, Ann, and John Steacy, Burlington 1787 

Cain, Esther, Oxford, and William Keynolds, Newton 1769 

Cain, Hannab, Bucks Co., Pa., and Robert Morris, Bucks Co., Pa 1765 

Caiu, H.mah, Sussex, and John Snider, Sussex 1773 

Cain, Mary, and Joseph Bond, Hunterdon , . 1781 

Cairle, Elizabeth, and Joseph Brick, Salem 1736 

Calaharn, Mary, Philadelphia, and James Steet, Philadelphia 1728 

Caldwell, Jane, Gloucester, and Abraham Chattin, Gloucester ........ 1716 

Caldwell, Mary, and John Rhodes, Burlington 1738 

Caldwell, Sarah, and William Cristie, Sussex 1768 

Calf us, Mary, and William Downs, Gloucester 1779 

Callahan, Margaret, Pennsylvania, and Jonathan Powell, Pennsylvania. 1763 

Calknder, Abijah, Middlesex, and Hobert Hude, Middlesex 1765 

Cambel, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Francis Panton, New York 1761 

Cammell, Elizabeth, Salem, and Anthony Dixon, Salem. . 1683-4 

Cammel, Susannah, and James Wilson, Galloway 1784 

Camp, Abigail, Essex, and John Griffith, Essex 1761 

Camp, Mary V., and Martin Voorhees, Middlesex 1780 

Campbel, Jennet, New Brunswick, and Tobias Van Norden, N. B\vk..l740 

Campbel, Rebecca, Cumberland, and Isaac Mills, Cumberland 1762 

Campb ill, Aune, Woodbridge, and Jacob Sutton, Piscataway 1756 

Campbell, Charity, and Kufus Ctaue, Essex 1779 

Campbell, Elizabeth, Somerset, and John Tunison, Biidgewater 1772 

Campbell, Elizabeth, Hackensack, and Casparus "Westervelt, Hack'nsk.1774 

Campbell, Elizabeth, and Nehemiah Sexton, Hunterdon 1779 

Campbell, Esther, Burlington, and William Launin, Burlington 1783 

Campbel], Hannah, Newark, and John S mdford, Newark 1760 

Campbel], Hannah, and James Letts, Middlesex 1774 

Campbell, Hannah, Burlington, and William Boulton, Burlington . . 176'3 

Campbell, Jane, and Cornelius Boice, Monmouth. . . 1767 

Campbell, Januet, Monmouth, and John Watson, Monmouth 1744 

Campbel], Mary, Monmouth, and Hugh McCallum, Monmouth 1748 

Campbel], Mary, Priucetown, and Benjamin Plum, Princetown 1763 

Campbell, Mary, New York, and Israel Read, Middlesex 

Campion, Keturah, and Thomas Matthews Gardiner, Burlington 1777 

Campion, Sarah, and Job Jones, Burlington 1 775 

Campton, Johanna, Woodbridge, aud Samuel Barron, Woodbridge.. 1749 
Camtaiu, Ann, Woodbridge, and Joseph Cutler, Woodbridge 1752 



Sept. 


21 


Feb. 


21 


Sept. 


25 


June 


16 


Dec. 


15 


Mar. 


29 


April 


12 


Jan. 


27 


April 


2D 


Oct. 


6 


June 


15 


April 


1 


April 


23 


Feb. 


2 


Oct. 


30 


Oct. 


22 


Mar. 


29 


May 


23 


Feb. 


13 


Aug. 


3 


Jan. 


8 


Dec. 


1 


Feb. 


3 


April 


22 


Sept. 


22 


Mar. 


1 


Sept. 


27 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


16 


April 


1 


April 


15 


Jan. 


6 


Feb. 


19 


Dec. 


24 


May 


28 


June 


5 


Kept. 


29 


Apri' 


11 


Feb. 


18 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


16 


July 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 83 

Cannady, Jane, Somerset, and David Scott, Somerset 1735 Aug. 18 

Cannau, Sarab, Burlington, and John King, Burlington 1765 Oct. 8 

Canneman, Jane, Penns Neck, and John Yourneen, Penns Neck 1762 Dec. 16 

Cannon, Grace, and Joseph Crosbie, Hunterdon 1778 Sept. 26 

Cannon, Ann, and Samuel Jones, Hunterdon 1780 Mar. 30 

Cannun, Anne, Reading, and Garret Van Sickle, Reading 1772 Jan. 1 

Cardiffe, Mary, Burlingtou, and Nicbolas Leonard, Gloucester 1743 Aug. 30 

Cargil, Mary, and George Titler, Orange Co., N. Y 1784 June 4 

Carbart, Mary, Monmouth, and William Robertson, Monmouth 1741--.". Mar. 22 

Carhart, Phebe, Middletowu, and James Roberts, Middletown 1758 Aug. 29 

Carle, Sarah, Morris, and Alexander Kirkpatrick, Somerset 1771 May 3 

Carley, Alice, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Yates, Bucks, Pa 1712 Sept. 20 

Carlile, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Benjamin Cooper, Gloucester 1729 Jiine in 

C'ai 11, Hannah, Salem, and Isaac Evans, Salem. 1774 Oct. io 

Carl], Mehitabel, Cape May, and Barlow Williams, Cape May 1776" Dec. 5 

Carll, Sarah, Cumberland, and Samuel Smith, Stow Neck 1760 'Sept. 29 

Carll, Sarah, and Noah Harris, Cumberland 1781 April 18 

Carman, Abigail, Woodbridge, aud Henry Freeman, Woodbiidge 1739 Sept. 8 

Carman, Abigail, Middlesex, and Aaron Bloodgood, Middlesex 1763 Mar. 31 

Carman, Ann, Burlington, and Peter Eisley, Cape May 1736 Jan. 22 

Carman, Anne, Burlington, and Eh Bndd, Burlington 1774 April 2 

Carman, Annie, aud George Taylor, Springfield 1785 Oct. 10 

Carman, Deborah, and Gershom Mott, New Jersey 1751 April 23 

Carman, Deborah, Middletown, aud George Taylor, Jr., Middletowu. .1752 Nov. 30 

Carman, Elizabeth, Cape May, aud Samuel Richardson, Cape May.. . . 1731 June 4 

Carman, Hannah, Burlington, and Samuel Rose, Lit. Egg Harbour. . ..1765 June 18 

Carman, Lucy, and William Silver, Burlington 1783 Mar. 18 

Carman, Margaret, and Jeremiah Dunn, Piscataway 1747 May 14 

Carman, Margaret, aud Stephen Carman, Middlesex 1769 Sept. 6 

Carman, Margaret, Bordentown, and John Steward, Bordentown 1773 May 12 

Carman, Martha, Monmouth, and Richard Herbert, Monmouth 1742 June 2 

Carman, Mary, and Elias Davis, Middlesex 1767 Sept. 5 

Carman, Mary, and Stephen Kent, Middlesex 1768 July 26 

Carman, Mary, and John Oliver, Bordentown 1771 April 24 

Carman, Mary, Burlington, and Daniel Fleisler, Burlington 1779 Sept. 23 

Carmau, Sarah, Middletown, aud John Amack, Middletown 1757 Mar. 12 

Carman, Uphame, Monmouth, and Samuel Clark, Monmouth . . 1767 May 17 

Carmichael, Elizabeth, Morristown, and James Pitney, Jr., Morristown.1780 Dec. 4 

Carmine, Deborah, and John Howell, Hunterdon 1780 April 17 

Carmstriug. Jane, and Jeremiah Risley, Gloucester. . 1739 Mar. 6 

Carney, Cathrina, aud James Clark, Salem 1755 Nov. 20 

Cams, Sarah, and Daniel Day, Morris 1782 Dec. 24 

Carpenter, Abigail, aud Edward Hancock, Salem 1786 Mar. 7 

Carpenter, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and John Biles, Hunterdon 1738 Oct. 13 

Carpenter, Mary, Burlington, and Peter Baynton, Burlingtou 1739 Jan. 8 

Carpenter, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Henry Richards, Perth Amboy. 1763 Nov. 19 



84 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Carpenter, Mary, and Thomas Craven, Hunterdon 1781 Feb. 6 

Carpenter, Sarah, Gloucester, and Thomas Elliot Marsh, Gloucester. . . 1764 Mar. 5 

Carr, Catherine, Monmouth, and Garratt Wall, Middlesex 1740 Oct. 24 

Carr, Dorothy, Backs Co., Pa., and Isaac Ashton, Bucks Co., Pa 1736 Nov. 30 

Carr, Hannah, Northampton, and John Winner, Northampton 1776 April 1 

Carr, Jean, Hunterdon, and Francis Costigin, Jr., Trenton 1769 Mar. 2 

Carr, Lydia, and John Bennet, Bristol, Pa 1778 Dec. 16 

Carr, Margaret, Middlesex, and Thomas Story, Middlesex 173'.) Oct. 25 

Cair, Margaret, Burlington, and Robert Frazer, Burlington 1767 Mar. 9 

Carre, Agues, and Daniel Sutton, Burlington 1688 April 10 

Carril, Sarah, Pennsylvania, and John Price, Pennsylvania 1728 Sept. 9 

Carrington, Mary, and Gabriel Compton, Middlesex 1760 Dec. 20 

Carroll, Elizabeth, and Abner Fitzpatrick 1779 July 30 

l.uiy, 'Elizabeth, Burlington, and James McKnight, Burlington 1763 Jan. 15 

Carson, Brazilla, and Thomas Bellenger, Burlington 1768 May 28 

Carson, Deidamia, and Archer Skinner, Middlesex 178u Aug. 11 

Carson, Rachel, Burlington, and John Fenimore, Jr., Burlington 1775 Oct. 1 

Carson, Sarah, and William Hepbourn, Hunterdon 17— Sept. 1 1 

Carswel), Sarah, Freehold, and Moses Thomson, Freehold 1765 July 18 

Carter, Ann, Trenton, and Benjamin Woolsey, Trenton 1764 July 6 

Carter, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Budden, Burlington 1746 May 10 

Carter, Hannah, Burlington, and John Da vies, Burlington 1736 May 11 

Carter, Hannah, and Ralph Hart, Trenton ... 1780 Dec. 7 

Carter, Isabell, Shrewsbury, and Emanuel Woolley, Shrewsbury 1752 May 28 

Carter, Jane, Burlington, and Robert Curtis, Burliugtou 1776 Feb. 5 

Cartel-, Johannah, Gloucester, and Henry Fackston, Gloucester 1763 Feb. 3 

Carter, Mary, Burlington, and John Buuting, Burlington 1740 Dec. 16 

Carter, Mary, Burlington, and Michael Burrows, Burlington 1764 May 1 

Carter, Pamelia, Springfield, and Samuel Conn, Springfield . . 1771 April 6 

Cartel-, Phebe, and Neill McGill, Hunterdon 1769 June 25 

Carter, Rachel, Bucks, Pa., and Andrew Wright, Bucks, Pa 17 J 3 Aug. 6 

('inter, Sarah, Burliugtou, and Samuel Wbeatcraft, Burlington 1736 May 7 

Carter, Sarah, and Thomas Browne, Newark 1778 Aug. 21 

Carter, Susannah, Trenton, and John Chambers, Trenton 1746 July 31 

( 'arter, Sarah, and Joseph Kirby, Burlington 1783 Mar. 3 

Carty, Ester, Gloucester, and Johu Holmes, Gloucester 1748 Jan. 23 

Carty, Sarah, Burlington, and James Dobbins, Jr., Burlington 1779 Jan. 12 

Carvill. Grace, Monmouth, and Andrew Neilson, New Jersey 1743 Mar. 28 

Case, Catherine, and Joseph Cowell 1769 Jan. 19 

Case. Catherine, Hunterdon, and Audrew Mershou, Hunterdon 1773 June 12 

Case, Rachel, Amwell, and John White, Amwell 1773 Feb. 11 

Caseby, Temperance, and Howell Smith, Salem 1786 Feb. 5 

Caskey, Hannah, Burlington, and Charles Cartey, Burlington 1756 Sept. 18 

Casperson, Elizabeth, Salem, and Frances Maharr, Salem .... 1745 Dec. 11 

Cassaway, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Scolt, Burlington. 1738 Nov. 4 

Cassell, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and John Cozens, Gloucester 1768 Aug. 27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Cassidy, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Thomas Golbom, Philadelphia. . 1731 

Casson, Elizabeth, and Jacob Gibbs 1701 

Castle, Deborah, and John Banks, Gloucester 1779 

Castle, Mary, Philadelphia, and Francis Jervis, Philadelphia 1735 

Castle, Susannah, and Samuel Clifton, Burlington 1761 

Cathcart, Phebe, Monmouth, and Obadiah Lippincott, Monmouth .... 1 752 

( iatte, Anu, and James Wood, Deptford 176-5 

Cattell, Mary, Gloucester, and John Haritage, Gloucester 1760 

Cattell, Mary, Chester, aud Thomas Haines, Chester 1766 

Cawood, Phebe, Woodbridge, and Jacob Islestine, Perth Amboy 1749 

Cawood, Ruth, Woodbridge, aud John Alward, Woodbridge 1754 

Cawson, Lydia, aud Philip Corson, Cape May 1784 

Chaliner, Jane, Springfield, and Nathan Folwell, .Spriugfield 1748 

Chamberlain, Amy, and Peter Tenbrook, Hunterdon 1782 

Chamberlain, Elizabeth, and Joseph Cox, Middlesex 1768 

Chamberlain, Mar}', aud Amos Dey, Monmouth 1778 

Chamberlain, Philena, Monmouth, aud Jed iah Stout, New Jersey. . 1744-5 

Chamberlain, Rachel, aud John Audrews, Amwell 1773 

Chamberlain, Rebecka, Good Luck, Samuel VVorden, Good Luck 1755 

Chamberlaiu, Zilpha, Monmouth, aud Ephraim Bates, Monmouth . . . 1755 

Chamberlin, Catharine, aud Elias Anderson, Monmouth 176: 

Chamberlin, Dorcas, and Isaac Decker, Sussex 1769 

Chamberlin, Margaret, Monmouth, and Gersham Bills, Monmouth 1755 

Chamberlin, Penelope, and John Lawshe, Hunterdon 1779 

Chambers, Amy, Monmouth, and George Mount, Moumouth 1744-5 

Chambers, Ann, and Timothy Jackson, Burlington 1778 

Chambers, Audrey, Monmouth, and Daniel Jones, Monmouth 1710-1 

Chambers, Hauuah, aud William Vasse 1741 

Chambers, Jane, Somerset, and Moses Ayers, Somerset 1739 

Chambers, Jane, Essex, and John Cameron, Essex 1763-8 

Chambers, Margaret, Trenton, and Peter Machett, Middlesex. . ... 1739 

Chambers, Margaret, aud Garret Suedekar, New Brunswick 1775 

Chambers, Martha, Burlington, and Patrick Jones, Burlington 1741 

Chambers, Mary, Burliugtou, and David Lippincott, Burliugtou 172 5 

Chambers, Rebecca, Burlington, and Abraham Walker, Burlington — 1736 

Chambers, Rose, and John Wright, Trenton 1778 

Chambers, Sarah, Burlington, and James Irwin, Gloucester 1744 

Chambers, Vallaria, Monmouth, and Uriah Lippincott, Monmouth. . . . 1752 

Chambless, Mabel, aud William Hancock, Jr., Salem 1 745 

Chambless, Sarah, Alloways Creek, and William Smith, Manniugton. .1765 

Chamless, Mary, Monmouth, and Jedidiah Allen, Moumouth. 1740 

Chamliss, Sarah, Salem, and Erasmus Felters, Salem 1750 

Champion, Aune, Gloucester, aud John Stokes, Gloucester 1751 

Champion. Catherine, and John Collins, Gloucester 1777 

Champion, Mary, Gloucester, and Jonathan Belltou, Gloucester 1728 

Champion, Mary, Gloucester, and Joshua Belauge, Cape May 1751 



Nov. 


7 


May 


16 


July 


13 


Jan. 


5 


Feb. 


6 


July 


2 


Jan. 


8 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


12 


May 


23 


Jan. 


!) 


Aug. 


20 


July 


21 


Julv 


4 


Feb. 


18 


Feb. 


2 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


10 


May 


30 


Mar 


30 


April 


12 


April 


7 


Sept. 


3 


Jan. 


18 


Mar. 


12 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


4 


Nov. 


13 


May 


17 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


10 


Feb. 


16 


June 


26 


July 


15 


Aug. 


14 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


17 


Nov. 


23 


Oct. 


26 


Jan. 


26 


Oct, 


26 


July 


8 


April 


19 


April 


15 



86 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Champion, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Thomas Nightingale, Phila 1749 

Chaudles, Christian, Salem, and Robert Raines, Salem 1729 

Chandler, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Morris, Monmouth ... 1767 
Chandler, Haunah, Philadelphia, and Benjamin Davies, Philadelphia 176G 

Chandler, Lidy, Monmouth, and Edward P. Cook, Monmouth 1757 

Chandler, Man 7 , and Jacob Ewens, Salem 1750 

Chandler, Rebeckah, Monmouth, and William Mount, Monmouth. .. .1763 

Chandler, Sarah, and Oeldiick Richmond, Salem , 1745 

Channel, Elizabeth, and Joseph Stiles, Cumberland 1785 

Channel], Lydia, Burlington, and Lott Evans, Burlington 1756 

Channell, Sarah, and Robert Doughty 1732 

Chapman, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Patrick Lynch, New Jersey. .. 1743 

Chapman, Mary, Burlington, and Nathaniel Warner, Burlington 1756 

Chapman, Mary, and Thomas Peacock, Northampton 1782 

Chapman, Patience, and Henry Wayman, Mansfield 1763 

Charleston, Haunah, Essex, and Thomas Morris, Middlesex 1753 

Chasy, Elleauor, Monmouth, and Matthew Ely, Monmouth 1761 

Chattel, Anne, Salem, and John Eaten, Salem 1770 

Chatten, Hannah, and William Sharp, Gloucester 1773 

Chattin, Alice, and William Zane, Gloucester ... 1775 

Chattin, Lettice, and John Stetser, Gloucester 1784 

Chayton, Content, aud John Borden, Burlington 1783 

Cheed, Hannah, Burlington, aud Aaron Paucoast, Burlington 1764 

Cheesemau, Catharine, Middlesex, and Joseph Drake, Jr., Middlesex .1752 

Cheesemau, Cecilia, Burlington, and Amos Ashead, Burlington 1728 

Cheesemau, Hannah, Gloucester, aud Henry Rue, Gloucester 1729 

Cheesemau, Letisha, and Joel Hillmau, Gloucester 1748 

Cheesemau, Mary, Gloucester, aud Daniel Eastlack, Gloucester 1740 

^-Cheesemau, Mary, Gloucester, and William Southerbe Cooper, Gl'c'st'r. 1749 

Cheesemau, Naomi, Gloucester, aud Henry Jones, Gloucester 1728 

Cheesman, Auu, aud Richard Powell, Gloucester 1783 

Cheesmau, Charrite, and John Gastou, Monmouth 1760 

Cheesman, Deborah, Gloucester, aud Archibald Jolly, Gloucester 1737 

Cheesman, Deborah, Gloucester, aud Richard Small wood, Gloucester 1756 

Cheesman, Drusilea, aud Joseph Hillmau, Gloucester 1763 

Cheesman, Haunah, Gloucester, and Samuel Cozens, Gloucester 1753 

Cheesmau, Isabel, aud John Thorne, Gloucester 1772 

Cheesman, Jemima, aud William Warwick, Gloucester 1780 

Cheesmau, Lydia, Monmouth, and Charles McCleau, Middlesex 1751 

Cheesmau, Lydia, South Amboy, aud Benjamin Ward, South Amboy. . 1759 

Cheesman, Martha, and Talman Smith, Burlington 1760 

Cheesman, Mary, Monmouth, aud John Vaughn, Monmouth 1764 

Cheesmau, Mary Anu, aud Thomas Jackson 1 780 

Cheesmau, Rhoda, and Jacob Rowaud, Gloucester 1782 

Cheesmau, Sarah, Gloucester, and Joseph B dliuger, Gloucester 1760 

Cheesmau, Sarah, and Samuel Riley, Piles Grove 1785 



April 


10 


Dec. 


25 


June 


19 


April 


29 


Dec. 


12 


Feb. 


25 


Dec. 


6 


June 


3 


May 


2 


Aug. 


18 


Oct. 


7 


July 


18 


Nov. 


13 


April 


27 


June 


20 


April 


7 


April 


22 


May 


8 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


16 


Jan. 


15 


Jan. 


13 


June 


9 


Aug. 


31 


Aug. 


14 


Feb. 


16 


Mar. 


7 


June 


28 


Sept. 


21 


April 


6 


Dec. 


1 


Feb. 


4 


April 


7 


April 


2 


July 


18 


April 


23 


Get. 


9 


Jan. 


25 


July 


11 


June 


30 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


7 


May 


4 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 87 

Oheesman, Tamar, Gloucester, and Isaac Jones, Gloucester 1707 

Cheevers, Abigail, Gloucester, and Thomas Weaver, Gloucester 1756 

Chemaly, Anne, Northampton, and Michael Woolston, Northampton. . 1774 

Chemilly, Susanna, and Jacob Clouts, Northampton 1782 

Cherry, Martha, Bucks, Pa., and John Oliver, Backs, Pa 175G 

Cherry, Rebecca, Phila., and Daniel Desborrow, Phila 1729 

Cheseman, Hannah, Gloucester, and liichard Cheseman, Gloucester. . .17-16 

Cheshire, Ann, Burlington, and Aaron Ivins, Burlington 1764 

Cheshire, Experience, and Thomas Stevenson, Burlington, 1733 

Cheshire, Sarah, Burlington, and John Morris, Burlington 1746 

Chesney, Mary, and Samuel Mills, Cumberland 1779 

Chesom, Jane, and William Hutton, Gloucester 1772 

Chester, Anne, Cumberland, and Samuel Bowen, Cumberland 1768 

Chester, Eleanor, Gloucester, and Joseph Lord, Gloucester 1750 

Chester, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Aaron Dilkes, Gloucester 1770 

Chester, Elizabeth, and Abishai Chattiu, Gloucester 1785 

Chester, Elena, Gloucester, and George Cozens, Gloucester 1727 

Chester, Hannah, Burlington, and Samuel Atkinson, Burlington 1774 

Chester, Jane, and Hugh Drake, Salem . . 1775 

Chester, Mary, Gloucester, and John Scott, Gloucester 1738 

Chew, Alice, Gloucester, and William Hampton, Jr., Gloucester 1753 

Chew, Anne, Gloucester, and David Paul, Gloucester 1765 

Chew, Deborah, and William Sell, Gloucester 1761 

Chew, Elizabeth, and David Robinson, Gloucester 1774 

Chew, Elizabeth, and Samuel Stiles, Gloucester ... 1783 

C hew, Hannah, and John Dilks, Gloucester 1733 

Chew, Keziah, Gloucester, and Ephraim Alberson, Gloucester 1741 

Chew, Nancy, and William ( laldwell, Gloucester 1778 

Chew, Patience, Gloucester, and Jacob Alberson, Gloucester 1731 

Chew, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Wild, Gloucester 1740 

Chew, Sarah, and Patrick Flanigan, Gloucester ^.1762 

Chew, Susannah, Gloucester, and Seavil Willson, Gloucester L 1756 

Chew, Susannah, Gloucester, and Isaac Flaningam, Gloucester. . . . \. 1761 

Chisam, Ruth, and Thomas Langley, Gloucester 1775 

Chisman, Anne, Gloucester, and Francis Batlin, Gloucester 1730 

Chivers. Sarah, Gloucester, and Joseph Hillmau, Gloucester 1758 

Chivers, Sarah, and John Beach, Morris 1776 

Christee, Sarah, and John Demarest, Bergen 1788 

Christie, Magdalena, and J. Henry Von Goetschius 1773 

Christopher, Rebecca, and John Williams, Burlington 1734 

Chub, Ann. and Jacob Crispin, Burlington 1781 

Church, Lydia, Cape May, and Thomas Paige, Cape May 1766 

Church, Martha, and Recompense Hand, Cape May 1762 

Church, Patience, Cape May, and Silas Hand, Cape May 1746 

Church, Prudence, and Henry Schillinger, Cape May 1760 

Church, Rebecca, and William Price, Burlington 1736 



Mar. 


11 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


5 


April 


15 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


20 


June 


14 


May 


7 


Sept. 


17 


April 


30 


April 


27 


Nov. 


12 


July 


11 


Mar. 


13 


July 


12 


May 


30 


Jan. 


17 


Aug. 


18 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


12 


Mar. 


5 


July 


12 


Sept. 


16 


May 


6 


April 


2 


Jan. 


16 


May 


12 


Dec. 


17 


April 


16 


Dec. 


3 


Aug. 


27 


Dec. 


1 


May 


10 


Aug. 


22 


Dec. 


7 


July 


22 


Mar. 


2 


May 


10 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


22 


July 


18 


Aug. 


7 


Nov. 


15 


Mar. 


28 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


9 



88 new Jersey colonial documents. 

Church, Rebecca, Cape May, arid Thomas Johnson, Cape May 1741 

Church, Susannah, and Jeremiah Richardson, Cape May 1774 

Churcher, Frances, and James Creek 1688 

Chuimely, Cat' arine, Burlington, and John Pettit, Burlington 1774 

Camming, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Mount, Monmouth 1748 

Clancey, Catherine, Wood bridge, and Jeremiah Sopers, Woodbridge. . . 1770 

Clandening, Anne, and Christian Coursen, Stateu Island 1747 

Clandennin, Jane, and Thomas Preston, Somerset 1750 

Clap, Anne, and George Biiggs, Philadelphia 1779 

Clark, Ann, and David Smith, Monmouth 1768 

Clark, Anna, Bucks Co., Pa., and Joseph Worrall, Bucks Co., Pa 1765 

Clark, Catharine, Philadelphia, and Martin Ashbourn, Philadelphia. . .1728 

Clark, Elizabeth, Freehold, and Cornelius Peas, Freehold 1758 

Clark, Hannah, Burlington, and John Farquar, Burlington 1750 

Clark, Hannah, and Robert White, New Windsor 1768 

Clark, Hannah, and Joseph Brumby, Burlington 1777 

Clark, Letishew, and John Cownover, Gloucester 1778 

Clark, Lidy, Monmouth, and George Brewer, Monmouth 1764 

Clark, Margaret, and Frederick Fredericks, Morris 17^4 

Clark, Mary, Chester, Pa., and John Brooks, Chester, Pa 1749 

Clark, Mary, and Joseph Gibbs, Burlington 1757 

Clark, Mary, Burlington, and George West, Burlington 1768 

Clark, Mary, and David Blackman, Gloucester 1769 

Clark, Mary, and Ebeuezer Seeley, Cumberland 1783 

Clark, Matilda, and Joseph Griswold, Middlesex 1778 

Clark, Phebe, Hunterdon, and Amos Hutchinson, Middlesex 1779 

Clark, Rachael, Pennsylvania, and Richard Glover, Pennsylvania 1728 

Clark, Rebecca, and John Walker, Middlesex 1769 

Clark, Rebecca, and James Vanuxen, Philadelphia 1779 

Clarke, Aune, Burlington, and John Snape, Burlington 1685 

Clarke, Elizabeth, Salem, and Francis Chattin, Gloucester 1760 

Clarke, Haunah, Burlington, aud William Buddell, Burlington 1731 

Clarke, Martha, Burlington, and Joseph Baker, Bucks Co., Pa 1747 

Clarke, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Francis Titus, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Clarke, Rachel, Bucks, Pa., aud James Carruthers, Bucks, Pa 1733 

Clarke, Susannah, and Ezekiel Harding 1735 

Clarke, Susannah. Burlington, and George Taylor, Burlington 1745 

Clarke, Susanua, and Jonathan Dolles, Cumberland 1787 

Clarksou, Abigail, Middlesex, aud Abraham Freeman, Middlesex 1763 

Clarkson, Christian, and Isaac Stelle, Piscataway 1740 

Clarksou, Cornelia, Somerset, and Gilbert Tenuent, New Brunswick. . 1741 
Clarkson, Experience, Woodbridge, and William Edgar, Woodbridge 1751 

Clarksou, Mary, Middlesex, and Nathaniel Martin, Middlesex 1756 

Clarkson, Polly, aud Manning Shotwell, Middlesex 1781 

Clawson, Keturah, Woodbridge, aud Thomas Gack, Woodbridge 1759 

Clawsou, Margaret, and David Collins, Middlesex 1745 



Dec. 


30 


Sept. 


8 


Aug. 


20 


Sept, 


5 


Feb. 


8 


Aug. 


11 


May 


7 


Feb. 


28 


Jan. 


23 


April 


25 


June 


4 


Feb. 


20 


July 


10 


July 


28 


Dec. 


10 


Bee. 


26 


Oct. 


30 


Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


21 


May 


10 


June 


18 


Feb. 


1 


April 


10 


Mar. 


30 


Mar. 


31 


Aug. 


2 


May 


10 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


26 


May 


12 


July 


22 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


30 


Juue 


19 


July 


24 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


14 


June 


1 


June 


29 


April 


22 


Feb. 


9 


Mar. 


30 


Dec. 


16 


Feb. 


27 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


7 



Marriage licenses. 

Clawson, Mary, Middlesex, and Peter Covert, Essex ... 1753 

Clawson, Naucy, Middlesex, and Jacob Rowland, Middlesex. . 1766 

Clawson, Pliebe, Middlesex, aud Drake Dunn, Middlesex 1762 

Clawson, Rachel, aud Stephen Horn, New Jersey 1775 

Clawson, Sarah, Morris, aud Paul Berry, Sussex . . . . 1769 

Clay, Arm, Pennsylvania, aud Hugh Ross, Horse Neck, Conn. 1771 

Clay, Hannah, Burlington, aud Samuel Thorne, Burliugton 1730 

Claypoole, Deborah, Willingborough, aud John Brown, Burlington.. .1766 

Clayton, Amey, Freehold, and Jacob Smith, Morris 1767 

Clayton, Amy, Monmouth, and Joseph Mathews, Monmouth . 17-48 

Clayton, Ann, Monmouth, and Cornelius Driscoll, Monmouth 1773 

Clayton, Anue, Freehold, and John Clayton, Freehold 1764 

Clayton, Catharine, Burlington, and Richard Hellson, Burlington . . . 1731 
Clayton, Catharine, Burlington, aud Samuel Gibson, Burlington. . , . . 1782 

Clayton, Catrine, Monmouth, and Stephen Cooper, Middlesex 1767 

Clayton, Deborab, aud Thomas O'Kisou, Upper Freehold . . .1768 

Clayton, Elizabeth, and Daniel Bunting, Pennsylvania 1767 

Clayton, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Ihoinas Oakley, Burlington 1773 

Clayton, Hannah, Monmouth, and Garret Hulsesart, Monmouth 1752 

Clayton, Hannah, Monmouth, and Peter Benam, Middlesex 1759 

Clayton, Mary, and Henry Sevingler, Freehold 1746 

Clayton, Mary, aud Amos Johnston, Monmouth 1762 

Clayton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Robin i, Monmouth 1732 

Clayton, Sibella, aud James Harpin 1699 

Clayton, Valuriah, Monmouth, aud Jacob Cjmpton, Monmouth 1763 

Clear, Elizabeth, and Jacob Hawk, Middlesex 1780 

Clear, Sarah, and Richard Compton, Middlesex 1781 

Clayton, Ann, and George Bevan, Trenton 1763 

Cleayton, Katherine, Monmouth, and Cornelius Tomson, Monmouth. . 1747 

Clem, Saviuah, Burlington, and Jacob Fislear, Burlington 17-44 

Clemans, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Jonathan Kunsey, Gloucester. . . . 1760 
Cleminger, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas Hankins, Monmouth.. .. 1728 

Clemmeu, Mary, aud Thomas Bates, Gloucester 1746 

Clemens, Hannah, Burlington, and Richard Lippincott, Burlington. .. 1751 

Clement, Ann, and Andrew Hudson, Gloucester 1773 

Clement, Anne, Gloucester, and Joseph Harrison, Gloucester 1749 

Clement, Anne, aud Baddle Reves, Gloucester 1759 

Clement, Mary, Gloucester, aud John Shivers, Gloucester 1736 

Clevenger, Catharine, Burlington, and Charles Miller, Burlington 1732 

Clevenger, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Atkiuson, Burlington. . . 1764 
Clevenger, Hannah, Burlington, aud William Duckworth, Burlington.. 1731 

Clevenger, Margaret, and Thomas Asson 1746 

Clever, Elizabeth, Stow Creek, aud Bsnjamin Thompson, Cumberland. 1778 

Clever, Sarah, Cumberland, and Levi Barnes, Cumberland 1780 

Clews, Elizitbeth, Pennsylvania, and Hezekiah Rogers, Pennsylvania. . 1728 
Cliff, Margaret, Philadelphia, and Robert Saunders, Burlington 1733 



8 9 



Jan. 


18 


Sept. 


20 


April 


19 


.Sept. 


16 


Nov. 


14 


Sept. 


13 


Oct. 


22 


Oct. 


13 


Sept. 


3 


July 


9 


Aug. 


27 


May 


22 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


31 


Sept. 


1 


April 


27 


Sept. 


1 


Sept. 


18 


April 


2 


Feb. 


24 


Feb. 


13 


Mar. 


29 


June 


25 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


28 


July 


23 


Feb. 


3 


Jan. 


5 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


26 


Sept. 


12 


April 


16 


May 


1 


Nov. 


17 


Sept. 


21 


Nov. 


12 


July 


9 


June 


26 


Feb. 


8 


Aug. 


21 


Feb. 


9 


Dec. 


4 


May 


29 


June 


11 


Oct. 


13 



(JO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Clifford, Mary, Hunterdon, and Alexander White, Sussex 17G9 

Clifton, Ann, and Edward Pleadwell, Philadelphia 1733 

Clifton, Ann, Burlington, and Jonathan Taylor, Burlington 1740 

Clifton, Hannah, and Robert Johnson 1735 

Clifton, Susannah, and Joseph Packer, Northampton 1759 

Clindinen, Ann, Pepack, and John Van Schaiack, Pepack 1747 

Ciine, Mary, Somerset, and John Farley, Somerset 1775 

Cline, Rachel, and Joseph Allen, Chester 1783 

Closon, Hannah, and William Wosteu, Salem 1733 

Clothier, Elizabeth, Springfield, and Robert Smith, Springfield 1764 

Clover, Mary, Somerset, and Jacob Conine, Somerset 1764 

Clowes, Rachel, Bucks, Pa., and Edmoud Sands, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Cluney, Jane, and James Chamless, Salem 1772 

Clunn, Mary, and John Yard, Trenton 1779 

Clutch, Martha, Burlington, and Michael Tenbell, Burlington 1767 

Clutch, Sarah, and Robert Hutchinson, Burlington 1769 

Coar, Ann, and Peter Kister, Hunterdon 1733 

Coates, Milicent, and John Webb, Gloucester 1779 

Cobner, Esther, Salem, and Alexander Gilmore, Salem 1775 

Cock, Catharine, Hunterdon, and William Barnes, Hunterdon 1742 

Cock, Catherine, Somerset, and Edward Hall, Somerset 1744 

Cock, Lydia, Gloucester, and Samuel Morton, Gloucester 1786 

Cock, Margaret, Reading Town, and Henry Schamp, Reading Town. .1750 
Cock, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and Jeremiah Bonham, Shrewsbury .... 1758 

Cockafare, Sarah, and Jacob Voorhis, New Brunswick 1772 

Cocke, Rebeccah, and Thomas Ausley, Monmouth 1760 

Codds, Helena, and James Stillman 1782 

Codds, Mary, and Hauce Halmes, Gloucester 1782 

Coddingtou, Elizabeth, and James Clarkson, Woodbridge 1714 

Coderry, Ruth, Gloucester, and Joseph Ireland, Gloucester 1727 

Codington, Phebe, and John Ellison 1774 

Codman, Margaret, and Anthony Waters, Essex 1767 

Coeymaus, Johanna, Somerset and Dr. John Neilson, New Brunswick. 1741 

Coffee, Hannah, and John Miers, Gloucester 1779 

Coffey, Sarah, Gloucester, and Jacob Ickle, Gloucester 1763 

Coffin, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas -Ballinger, Burlington 1742 

Cogall, Rachel, Burlington, and John Hall, Burlington 1764 

Colbraetb, Eaphram, and James Blair 1760 

Colbraeth, Esther, Northampton, and James Vernon, Northampton. . .1756 

Cold, Mary, Staten Island, and John Burns 1745-6 

Cole, Bersheba, and Seiley Keen, Salem 1760 

Cole, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Vansciver, Burlington 1754 

Cole, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Gosling, Jr., Gloucester 1750 

Cole, Lydia, and Frederick V. Dike, Somerset 1778 

Cole, Margaret, Monmouth, and Jonathan Gordon, Monmouth 1748 

Cole, Martha, Monmouth, and Michael Erickson, Monmouth 1746 



Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


29 


Feb. 


12 


Nov. 


4 


May 


31 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


30 


Dec. 


12 


Nov. 


12 


April 


24 


May 


29 


July 


23 


May 


26 


Jan. 


18 


May 


22 


April 


3 


Dec. 


24 


June 


11 


Jan. 


5 


Feb. 


11 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


1 


May 


14 


May 


24 


Nov. 


9 


Nov. 


1 


Feb. 


13 


April 


11 


Feb. 


5 


Sept. 


18 


Oct. 


17 


Feb. 


26 


Mar. 


9 


May 


11 


Mar. 


28 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


3 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


18 


July 


28 


May 


17 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


5 


June 


13 



MARRtAGE LICENSES. 9 1 

Cole, Mary, and William Ogborue 1698 

Cole, Mary, Gloucester, and Edward Tonkin, Burlington 1733 

Cole, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Matchet, Monmouth 1757 

Cole, Mary, Gl mcester, and John Hendrixson, Gloucester . . 1759 

Cole, Mary, and Jonathan Collins, Burlington 1781 

Coleman, Amy, and Matthias Par, Morris 1779 

Coleman, Mercy, and Robert Qnigley, Nottingham 1767 

Coleman, Phebe, and David Robertson 1745 

Coleman, Rachel, and David Sellers, Philadelphia 1779 

Coleman, Sarah, and Samuel Cox, Middlesex 1764 

Coleman, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Obadiah Evius, Hunterdon 1772 

Colemaus, Sarah, Gloucester, and Thomas Cheeseman, Gloucester 1727 

ColeP, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Burdsall, Burlington. 1730 

Coles, Hannah, and Daniel Lippiucott, Burlington. 1756 

Coles, Hope, and Abijah Collins, Gloucester 1785 

Coles, Mary, and William Kain, Gloucester 1777 

Coles, Susannah, Gloucester, and William Budd, Burlington 1738 

Coley, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Gerrit Lydeker, Bergen 1770 

Cohens, Sybillo, and Samuel Gaskill, Burlington 1759 

Collick, Catharine, and Abraham Whittbank, Cape May 1758 

Collier, Elizabeth, and John Baxter, New Jersey 1778 

Colliugs, Elsy. and Abel Sulb, Great Egg Harbour 1784 

Collins, Abigail, Burlington, and John Lippiucott, Burlington 1770 

Collins, Abigail, and William Williams, Virginia 1779 

Collius, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Ishmael Kent, Burlington 1731 

Collins, Elizabeth, and Bernard McCormick, Monmouth 1779 

Collins, Esther, Burlington, aud Isaac Evans, Burlington 1782 

Collins, Hannah, Burlington, and John Mullen, Burlington 1754 

Collins, Jane, aud Edward Johnston Collins, Gloucester 1783 

Collins, Lydia, Sussex, and Jacob Dodderer, Sussex 1763 

Collins, Man 7 , aud Michael Banker. Burlington 1741 

Collins, Mary, Monmouth, and William Britton, Long Island 1743 

Collius, Mary, aud Gershom Walling, Monmouth 1762 

Collius, Mary, Perth Amboy, aud Benjamin Van Pelt, Stateii Island. . 1763 

Collins, Mary, Gloucester, and Samuel Hugg, Gloucester 1764 

Collius, Patience, Gloucester, and George Flaniugau, Gloucester 1709 

Collins, Priscilla, Gloucester, and James Mulock, Gloucester 1757 

C jllin«, Priscilla, aud Aaron Haines, Gloucester 1772 

Collins, Rachel, Gloucester, aud Joseph Champion, Gloucester 1770 

Collins, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Caspar Fish, Gloucester 1742 

Collins, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Bates, Burlington 1747 

Collins, Sarah, and Peter Cliver, Springfield 1781 

Collins, Susanna, and Bryan Donuolly, Burlington 1738 

Collins, Susauua, Philadelphia, and Samuel Tew, Gloucester 1739 

Cobweb, Rebecca, Salem, aud Aaron Loper, Salem 1751 

Colson, Hannah, Salem, and Richard Kirby, Salem 1769 



Nov. 


17 


May 


7 


April 


16 


April 


2 


May 


31 


Feb. 


3 


June 


18 


Juue 


12 


Dec. 


23 


May 


31 





19 


May 


11 


April 


4 


Nov. 


12 


July 


15 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


6 


Dec. 


19 


Aug. 


31 


Sept. 


7 


Feb. 


23 


.Mar. 


12 


July 


24 


Dec. 


26 


Mar. 


29 


April 


1 


Aug. 


17 


Aug. 


6 


Feb. 


12 


Sept, 


9 


Nov. 


30 


Nov. 


15 


Aug. 


24 


July 


9 


Fv\>. 


17 


April 


16 


Nov. 


24 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


31 


Sept. 


19 


Aug. 


26 


May 


10 


July 


23 


Oct, 


28 


Nov. 


6 



§2 New Jersey colonial documents. 

Colton, Lydia, Philadelphia^ aud Isaac Warner, Philadelphia 1757 

Colwell, Marthew, Middletown, and John Smith, Freehold 1763 

Colwells, Nely, Monmouth, aud Frederick Bennet, Monmouth 1762 

Colyer, Mary, Salem, and John Wetherby, Salem , 1719 

Combes, Dinah, Monmouth, and Benjamin Hutchinson, Monmouth. . .1771 

Combes, Hulda, Pennington, and Robert Combs, Middlesex 1772 

Combien, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Edward Hatton, Philadelphia. . . 1731 

Combs, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and James Gilleland, Middlesex 1752 

Combs, Hetty, aud Abraham Schureman, Middlesex 1781 

Combs, Jane, and Garlon Ockarinan, Middlesex 1786 

Combs, Keziah, and John Launiug, Monmouth 1757 

Combs, Mary, Middlesex, aud Ezekiel Anderson, Hunterdon 1761 

Combs, Rachel', Middlesex, and Johu Lorton, Jr., Middlesex 1752 

Combs, Sarah, Middlesex, and Joseph Clayton, Freehold 1761 

Comes, Mary, Piscataway, and John Dowden, Piscataway 1747 

Commiuger, Elizabeth, and Absalom Howell, Trenton 1782 

Commons, Catherine, Sussex, and James Hazlett, Sussex 1771 

Compton, Elizabeth, and John Debow, Freehold 1751 

Comptou, Hannah, Monmouth, and Johu Clayton, Monmouth 1743 

Compton, Hannah, Middlesex, and Nicholas Monday, Middlesex 1757 

Compton, Judith, Middletown, aud bkelton Johnson Middletown 1752 

Compton, Margaret, Somerset, and Peter Casney, Somerset 1776 

Compton, Mary, Burlington, and William Smith, Burlington 1728 

Compton, Rachel, aud William Preston, Jr., Freehold 1715 

Compton, Rachel, Somerset, and Isaac Vail, Somerset 1762 

Compton. Rebecca, Monmouth, and Matthew Dean, Monmouth 1749 

Compton, Sarah, Monmouth, and David Baird, Monmouth 1714 

Comptou, Sarah, Somerset, and John Castner, Somerset 1754 

Compton, Sarah, Middletown, and Darling Conro, Perth Amboy 1761 

Compton, Sarah, and William Ferril, Monmouth 1780 

Comton, Alice, Freehold, and Legget Smith, Freehold 1713 

Conaro, Mary, and John B.irnet, Burlington 1788 

Coucleton, Bridget, Salem, and Jonathan Rogers Barber, Salem. . . . 1745-6 

Concklin, Hannah, and Samuel Hankinson, Hunterdon 1787 

Conder, Susannah, Evesham, and Salaways Warner, Evesham 1760 

Condict, Abigail, Morristown, and Benjamin Pirson, Jr., Morristown.. .1779 

Condict, Rebekka, Morris, and Isaac Lyon, Morris 1779 

Condon, Elizabeth, Salem, aud Thomas Johnson, Salem 1766 

Condon, Rains, Salem, and James Halladay, Salem. 1749 

Conger, Dorcas, Piscataway, and Daniel Waldron, Perth Amboy 1750 

Coningham, Sarah, Cumberland, and William Mulford, Cumberland. .1763 
Conklin, Chanty, Orange Co , N. Y., and Nicholas Lozier, Bergen .. 1771 

Conkliu, Sarah, Essex, aud Nathaniel Rusco, Essex 1717 

Conkling, Ruth, Morristown, and Stephen Whitaker, Bernards 1779 

Couuaro, Elizabeth, and William Brian, Burlington 1782 

Connarro, Sarah, Burlington, and Abel Inman, Burlington 1750 



Aug. 


25 


Jan. 


5 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


PJ 


May 


30 


Mar. 


25 


Sept. 


4 


Sept. 


19 


Mar. 


8 


July 


3 


Oct, 


31 


Nov. 


19 


Dec. 


23 


April 


25 


July 


9 


Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


21 


Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


29 


May 


21 


July 


3 


Feb. 


1 


Feb. 


25 


June 


18 


Feb. 


8 


Aug. 


12 


Oct, 


27 


Nov. 


11 


Sept. 


16 


Aug. 


12 


Sept, 


5 


Mar. 


20 


Mar. 


28 


Feb. 


27 


Dec 


5 


Dec. 


20 


June 


28 


Oct. 


2 


June 


29 


Feb. 


22 


April 


11 


Aug. 


27 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


24 


Mar. 


25 


July 


23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 93 

Conner, Mary, and Joseph Swain, New Windsor 1772 

Conuer, Rachel, Cumberland, and Jonathan Ballinger, Cumberland. .. 1769 

Conniway, Ledy, and Azariab Tain, Cape May 1708 

Connolly, Dorothy, Gloucester, and William Wallis, Gloucester 1739 

Conover, Deleh, and David Ivins, Burlington 1783 

Conoway, Nelly, Hunterdon, and -Peter Drew, Hunterdon 17G5 

Conrad, Catherine, and William Abbett, Bucks, Pa 1761 

Conrow, Abigal, Burlington, and Thomas Curtis, Burlington 1767 

Conrow, Eleanor, Burlington, and Samuel Biglow, Burlington. 1767 

Conrow, Sarah, and Thomas Haines. Burlington 1778 

Conrow, Sarah, and Nathaniel Middleton, Burlington 1790 

Cook, Catherine, and John Bruce, Monmouth 1747 

Cook, Catherine, Monmouth, and Oliver Hicks, Monmouth 1775 

Cook, Cliffy, Shrewsbury, and Benjamin Walcott, Shrewsbury 1753 

Cook, Eleanor, and William Ryerson, Essex 1789 

Cook, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Benjamin Brayley, Hunterdon 1732 

Cook, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Samuel Osborn, Shrewsbury. 1764 

Cook, Faith, Shrewsbury, and David Falkinbridge, Lt. Egg Harbour. .1767 

Cook, Francis, and Samuel Mount, Monmouth 1755 

Cook, Hannah, and Peter Andrews^ Gloucester 1779 

Cook, Jean, and Edward Dennis, Cumberland 1786 

Cook, Keziah, and John Morris, Morris 1779 

Cook, Lydia, Monmouth, and Samuel Slocura, Monmouth 1743 

Cook, Mary, Monmouth, and Jonathan Lippincott, Monmouth 1757 

Cook, Pheby, and Feter Dewitt, Monmouth 1757 

Cook, Phebe, Cumberland, and Levi Heaton, Cumberland 1777 

Cook, Rachel, and Nathaniel Leve, Cumberland 1778 

Cook, Sarah, Hunterdon, and John Stephens, Middlesex 1729 

Cook, Sarah, Monmouth, and Aaron Mattison, Monmouth 1745 

Cook, Sarah, Monmouth, and David Allen, Monmouth ... 1759 

Cook, Sarah, and Nathaniel Cornell, Hunterdon 1785 

Cook, Susannah, Monmouth, and George Howland, Monmouth 1758 

Cook, Tabitha, Sussex, and Thomas Hunt, Sussex 1770 

Cook, Tabitha, and Abner Rozell, Maidenhead 1782 

Cooke, Abigail, Burlington, and Amos Willetts, Monmouth 1743 

Cooke, Hannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Humphries, Monmouth. 175'J 

Coolbagh, Catharine, New York, and George Crolius, New York 1763 

Coole, Asabelah, Philadelphia, and William Segrave, Cape May 1740 

Cooley, Catharine, and John Christopher Hedrick, Bergen 1777 

Coon, Anna, Somerset, and Thomas Ormston, Somerset . 1751 

Coone, Anne W., Pennsylvania, and John Pureed, Pennsylvania 1761 

Coonrad, Elizabeth, and John Derrick, Burliifgtou 1780 

Coons, Mary, Somerset, and Henry Harpentine, Somerset 1742 

^Cooper, Abigail, and William Kaighin, Gloucester 1737 

Cooper, Charity, Bristol, and Samuel Wright, Bristol 1781 

Cooper, Elizabeth, and Thomas Cooper, Burlington 1758 



Feb. 


10 


Dec. 


26 


Sept. 


29 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


8 


Sept. 


18 


Feb. 


18 


Sept. 


1 


July 


28 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


21 


May 


5 


Mar. 


10 


Feb. 


27 


Sept. 


15 


Mar. 


24 


Mar. 


16 


Mar. 


18 


June 


20 


Sept. 


1 


Mar. 


22 


Feb. 


4 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


16 


Feb. 


25 


Nov. 


19 


Sept. 


28 


April 


30 


April 


17 


Dec. 


4 


Sept. 


18 


Jan. 


21 


April 


13 


Feb. 


27 


Aug. 


17 


Oct. 


23 


May 


7 


April 


3 


Nov. 


11 


May 


21 


Nov. 


27 


Jan. 


12 


Feb. 


16 


May 


30 


Sept. 


13 



94 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Cooper, Elizabeth, Morris, and Henry Wick, Jr., Morris 1760 

Cooper, Hannah, and Richard Cooper, Bergen, 1787 

Cooper, Mary, and Abraham Lyddon, Gloucester 173i 

Cooper, Mary, Burlington, and John Atkinson, Burlington 1761 

Cooper, Mary, Bristol, Pa., and Peter Bjoz, Bristol, Pa 1774 

Cooper, Mary, and John Holmes, Gloucester 1780 

Cooper, Mehitable, Morris, and William Davison, Somerset 1770 

Cooper, Phebe, Monmouth, and Patrick Fuy, Monmouth 1748 

Cooper, Providence, Morris, and Joseph Manning, Morris 1768 

Cooper, Rachell, Gljuce^ter, and James Wood, Philadelphia 1745 

Cooper, Rachel, Gloucester, and James Wood, Jr., Philadelphia 1745 

Cooper, Rebeca, and Amos Winner 1779 

Cooper, Ruth, Pennsylvania, and Dennis Pircell, Pennsylvania 1728 

Cooperax, Mary, Middletown, and Daniel Robinson, Middletown 1764 

Coopper, Phebe, Freehold, and Benjamin Woliey, Shrewsbury 1758 

Coorson, Sarah, Monmouth, and Peter Harvey, Monmouth 1767 

Coperthwait, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Vanmeter, Salem.. . . 1770 
Copperthwaite, Rebecca, Burlington, and David Garrison, Salem. . ..1770 

Copperthwaite, Mary, and Joseph Griggs, Monmouth 1778 

Copner, Abigail, and Ebenezer Dunn, S ilern.. 1772 

Copner, Sarah, and Matthias Lambson, Salem 17-"8 

Copper, Mary, Freehold, and Charles Reid, Freehold 1767 

Coppiuger, Mary, Sussex, and William Foot, Sussex 1772 

Coppuck, Sarah, Burlington, and James Miller, Burlington . . 1761 

Cordery, Sarah, and Jonathan Steelman, Galloway 1783 

Cordry, Rebecca, Burlington, and John L?eds, Burlington 1737 

Cordury, Elizabeth, and Amos Ireland, Gloucester 1781 

Core, Elizabeth, Burlington, and James Robius, Burlington 1737 

Corin, Lydia, anil Samuel Cramer, Burlington 1784 

Corkaran, Sarah, Gloucester, and Isaac Dilks, Gloucester 1753 

Corker, Elizabeth, Backs, Pa., and William Hawkins, Philadelphia ..1742 

Corkell, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Homau, Gloucester 1745 

Corkiu, Catherine, Burlington, and William Baker, Burlington 1739 

Corle, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Samuel Furman, Somerset. . . 1748 

Corle, Mary, and Isaac Cool, Somerset 1781 

Corle, Sarah, and Daniel Manning, Somerset 1781 

Corless, Exercise, Monmouth, and William Shinn, Burlington 1739 

Corlies, Mary, Monmouth, and Joshua Bond, Monmouth ... 1745 

Corlis, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Thomas Cox, Shrewsbury 1749 

Cornel, Margareta, Somerset, aud Roleph Vorhuyse, Middlesex 1745 

Cornel, Martha, Hunterdon, and David Baldwin, Hunterdon 1775 

Corneliuson, Mary, Salem, and Isaac Zane, Gloucester 1769 

Cornelinson, Ann, Penns Neck, and Daniel Nelson, Piles Grove 1762 

Cornell, Jemima, Upper Freehold, and Robert Vaughn, Up. Freehold 1763 

Cornell, Nautchy, and Peter Buckerlew, Middlesex 1784 

Cornell, Maria, Somerset, aud John Van Nortwick, Somerset 1747 



Feb. 


4 


May 


11 


May 


11 


Nov. 


12 


May 


3 


Jan. 


1 


Dec. 


22 


Mar. 


30 


June 


8 


Jan. 


14 


Jan. 


14 


May 


1 


Sept. 


18 


Mar. 


7 


May 


31 


Nov. 


18 


Mar. 


17 


Mar. 


17 


Dec. 


14 


June 


11 


Dec. 


14 


Aug. 


29 


July 


4 


Aug. 


19 


Jan. 


8 


June 


7 


July 


2 


Nov. 


2 


June 


16 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


14 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


3 


May 


24 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


2-5 


June 


6 


June 


2 


Sept. 


20 


Dec. 


5 


May 


30 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


21 


Sept. 


5 


April 


3 


Sept. 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 95 

Cornell, Maria, Somerset, and Simon Van Nortwick, Somerset 1751 April 12 

Cornell, Marthew, and Moses Moore 1783 Feb. 25 

Cornell, Sarah, and Samuel Howell, Hunterdon 1782 Dec. 5 

Cornelly, Mary, and David Ogden, Middlesex 17(58 Mar. 28 

Cornish, Elizabeth, and Joshua Palmer, Pennsylvania 17C6 Nov. 2G 

Cornish, Hanah, Nottingham, and Joseph Smith, Nottingham 1764 Aug. 1 

Comwill, Meire and James Lie, Bergen 1766 Nov. 29 

Corry, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Hugh Ross, Philadelphia 1732 June 4 

Corshun, Catharine, and Johu Stevenson, Atnwell 1782 June 1 1 

Corson, Ann, Cape May, and John Leonard, Cape May 1732 Dec. 29 

Corson, Deborah, and John Drummond, Gloucester 1772 Feb. 9 

Corson, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Jotham Townseud, Cape May 1776 May 21 

Corson, Judith, Cape May, and William Eldridge, Cape May 1778 Dec. 10 

Corson, Lydia, Cape May, and Isaac Dinar, Cape May 1740 June 20 

Corson, Raamab, Cape May, and Richard Tomson, Cape May 1741 Dec. 19 

Corson, Rachel, Cape May, and Joseph Corson, Cape May 1759 Jan. 22 

Corson, Rachel, Cape May, and Isaac Dole, Cape May 1761 Oct. 28 

Corson, Roada, Cape May, aul William Robinson, Cape May 1754 Aug. 13 

Corson, Susannah, Cape May, and James Conaway, Cape May 1741 May 14 

Corson, Zabiah, Cape May, and Joseph Hildreth, Cape May 1748 Feb. 16 

Corwine, Rachel, Atnwell, and Jacob Williamson, Amwell 1775 Dec. 11 

Coryell, Amelia, and John Prall, Amwell 1785 Feb. 7 

Cosby, Grace, and 'lhomas Freeman, New York 1733 June 14 

Cosier, Lidia, Gloucester, and Solomon Manning, Gloucester 1747 June 12 

Cotheal, Rachael, Middlesex, and Neil Campbell, Middlesex 1763 Jan. 10 

Cotterell, Mary, Monmouth, and John Applegate, Monmouth 1748 Sept. 27 

Cottrile, Rebekah, Shrewsbury, and Thomas Romine, Shrewsbury. . . . 1752 Nov. 23 

Coueuover, Sophiah, Gt. Egg Harb'r, and James Steelman, Gt. Eg. H. .1772 Dec. 23 

Congal, Elizabeth, and William Perkins, Gloucester 1784 Nov. 11 

Coulton, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Lewis, Monmouth. .. 1749-50 Jan. 26 

Coulton, Hannih, and John Russel, Shrewsbury 1749 Jan. 23 

Coulton, Marry, Monmouth, and Thomas Borden 1746 Jan. 29 

Couper, Elysabeth, and James Van Emburg, New Barbadoes 1769 Feb. 28 

Coursen, Catherine, Hunterdon, and Peter Perine, Hunterdon 1 746 Aug. 22 

Coursen, Charity, Hunterdon, and Benjamin Cole, Hunterdon 1752 Aug. 11 

Cousins, Mary, Springfield, and Marmaduke Fort, Burlington 1738 Dec. 2 

Cousins, Mary, Essex, and Moses Ogden, E^sex 1746 Oct. 29 

Cov, Mary, Staten Island, and Thomas Butler, Staten Island 1758 May 22 

Covenhoven, Anne, Monmouth, and William Covenhoven, Monm'th. 1743-4 Mar. 16 

Covenhoveu, Anne, and Cornelius Quick, Amwell 1771 Dec. 11 

Covenhoven, Aultie, Monmouth, and John Beunet, Monmouth 1761 Aug. 10 

Covenhoven, Catharine, Middlet'n, and Nicholas Van Brunt Shrewsb'y. 1767 Jan. 15 

Covenhoven, Coboacha, Freehold, and Cyrenius Van Mater, Jr., Mdn 1766 Mar. 31 

Covenhoven, Elenor, and Richard Sansbury, Amwell 1764 July 19 

Covenhoven, Heudrica, and John Campbell, Monmouth 1761 Nov. 30 

Coveuhoven, Hester, Bergen, and Reynier Vaugiese, Bergen ... 1743 Mar. 20 



g6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Covenhoven, Jane, Monmouth, ami Peter Longstreet, Monmouth 1765 Dec. 19 

Covenhoven, Jean, Monmouth, and Peter Schanck, Monmouth 1717 Dec. 26 

Covenhoven, Lenah, Monmouth, and Benjamin Vancleeve, Jr., Mon. .1741 Aug. 1 

Covenhoven, Mary, Monmouth, and John Schanck, Monmouth 1752 Dec. 19 

Covenhoven, Mary, Freehold, and Peter Schanck, Freehold 1753 June 11 

Covenhoven, Mary, Middletowu, and Dauiel Van Mater, Monmouth. . 1754 Dec. 27 
Covenhoven, Mary, Freehold, and Cornelius Vauderveer, Freehold. ... 1764 Sept. 17 
Covenhoven, Patience, Monmouth, and Albert Covenhoven, Monm'th 1765 Nov. 21 
Covenhoven, Sarah, Middletown, and Garret Schanck, Middletowu. .. 1762 Jan. 5 
Covenhoven, Sarah, Monmouth, and Benjamin Van Cleeve, Monm'th 17613 July 11 

Covenhoven, Sary, Freehold, and Joseph Thompson, Freehold 1767 Feb. 19 

Covenhoven. Williamtic, Middletown, and Matthias Covenhoven, Mid. 1719 July 27 
Covenoven, Catharine, Freehold, and Daniel Vauderveer, Freehold. .. 1765 Feb. 28 
Covenoven, Margaret, Middletown, and Philip Wyukoop, Philadelphia. 1735 Mar. 9 
Covenoven, Mary, Burlington, and Reddock Townsend, Burlington. .. 1736 Dec. 9 

Covenover,' Mary, and Elias Gaudy, Gt. Egg Harbour. . . 1761 Sept. 26 

Covenover, Patience, Monmouth, and Samuel Bowne, Monmouth. . . . 1751 Sept. 3 

Covenover, Sarah, and Jacob Eldridge, Gloucester 1761 A.ug. 21 

Covenover, Sarah, Gloucester, and David Adams, Gloucester 1771 April 18 

Covert, Tainche, Monmouth, and George lieid, Jr., Monmouth 1713 July 18 

Covinoven, Ledy, Monmouth, and Hendrick Hendrickson, Monmouth. 1757 Mar. 7 
Cowan, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jeremiah Bloomtiekl, Burlington . . 1773 June 28 

Coward, Alice, and John Brown, Burlington 1759 Feb. 7 

Coward, Deliverance, and James Randolph, Monmouth 1760 Mar. 15 

Coward, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Sill, Jacobstown ...... 1765 May 20 

Coward, Rebecca, and Tobias Heudricksou, Monmouth 1762 Mar. 6 

Cowenhoveu, Katheriue, and Adam Jobs, Samerset 1782 April 1 

Cowgill, Beulah, and John West, Springfield 1781 Nov. 10 

Cowgill, Rachael, Burlington, and Samuel Woodward, Burlington 1728 Sept. 16 

Cowgill, Sarah, Burlington, and John Munyon, Burlington 1738 April 25 

Cowgill, Susannah, and John King, Monmouth 1737 Sept. 24 

Coueman, Marget.l Essex, and Thomas Vanrypen, Essex 1750 April 17 

Cownover, Rebecca, and James Scull, Gt. Egg Harbour.. 1783 Sept, 11 

Cowperthwaite, Hannah, and Benjamin Stockton, Burlington 1779 Nov. 29 

Cowvenoven, Sarah, Middletown, and Jacob Wikoff, Shrewsbury 1751 Jan. 7 

Cox, Abigail, and Hezekiah Kemble, Gloucester 1780 Jan. 29 

Cox, Amy, Burlington, and Bartholomew Coppock, Burlington 1730 Aug. 4 

Cox, Ann, Monmouth, and Zichariah Coulten, Middlesex 1750 Dec. 25 

Cox Ann, Middlesex, and William Corlis, Burlington . . 1756 June 3 

Cox, Anne, and John Hendrickson, Burlington 1763 Nov. 14 

Cox, Bythiui;), and John Wills, Willin^borough < 1763 Aug. 19 

Cox, Catherine, Gloucester, and Samuel Cozens, Gloucester 17E4 Mar. 2 

Cox, Catherine, Upper Freehold, and Thomas Van Kirk, Freehold . . 1761 Jan. 7 
Cox, Catherine, Monmouth, and Benjamin Loxley, Philadelphia 1761 Sept. 1 

i One of the sureties (probably her father) signs his name " Hendrick Coeymans of Essex 
county." 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 97 

Cox, Deborah, and Thomas MoCurtain, Monmouth.. 1771 Jan. 19 

Cox, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Richard Compton, Jr., Monmouth. ... 1727 Jan. 15 

Cox, Elizabeth, and Samuel Mead, Monmouth.. .... 17G0 Nov. 1 

Cox, Elizabeth, Williugborongb, and Elisha Read, Willingborough 17G5 July 3 

Cox, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and James Cox, Monmouth 1769 Feb. 25 

Cox, Ellinor, Burlington, and Benjamin Perkins, Burlington 1731 June 13 

Cox, Hannah, Gloucester, and Nixon Chatlin, Gloucester 1719 May 23 

Cox, Hauuar, Freehold, and John Reynolds, Freehold 1762 Jan. 23 

Cox, Hannah, and Joseph Burdsell, Monmouth 1783 Nov. 20 

Cox, Jane, and Hugh Caldwell, Gloucester. 1736 April 29 

Cox, Katherine, Gloucester, and Andrew Long, Gloucester 1730 Dec. 2 

Cox, Marah, Shrewsbury, and Richard Allen, New York 1754 Mar. 25 

Cox, Mary, New Brunswick, and Nathaniel Stillwell, New Brunswick .1710 Aug. 28 

Cox, Mary, Freehold, Thomas Newton, Freehold 1743 May 20 

Cox, Rachel, Bloomsbury, and John Stevens, Jr., Trenton 1782 Oct. 15 

Cox, Rebekab, Monmouth, and Joseph Norcross, Monmouth 1718 Aug. 1 

Cox, Rebekah, and John Morris, Middlesex 1763 Feb. 2-1 

Cox, Rebekah, and William Mount, Monmouth 1 775 Nov. 20 

Cox, Robena, Pennsylvania, and John Vansant, Pennsylvania ....... 1728 Ang. 19 

Cox, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Bryan, Burlington 1730 Nov. 22 

Cox, Sarah, Middlesex, and Christopher Beekman, Middlesex 1741 Nov. 12 

Cox, Sarah, Hunterdon, and John Shaw, Shrewsbury 1770 Feb. 20 

Coxe, Fanny, Burlington, and Thomas Bryan, Burlington 1760 Dec. 31 

Coxe, Grace, and Le Kay de Chaumonti 1789 July 17 

Coxe, Mary, Monmouth, and William Enelman, Monmouth 1729 April 28 

Coxe, Mary, Monmouth, and John Liming, Monmouth 1740 Nov. 4 

Coxe, Mercy, Upper Freehold, and Ephraim Robins, Upper Freehold.. 1746 April 21 

Coxe, Mercy, and Thomas French, Burlington 1769 April 22 

Coxe, Phebe, Cape May, and Charles Stilman, Gt. Egg Harbour 1761 Dec. 18 

Coxe, Sarah, Philadelphia, and William Monington, Burlington 1772 Feb. 14 

Cozens, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Norton, Burlington 1727 Feb. 3 

Cozens, Hannah, Gloucester, and Jacob Horner, Gloucester 1764 Dec. 29 

Cozens, Mary, and Richard Maffet, Gloucester, 1785 Feb. 24 

Craford, Elizabeth, Salem, and Andrew Paget, Salem 1727 June 10 

Craford, Elizabeth, and John Richardson, Cape May 1756 Dec. 17 

Craford, Rachel, Cape May, and Jeremiah Hand, Cape May 1739 Mar. 17 

Craford, Sarah, Cape May, and Ezekiel Eldridge, Cape May 1741 April 14 

Craft, Ann, Burlington, and John Loveless, Burlington 1742 Nov. 15 

Craft, Catherine, Monmouth, and Francis Harbert, Monmouth 1752 Nov. 10 

Craft, Grace, Burlington, and John Lanuing, Burlington 1761 Nov. 11 

Craft, Margaret, and John Renier, Burlington 1734 Dec. 23 

Craft, Mary, and Solomon Brown, Monmouth 1762 Dec. 29 

Craft, Mary, Burlington, and Amos English, Burlington 1765 Mar. 6 

i So he signs the bond. In the body of the instrument the name is entered as James 
Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont. 

7 



98 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Crage, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas Bullman, Jr., Monmouth 1765 

Crager, Martha, Woodbridge, and Joseph Haviland, Perth Amboy .... 1752 

Craig, Catherine, aud Johu Loyd, New Jersey 1745 

Craig, Mary, Monmouth, and Peter Gordon, New Jei - sey 1712 

Craig, Rebecca, Somerset, and William Hutton, Somerset. ... 1758 

Craig, Susannah, and Anthony Shank, Bucks Co., Pa 1783 

Craige, Gertrude, Monmouth, and William Hamton, Monmouth 1747 

Craige, Elizabeth, Freehold, and William Van Kirk, Freehold 1757 

Cramer, Sarah, and Joseph Gaskill .... 1768 

Cramer, Dinah, and Daniel Johnson, Egg Harbor 1747 

Cramer, Lydia, Burlington, and Abel Gale, Burlington 1710 

Cramer, Mary, and David Cavalier, Little Egg Harbour 1782 

Cramer, Pkebe, aud John Mott, Burlington 1738 

Cramer, Zuby, and Benjamin Pridmore. Monmouth 1778 

Crammer, Ann, and Abraham Gaskill, Burlington 1784 

Crammer, Barthial, Burlington, and Robert Webb, Jr., Burlington., . 1751 
Crammer, Marah, Monmouth, and Andrew Allin, Monmouth ...... .1754 

Crammer, Marcy, aud John Matins, Little Egg Harbor . . 1781 

Crammer, Sarah, Monmouth, aud William Camburn, Monmouth. ...1763 

Crammer, Susannah, aud Joel Westcoat, Galloway . 1784 

Crane, Abigail, and John Wiggins, Trenton 1784 

Crane, Ann, Newark, aud Ebenezer Davis, Newark.. ... 1750 

Crane, Fanny, and Lawrence Johnson, Hunterdon 1778 

Crane, Hannah, and John Gilford 1779 

Craue, Katerine, Essex, and Stephen Ward. Essex . 1779 

Crauford, Margaret, South Amboy, and James Price, South Amboy. . . 1760 

Cranford, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Smith. Middletown 1766 

Cranmer, Sarah, and Joseph Aller, Little Egg Harbor 1783 

Cranson, Ann, Bristol, Pa., and Lovit Streaker, Bristol, Pa 1776 

Craven, Anne, aud Benjamin Ruge, Salem 1731 

Craven, Grace, Salem, and John Owen. Salem 1758 

Crawford, Caturah, aud Johu Patten, Freehold 1766 

Crawford, Catherine, Elizabeth Town, and John Barclay, Balkinridge. 1719 
Crawford, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and William Payday, Gloucester ...1750 

Crawford, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Enos Buck, Cape May 1773 

Crawford, Elizabeth, and Authony Warrick, Gloucester 1775 

Crawford, Lydia, Middletown, and Cornelius Compton, Middletown. . 1756 

Crawford, Mary, and Benjamin Gibbous, Monmouth 1754 

Crawford, Sarah, aud James Simpson, Gloucester 1772 

Crawford, Zeruiah, Freehold, aud Stephen Vanbrackel, Monmouth.. 1718-9 

Crawley, Judah, Somerset, and Johu Pechet, Somerset 1712 

Cray ton, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Thomas. Barry, Perth Amboy 1750 

Creasey, Mary, and Jeremiah Corsen. Cape May 1763 

Creaton, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and David Johuson, Bucks, Pa 1775 

Creeger, Christian, aud Andrew Thompson, Hunterdon 1780 

Creesey, Comfort, Gloucester, aud Elias Steelmau, Gloucester ...... .1732 



Nov. 


22 


Sept. 


30 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


13 


Oct, 


2 


Dec. 


13 


Sept. 


30 


Aug. 


23 


Dec. 


5 


May 


14 


June 


16 


Sept, 


19 


Aug. 


7 


Oct, 


8 


Aug. 


18 


May 


9 


June 


3 


Aug 


16 


Oct. 


13 


Dec. 


8 


Mar. 


22 


Mar. 


18 


June 


8 


April 


7 


Mar. 


22 


Sept. 


2 


April 


24 


May 


19 


June 


20 


Mar. 


20 


April 


26 


June 


5 


April 


6 


Oct. 


24 


May 


3 


Oct. 


5 


July 


30 


Mar. 


12 


Jan. 


7 


Mar. 


22 


Sept. 


27 


Aug. 


15 


Sept, 


24 


Aug. 


5 


Julv 


22 


Dec. 


16 



-MARRIAGE LICENSES. 99 

Cregeir, Martha, Staten Island, and John Stevens, Staten Island 1741 Sept. 8 

Creidock, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John McCaffarty, .Monmouth.. . .1744 April 21 

Cresey, Rachel, and Jothatn Townseml, Cape May 17(58 Nov. 14 

Cresse, Abigail, and Return Badcook, Gape May 1783 Feb. 22 

Cresse, Esther, Cape May, and Richard Edmunds, Cape May 1769 June 21 

Cresse, Hanuah, aud Thomas Matthews, Cape May 1768 Jan. 8 

Cresse, Hannah, Cape May, and Thomas Pratteu, Cape May 1769 June 21 

Cresse, Priscilla, and Permenas Corson, Cape May 1775 Nov. 1 

Cresse, Prudence, and Joshua Billings, Cape May 1787 Jan. 10 

Cresse, Rachel, Cape May, and Nathan Godfrey, Cape May 1780 Sept. 11 

Cresse, Sarah, Cape May, and Thomas Smith, Cape May 1739 Nov. 15 

Cressey, Hannah, aud Isaiah Stiles, Cape May. .■ 1770 Dec. 19 

Cressej', Marcy, Cape May, and Reeves Iszard, Cape May 1761 Jan. 12 

Creveling, Christina, and Jacob Waller, Sussex 1769 Nov. 27 

Crtbbs, Jane, and William Stebins, Burlington 1770 Dec. 7 

Crigh, Catherine, and Philip Young, Somerset 1779 Jan. 19 

Crippe, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Kingston, Burlington 1741 Mar. 23 

Cripps, Martha, Burlington, and Jasper Moon, Burlington 1773 Sept. 1 

Cripps, Mary, and Peter Anderson, Gloucester 1785 Mar. 14 

Crispen, Sarah, Burlington, and William Eldridge, Burlington 1772 Jan. 20 

( 'rispin, Abigail, and William Lecouey, Burlington 1787 Oct. 31 

Crispin, Hannah, Burlington, and Richard Stockton, Burlington 1768 April 28 

Crispin, Hannah, and James Lippincott, Burlington 1777 Sept. 20 

Crispin, Margaret, Burlington, and Richard Prickitt, Burlington 1756 April 9 

Crispin, Martha, Evesham, and David Wills, Evesham 1750 Jan. 21 

Crispin, Mary, Burlington, aud Eber Bishop, Burlington 1782 Feb. 23 

Critch, Mary, and Philip Wickart, Northampton 1781 Feb. 27 

Crocher, Ann, Salem, and William Price, Salem 1086-7 Aug. 10 

Crockford, Hannah, Burlington, and Richard Brian. Burliugton 1754 Jan. 23 

Croney, .Ann, Burlington, and George Mitchell, Burlington 1782 Mar. 2 

Crooks, Elizabeth, aud Thomas Twining, Kingwood 1781 Sept. 27 

Crooks, Elizabeth, and John Cooke, Sussex. 1768 June 18 

Crosby, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Marriatt, Burlington 1739 May 12 

Crosby, Susannah, Burlington, and Joseph Beesley, Burlington 1766 Nov. 20 

Croshaw, Sarah, Springfield, aud Abraham Zilley, Springfield 1773 Oct. 19 

Cross, Deborah, Somerset, and Henry Sirnson, Sussex 1754 June 25 

Cross, Ketrin, Somerset, and Joseph Boyle, Morris 1776 May 1 

Cross, Marj', Burlington, and William Foster, Burlington 1779 Dec. 9 

On ss, Susannah, Burlington, and John Poiused, Burliugton 1746 Sept. 28 

Crossley, Martha, Burlington, and John Adair, Burliugton 1774 Dec. 5 

Croston, Eleanora, and Robert Wilson, Gloucester 1783 Sept. 30 

Crow, Elizabeth, Salem, and Edward Saughurst, Salem 1733 May 16 

Crow, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Joseph Drake, Jr., Middlesex 1764 Mar. 27 

Crow, Sarah, Middlesex, and Henry Cothell, Middlesex 1763 Feb. 10 

Crowe, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Kezia Runyon, Middlesex 1761 Dec. 29 

Crowel, Experience, Cape May, and Jacob Hand, Cape May 1748 June 8 



100 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Crowell, Abigail, and Levi Eldridge, Cape May 1776 Aug. 7 

Crowell, Agnes, Middlesex, and Eli Potter, Middlesex 1763 Jan. 31 

Crowell, Annabel, Woodbridge, and Thomas Hadden, Jr., Woodb'ge . . 1758 Nov. 15 

Crowell, Catherine, Woodbridge, and Reuben Evans, Woodbridge ...1754 Oct. 21 

Crowell, Catherine, and Joshua Wright, Richmond, N. Y 1784 Oct. 31 

Crowell, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Ephraim Bancroft, Cape May 1763 June 8 

Crowell, Hannah, Cape May, and Jonathan Whilden, Cape May 1772 Nov. 16 

Crowell, Phebe, Cape May, and Ezekiel Eldridge, Cape May 1768 Oct. 18 

Crowell, Rhoda, Cape May, and Isaiah Stites, Cape May 1738 April 29 

Crowell, Rhoda, and James Sehillinger, Cape May 1780 June 27 

CrowelJ, Ruth, Cape May, and Abraham Reeves, Cape May 1775 Oct. 22 

Crowell, Sally, Monmouth, and George Taylor, Monmouth 1766 July 29 

Crowell, Sarah, Cape May, and Silas Hand, Cape May 1751 April 22 

Croxson, Elisabeth, Monmouth, and Richard Mitchel, Monmouth 1763 Sept. 23 

Crura, Sarah, Filesgrove, and Ephraim Vanmeter, Pilesgrove 1760 April 21 

Crusea, Mary, Bergen, and Nicholas Lozier, Bergen 1768 Sept. 2 

Crusee, Helenah, and Samuel Stout, (minor), Somerset 1779 April 24 

Crussie, Alice, and Samuel Hunt, Morris 1780 Sept. 30 

Cruzee, Catharine, and Rynear Mene, Somerset 1780 Apiil 1 

Cubberly, Mary, New Windsor, and William Tindall, New Windsor . . 1770 Mar. 28 

Culver, Eunice, Monmouth, and Jeremiah Bacon, Monmouth 1762 Nov. 6 

Cummin, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and Jacob Wurtz, Bucks, Pa 1762 Mar. 31 

Cumming, Catharine, Freehold, and Philip Stockton, Somerset 1767 April 9 

Gumming, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and John White, Perth Amboy.. .1757 Oct. 3 

Cumminge, Esther, and Joseph Smith, Middlesex 1764 July 27 

Cumpton, Hannar, Middletown, and David Stout, Middletown 1759 April 9 

Cumpton, Lydia, Monmouth, and Benjamin Morris, Monmouth 1767 June 1 

Cunningham, Ann, and Amos Shiun, Springfield 1777 April 5 

Cunningham, Catharine, Monmouth, and Preserve Potter, Monmouth 1742 July 22 

Cunningham, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Richard Green, Burlington. .1764 July 2 

Cunningham, Elizabeth, and Joseph Busson, Burlington 1766 Dec. 31 

Cunningham, Jemina, and Andrew Fanner, Burlington 1763 Dec. 17 

Cunningham, Mary, Monmouth, and Daniel Robins, Middlesex 1767 Oct. 3 

Cunningham, Rachel, Mannington, and William Smith, Manniugton. .1761 Dec. 11 

Cunningham, Sarah, Springfield, and Amos Shinu, Springfield 1774 Mar. 11 

Cuntrymau, Mary, and Adam Snook, Sussex 1768 Dec. 8 

Curlis, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Jonathan Herbert, Monmouth 1760 Dec. 30 

Curlis, Hannah, Monmouth, and Ebenezer Wardell, Monmouth 1753 Sept. 27 

Curlis, Jane, Monmouth, and John Willgus, Monmouth 1741-5 Mar. 16 

Curlis, Mehitabel, Monmouth, and Caleb Shinn, Monmouth 1739 Jan. 2 

Currant, Margaret, and William Adaire, Bristol, Pa 1759 July 13 

Currey, Juliana, and Robert Harberson, Salem 1785 Dec. 21 

Currey, Marget, and George Peterson, Upper Penns Neck 1782 June 19 

Curtin, Mary, and William Hay, Burlington 1770 Aug. 3 

Curtis, Abigail, and John Paine, Jr 1699 Aug. 8 

Curtis, Diadama, Burlington, and Adin Pancoast, Burlington 1762 April 22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 10 1 

Curtis, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Henry Cooper, Burlington 1735 May 13 

Curtis, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Merritt, Burlington 1770 June 28 

Curtis, Hester, Burlington, and William Hancock, Burlington 1732 June 5 

Curtis, Jerusba, Burlington, and Samuel Goldy, Burlington 1765 Feb. 2 

Curtis, Lidy, Shrewsbury, and William Pearce, Shrewsbury 1766 Jan. 28 

Curtis, Margaret, Bridgetown, and Zachariah Rosell, Bridgetown 1748 Jan. 25 

Curtis, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and Michael Price, Shrewsbury 1760 May 21 

Curtis, Mary, Gloucester, and Richard Buckley, Gloucester 1733 July 4 

Curtis, Mary, and Ashfordby Orrason, Hunterdon 1784 Sept. 7 

Curtis, Myrtilla, and Thomas Platts, Alloways Creek 1781 May 3 

Curtis, Rachel, Monmouth, and Samuel Tallman, Monmouth 1765 June 26 

Curtis, Rebaccah, and John Mead, Pomptou 1785 Mar. 17 

Curtis, Sarah, Monmouth, and William Bennet, Monmouth 1746 Jan. 29 

Curtis, Sarah, Kingwood, Edward Taylor, Kiugwood 1774 April 16 

Curtis, Mary Monmouth, and Adam Brewer, Monmouth 1761 Aug. 28 

Cushlow, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Kelley, Salem 1768 Dec. 24 

Cutler, Charity, and John Kent, Middlesex 1769 Feb. 8 

Cutler, Christina, Woodbridge, and Edward Potter, Woodbridge 1761 Dec. 28 

Cutler, Martha, Salem, and John Kidd, Salem 1729 May 1 

Cutler, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Rockhill, Bucks, Pa 1736 April 8 

Cutler, Ellen, and Samuel Brown, Monmouth 1762 Aug. 7 

Cuypher, Catherine, Bergea, and David Ackermau, Bsrgen. . 1769 April 22 

Cuyper, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Lambert Smith, Orange Cx, N. Y. ... 1761 Jan. 26 

Cyphars, Mary, Evesham, and John Smith, Evesham ' 1774 Oct. 22 

Cyphers, Elizabeth, and Joseph Lee, Hunterdon 1766 Nov. 29 

MALES. D 

Dabzell, Kennedy, Somerset, and Elizabeth Mayhew 1769 Feb. 

Dalles, - Alexander, New York, and Margaret Dalles, Perth Amboy 1764 Jan. 20 

Dallej', John, Somerset, and Hannah Stoll, Hunterdon 1772 Mar. 3 

Dalle}', Philip, Reading Town, and Mercy Jones, Reading Town 1748 Jan. 12 

Dally, Henry, Middlesex, and Sarah Gilford, Perth Amboy 1739 Kov. 9 

Dalton, Henry, Burlington, and Hannah Hammock 1777 Dec. 13 

Dalton, Miles, and Catherine Milligan 1762 Mar. 7 

Dalrimple, Joseph, Morris, and Jane Boyle 1745 May 24 

Dancer, John, Middlesex, and Mary Brown , 1769 June 13 

Dauford, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Groom 1737 Sept. 12 

Dangerfleld, William, Burlington, and Esther Foster 1778 April 6 

Daniel, Aaron, Salem, and Margaret Watson, Salem 1766 Nov. 29 

Daniel, Aaron, Salem, and Martha Stretch 1791 Mar. 29 

Daniel, John, Hunterdon, and Catherine McDaniel 1778 June 5 

Daniels, Aaron, Salem, and Melissa Hancock 1787 Oct. 9 

Daniels, Clement, Cape May, and Deborah Youngs 1737 Oct. 24 

Daniels, Eli, Cumberland, and Polley Woolson, Cape May 1776 Mar. 20 

Daniels, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Sarah Sear 1 780 Sept. 22 

Daniels, John, Morris River, and Lydia White 1759 Aug. 22 



102 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Daniels, John, Cumberland, and Mary Newconib, Cumberland 1770 

Daniels, John, Gloucester, and Phebe Stilwell 1788 

Daniels, Thomas, Cape May, and Mary Golding, Cape May 1740 

Danilson, William, Somerset, and Dorothy Kenoey, Somerset 1750 

Darby, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Uamton, Monmouth 1762 

Darbyshire, John, Burlington, and Elinor Gregg, Burlington 1731 

Dare, Amos, Salem, and Rachel Wood 1775 

Dare, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Mary Dare, Cumberland 1773 

Dare, Benone, Cumberland, and Clemens Withneau, Cumberland . . . 1760 

Dare, David, Cumberland, and Ruth Peck 1778 

Dare, Reuben, Cumberland, and Rhoda Stevens, Cumberland 1760 

Darnion, Jesse, Gloucester, and Abigail Pew 1783 

Dassigney, Benjamin, New Brunswick, and Anue Beekman, N. B'wk. .1750 

Daugherty, Michael, Salem, and Martha Edwards, Salem 1763 

Davan, John, New York, and Anne Marshall, Elizabethtown 1757 

Davenport, Jacob, Morris, and Hannah McLain, Morris 1784 

Davenport, Joseph. Gloucester, and Catherine Halton, Gloucester ...1771 

Davenport, Samuel, Burlington, and Ruth Price, Burlington 1765 

Davenport, William, Perth Ambny, and Sarah Langworthy, P'th Am. . . 1762 

Davice, Jonathan Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Albertis, Trenton 1710 

Davidson, John, Burlington, and Amy Hay 1772 

Davidson, John, Burlington, and Ann Shiun . . .' 1778 

Davidson, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Eastlack 1777 

Davidson William, Burlington, and Licey Holdou, Burlington. . . . . 1746 
Davies, Benjamin, Philadelphia, and Hannah Chandler, Philadelphia. 1766 

Davies, David, Burlington, and Jane Stackhouse, Pennsylvania 1731 

Davies, John, Burlington, and Hannah Carter, Burlington . . 1736 

Davies, John, Burlington, and Martha Ward, Burlington 1765 

Davis, Andrew, Burlington and Mary Hatkinson 1781 

Davis, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Mary Woolley, Monmouth 1749 

Davis, David, Burlington, and Jane Philips 1759 

Davis, David, Gloucester, and Rachel Pine 1781 

Davis, Ebenezer, Newark, and Ann Crane, Newark 1750 

Davis, Elias, Middlesex, and Mary Carman 1767 

Davis, Enoch, Middletowu, aud Elizabeth Abrahams, Perth Amboy. . .1754 

Davis, Enoch, Monmouth, and Anua Swindon, Monmouth 1762 

Davis, Henry, New Brunswick, and Margaret Brown, New Brunswick. 1746 

Davis, Howell, Burlington, and Margaret Antrum 1761 

Davis, Isaac, Cumberland, and Mary Anna David, Salem 1767 

Davis, James, Monmouth, and tfebecca Brand, Monmouth 1765 

Davis, James, Burlington, and Jane Richardson, Burlington 1774 

Davis, John, Burlington, and Deadeina Bishop, Burlington 1762 

Davis, John, Middlesex, and Isabella Bayler 1784 

Davis, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Amvni Davis 1783 

Davis, Jonathan, Chester, Pa., and Martha Garwood, Burlington. ... 1783 
Davis, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Reynolds 1737 



Jan. 


30 


Nov. 


10 


July 


2 


Oct. 


25 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


12 


July 


25 


April 


7 


May 


9 


Dec. 


15 ( 


Dec. 


6 


May 


7 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


15 


Nov. 


1 


April 


17 


Jan. 


10 


Jan. 


1 


May 


12 


April 


23 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


4 


Oct. 


4 


April 


29 


Aug. 


9 


May 


11 


Sept. 


10 


May 


1 


Dec. 


11 


Sept. 


14 


Sept. 


29 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


5 


Nov. 


22 


Oct. 


20 


July 


14 


April 


18 


Sept. 


23 


July 


1 


May 


9 


Mar. 


8 


Mav 


1 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


17 


Mar. 


31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 103 

Davis, Joseph, Monmouth, and Jane Tyson, Monmouth 1739 

Davis, .Joseph, Monmouth, and Upkam Amock, Monmouth 1754 

Davis, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail Havens, Burlington ...1756 

Davis, Joseph. Burlington, and Mary Davis, Burlington 1760 

Davis, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Sarah Phillips . 1779 

Davis, Nathan, Monmouth, and Anne v Gifford, Monmouth 17G1 

Davis, Richard, Somerset, and Mary Fitchel, Somerset 1740 

Davis, Richard, and Phebe Adams 1756 

Davis, Samuel, Bergen, and Nancy Harrison 1750 

Davis, Samuel, Cumberland, and Mary Ferry, Hopewell . . 1759 

Davis, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Alice Hampton 1781 

Davis, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Kelly 1783 

Davis, Samuel C, Gloucester, and Ann Rowand 1790 

Davis, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Sarah Price 1733 

Davis, Thomas, Piscataway, and Anne Smalley, Piscataway 1750 

Davis, Thomas, Somerset, and Anne Probasco 1779 

Davis, William, Perth Amboy, and Honor Mack Dowall, Perth Amboy. 1740 

Davis, William, Burlington, and Sarah Stockton, Burlington 1761 

Davis, William, Gloucester, and Sarah McNeal, Gloucester 1763 

Davis, William, New York, and Mary Nicolson 1766 

Davis, William, Sussex, and Ann Merlet 1772 

Davis, William, and Phebe Ward 1779 

Davison, Amaziah, Middlesex, and Margaret Burns, Middlesex 1761 

Davison, Andrew, Monmouth, and Catherine Pew, Monmouth 1741 

Davison, John, New Brunswick, and Sarah Wilkins, Somerset . . . . 1740 

Davison, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Anderson 1774 

Davison, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Bonham.. 1779 

Davison, Robert, Monmouth, aud Anne Higgins, Middlesex 1742 

Davison, William, Middlesex, and Anue Brunson, Somerset 1744 

Davison, William, Somerset, and Mehitable Cooper, Morris 1770 

Davison, William, Middlesex, and Catherine Van Pelt 1780 

Dawson, Aaron, Gloucester, and Tracy Muuyon, Gloucester. . 1771 

Dawson, Isaac, Philadelphia, and Jane Blackham, Philadelphia 1738 

Dawson, Jeremiah, Burlington, aud Anne King 1778 

Dawson, John, Burlington, an 1 Mary Skidmore. 1732 

Dawson, John, Pennsylvania, aud Grace Searle, Pennsylvania 1768 

Dawson, Michael, Sussex, and Sarah Gerrard, Gloucester 1763 

Day, Aaron, and Mary Telf 1779 

Day, Charles, Gloucester, aud Letitia Alberson 1759 

Day, Daniel, Morris, and Sarah Cams 1782 

Day, David, Bergen, and Sarah Vloore, Bergen ... 1769 

Day, Jacob, Bergen, and Sarah Stien Brauner, l Bergen 17 7;; 

Day, John, Bergen, and ( latey St illwel 1772 

Day, William, Bergen, and Aukie Nash, New York 1762 May 28 

i Steenbrander. 



Sept. 


28 


Sept. 


14 


Sept. 


23 


Mar. 


20 


Aug. 


25 


Jan. 


20 


Sept. 


28 


Nov. 


24 


July 


25 


Jan. 


11 


April 


23 


Nov. 


7 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


16 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


10 


Jan. 


9 


Jan. 


12 


June 


21 


Dec. 


31 


Feb. 


26 


May 


25 


July 


27 


Mar. 


25 


Feb. 


1 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


25 


Nov. 


17 


Dec. 


22 


April 


29 


Dec. 


9 


May 


25 


July 


29 


Aug. 


31 


April 


5 


June 


22 


Jan. 


16 


Sept. 


25 


Dec. 


24 


Nov. 


11 


Oct. 


30 



104 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Day, William, Bergen, and Auney Vanriper 1764 Oct. 27 

Day, William, Bergen, and Mercy Lie 1766 

Dayton, David, Gloucester, and Barbara Tyre, Gloucester 1761 Sept. 9 

Dayton, Ephraim, Salem, and Sarah Ogden, Salem 1 747 May (9) 29? 

Dayton, Ephraim, Cohansie, and Buhamah Eliner, Cohansie 1747 Dec. 29 

Dayton, Jonathan, Essex, and Elizabeth Hull 1746 

Deacon, George, Burlington, and Ann Burr 1757 

Deacon, Job, Burlington, and Mary Atkinson 1784 

Deacon, John, Jr., Burlington, and Hannah Elton, Burlington 1748 

Deacon, John, Burlington, and Hannah Eayres 1787 

Deacon, Samuel, Burlington, and Mahitabel Rogers, Burlington 1762 

Deacon, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Rogers 1764 

Dealy, William, Somerset, and Elizabeth Durragh, Somerset 1744 

Deau, Ichabod, Middlesex, aud Rachel Predmore, Middlesex 1745 

Dean, Matthew, Monmouth, and Rebecca Compton, Monmouth 1749 

Deaue, Jonathau, Perth Amboy, find Francis Phillips, Maiden Head.. 1775 

Dear, Benoni, Salem, and Kezire Stedman, Salem 1745 

Deare, Stephen, Middlesex, and Hannah Loofbury, Middlesex 1763 

Dearou, George, Burlington, an I Joau Fennimore, Burlington 1728 

Debow, Isaac, Middlesex, aud Mary Morgan 1774 

Debow, John, Freehold, and Elizabeth Compton 1751 

Debow, Vaubrok, Monmouth, and Rebecca Smith, Monmouth 1759 

Debow, William, Middlesex, aud Elizabeth Stout 1779 

Debowe, Frederick, Middletowu, aud Margaret Johnson, Middletown. 1748 

Debowe, Johu, and Alice Johnson 1744 

DeCamp, Gideon, Middlesex, aud Christian Giddeman, New Brunsw'k. 1750 

DeCamp, Gideon, Hunterdon, and Charity Hunt 1773 

Decamp, Joseph, Elizabeth, and Elizabeth Thomas, Elizabeth 1755 

DeCamp, Joseph, Middlesex, and Grace Moore, Essex 1761 

de Chaumond, James LeRay Donatien, aud Grace Coxe 1789 

Decker, Isaac, Sussex, and Dorcas Chamberliu 1769 

Decker, Nicholas, Burlington, aud Lydia .VTinion, Burlington 1765 

DeCow, Francis, Burlington, and Sarah Walsh, Burlington 1734 

Decow, Jacob, aud Elizabeth Newbould 1699 

DeCow, Jacob, Burlington, and Jane Dimcan 1736 

Dederer, Christian, Hackensack, and Elizabeth Vail, Hackensack 1760 

Degrave, John, Middlesex, and Alitia Autuerman 1779 

DeGraw, Cornelius, Orange, N. Y., aud Leah Darnaree, Bergen 1765 

Degray, John, Bergen, and Polly Berry, Essex 1774 

Degray, Richard, Bergen, aud Ann Schuyler 1786 

De Groot, Jacob, Bergen, and Lenah Brinkerhoff, Bergen 1771 

Degroot, Joseph, Bergen, aud Elizabeth Williams, Orange, N. Y 1764 

De Heart, Matthias, Essex, and Catherine Kingslaud 1746 

Dehart, Samuel, Elizabeth, and Abigal Merrill, Elizabeth 1749 

Deheart. Simon, and Mary Taylor 1764 

Delaucy, Samuel, Gloucester, and Dinah Read 1774 



April 


5 


Jan. 


29 


Mar. 


14 


Mar. 


16 


Nov. 


20 


Mar. 


20 


Jan. 


25 


Jan. 


14 


April 


16 


Aug. 


12 


Sept. 


9 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


19 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


12 


Sept. 


12 


June 


30 


Feb. 


17 


May 


27 


Aug. 


20 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


11 


June 


6 


Dec. 


16 


July 


17 


April 


12 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


26 


Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


17 


May 


23 


Aug. 


26 


Jan. 


21 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


9 


Aug. 


22 


Mar. 


31 


Sept. 


28 


April 9 


May 


8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 16$ 

DeLancy, Stephen, New York City, and Esther Rynders, N. Y. City. .1761 Aug. 21 

Delatush, Henry, Burlington, and Rebecca Thompson 1761 Dec. 15 

Delatush, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Garwood, Burlington 1759 April 18 

Delgrass, Solomon, Perth Amboy, and Mary Bird, Perth Amboy 1758 June 19 

Dell, Riohard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Decow 1695 June 5 

Dell, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth B isnett 1698 Aug. 11 

Dell, Nathaniel, Gloucester, and Ann Rush, Gloucester 1763 June 24 

Demaree, David and Mary King 1782 Aug. 31 

Demaree, Jacob, Essex, and Rachel Seckor* ... 17-18 Jan. 10 

Dernarest, Abraham, Bergen, and Peggy Demarest, Bergen 1763 Oct. 22 

Demarest, David, Bergen, and Catherine Secker2 1748 July 5 

Demarest, David, Bergen, and Mary Van Bushkirk, Bergen 1748 Aug. 1 

Demarest, David, Bergen, and Lena Van Voorhees, Bergen 1760 Nov. 20 

Demarest, Daniel, Bergen, and Euppy Westerveltf 1762 Aug. 22 

Demarest, Jacob, Bergen, and Gesche Hopper 1788 Dec. 16 

Demarest, John, Bergen, and Sarah Christie 1788 May 10 

Demarest, Nicholas, Bergen, and Elsie Demarest, Bergen 1748 July 5 

Demarest, Peter, Bergen, and Annatie Derye, Bergen 1764 Sept, 26 

Demarest, Peter, Bergen, and Antye Bogert 1784 May 20 

Demarest, Samuel, Bergen, and Willemyntie Bant, Bergen 1767 July 27 

Demorest, David, Bergen, and Margaret Van Voorhees, Bergen 1771 June 25 

Dernorest, John, Bergen, and Rebecca Ryerson 1764 Oct, 18 

Demott, Derrick, Hunterdon, and Martha Snedeker. 1780 Nov. 11 

Demott, Deverick, Hunterdon, and Lenah Pippenger 17^2 Oct. 14 

Demott, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Abigail Hoogland, Hunterdon 1770 Aug. 29 

Demott, Johaunis, Bergen, and Cyntie Roelofse, Bergen 1769 April 29 

Demott, Lawrence, Somerset, and Dorothy Vanderbeck, Somerset 1749 April 25 

Demott, Michael, Hunterdon, and Phebe Schermerhorn, Hunterdon . . 1749 Mar. 5 

Dempsey, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Blake, Bucks, Pa 1740 Sept. 20 

Dempson, Timothy, and Ann Beverlin 1731 July 27 

Demun, Edward, Sussex, and Hannah Thornell, Morris 1773 April 9 

Deney, William, Burlington, and Patience Bolsworthy, Monmouth 1761 July 11 

Dening, Philip, Monmouth, and Rachel Mitchell, Monmouth 29 

Denise, Deuise, Monmouth, and Margaret Francis 1768 April 11 

Denn, John, Salem, and Susanna Fitz Gerrald, Elsinburrough 1772 Feb. 15 

Dennes, John, Essex, and Martha Moore, Essex 174S Jan. 21 

Dennis, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Hannah Little, Monmouth 1764 Jan. 6 

Dennis, Edward, Cumberland, and Jean Cook 1786 Mar. 22 

Dennis, Jacob, Monmouth, and Sarah Johnston, Monmouth 1751 Jan. 23 

Dennis, Jacob, Monmouth, an 1 Margaret Prise, Monmouth 1755 Feb. 22 

Dennis, James, Burlington, and Sarah Elmore, Burlington 1738 Mar. 20 

i Jacob De Moree, y. m. [young man. or bachelor], and Rachel Siaker, y. d. [young daugh- 
ter, or spinster], were married at Schraalenburgh, Bergen county. Jan. 12, 1749 [N. S]. 

2 Married at Schraalenburgh, Bergen county, July 10, 1748. 

3 Daniei Demarest, y. m., born at Schraalenburgh, and Sophia Westervelt, y. d., born at 
Kendergemak, were married at Schraalenburgh, April 26, 1762. 



Io6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Dennis, John, Gloucester, and Mary Germain, Gloucester 1731 

Dennis, John, Middletown, and Sarah Thorn, Middletown 1757 

Dennis, John, Monmouth, and Abigail West, Monmouth 1763 

Dennis, John. Monmouth, and Rebecca West, Monmouth 17G6 

Dennis, Philip, Burlington, and Elizabeth Skirm 1761 

Dennis, Samuel, Monmouth, and Mary Vanderbelt, Monmouth 1765 

Dennis, William, Burlington, and Mary Rogers, Burlington 1737 

Denny, Henry, Bergen, and Mary Young 1780 

Denny, Thoma3, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Rambo, Gloucester 1745 

Denny, Thomas, Gloucester, and Faithy Vear 1782 

Dent, Charles, Salem, and Rebecca Peterson, Salem 1762 

Denton, Robert, Burlington, and Jane Moon, Burlington 1738 

Denyse, Jaques, New York, and Canbachia Emons, Monmouth 1755 

De Peyster, Gerardus, New Brunswick, and Eve Miller, New Brunsw'k. 1743 

De Pue, Isaac, Orange, N. Y., and Bractye Smith, Orange, N. Y 1765 

Depuy, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Gearhart 1784 

Derborrow, Daniel, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Cherry, Philadelphia. . 1729 

Derrick, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Coourad 1780 

Derrickson, Tice, Freehold, and Mary Tice, Freehold 1755 

Deul, John, Gloucester, and Mary Davis 1782 

Devall, William, Monmouth, and Mary Simason, Monmouth 1748 

De Vausene, John, Essex, and Hester Vreland, Essex 1745 

Devenport, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Gibbs 1757 

Devier, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Ellis, Gloucester 1750 

Devine, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Ellis, Gloucester 1750 

Devo, Conrad, Burlington, and Sarah Stratton, Burlington 1765 

De Voii-ne, John, Newark, and Siechie Van Winkle, Newark 1766 

Devoor, William, Morris, and Catharine Schoonmaker, Morris. . . 1740 

Devorix. Peter, Trenton, and Patience Davix. 1778 

Devos, Mathias, Salem, and Elizabeth Johnson, Salem 1746 

Devwin, Jekiel. Salem, and Esther Paullin 1750 

D'VVaudelaer, John, Jr., and Garretie Gansevoort 1777 

Dewitt, Peter, Monmouth, and Pheby Cook 1757 

Dey, Amos, Monmouth, and Mary Chamberlain 1778 

Dey, David, Bergen, and Sarah Neafie. ... 1789 

Dey, James, Monmouth, and Margaret Rue, Middlesex 1760 

Dey, Peter, Bergen, and Elinor Board . 1786 

Dey, Phillip, Bergen, and Jane Post. . . 1780 

Dey, Tunis, Bergen, Hester Schuyler, Bergen 1749 

Dey, William, South Amboy, and Hannah Priue, South Amboy 1756 

Dey, William, Middlesex, and Jane Mason, Monmouth 1764 

Dey, Vincent, Middlesex, and Phebe Hooglaud, Sussex 1775 

Dick, Samuel, Salem, and Sarah Sinnicksou, Salem. . . 

Dickards, Peter, Burlington, and Salaray Lawrence 1759 

Dickason, William, Salem, and Abigail Ward, Gloucester 1749 

Dickens, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Race, Monmouth 1760 



Jan. 


7 


June 


27 


June 


4 


Feb. 


15 


Nov. 


27 


Mar. 


13 


June 


1 


Sept. 


21 


Jan. 


2 


Sept. 


27 


Dec. 


18 


Feb. 


13 


May 


9 


Aug. 


31 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


20 


Nov. 


27 


Mar. 


14 


Mar. 


4 


June 


4 


April 


29 


May 


11 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


20 


June 


13 


Nov. 


11 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


4 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


25 


Feb. 


2 


Feb. 


21 


Nov. 


24 


May 


9 


Sept. 


7 


Dec. 


12 


July 


1 


Jan. 


16 


Oct. 


12 


Feb. 


6 


Nov. 


21 


April 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. t07 

Diekeson, John, Salem, ami Martha Wallace 17(57 

Dickeson, Thomas, Sftlem, and Hannah Hudson 1773 

Diekinsou, George, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Leader, Philadelphia. . 1730 

Dickinson, George, Salem, and Elizabeth McCallister, Salem 1762 

Dickinson, George, Salem, and Margaret Smith, Salem 1769 

Dickinson, John, Salem, and Lydomia Belton, Gloucester 1747 

Dickinson, Joseph, Salem, and Hannah Smith, Cumberland 1765 

Dickinson, William, Gloucester, and Mary Ballinger 177(i 

Dickson, Clement, Gloucester, and Sarah Moore, Gloucester 1700 

Dickson, Thomas, Morris, and Hannah Stephens, Morris. 1751 

Diffedofey, Henry, Monmouth, and Hannah Mires, Monmouth 1753 

Dikes, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Bourkee 1732 

Dildine, John, Somerset, and Mary Rosecrauts 1780 

Dilkes, Aaron, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Chester, Gloucester 1770 

Dilkes, Andrew, Gloucester, and Joanna Turner 1777 

Dilkes, John, Gloucester, and Ann Gayard, Gloucester 1750 

Dilks, Isaac, Gloucester, and Sarah Corkoran, Gloucester 1753 

Dilks, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Catherine Peirce 1780 

Dilks, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Chew 1733 

Dilks, John, Gloucester, and Anne Peas 1780 

Dilks, Joseph, Gloucester, and Lydia Jones, Gloucester. . . . 1718 

Dillen, Peter, Somerset, and Polly Vactor 1779 

Dilley, John, Hunterdon, and Martha Lish. 1768 

Dillon, James, Salem, and Mary Dillon, Salem 1739 

Dillon James, Burlington, and Catherine Vaughan, Burlington 1779 

Dillworth, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Alice Eaton. . . 1734 

Dilmore, William, Salem, and Elizabeth O'Hara 1772 

Dingwell, Philip, Burlington, and Mary Daily, Burlington 1750 

Dingwell, Philip, Bordentown, and Mary Dailey, Bordentown 1751 

Dingwell, Philip, Bordentown, and Mary Dailey, Bordentown 1750 

Diulap, James, Gloucester, and iHedney Smallwood 17> s 2 

Disbrow, Elijah, Perth Arnboy, and Phebe Letts, Perth Amboy 1771 

Disbrow, Henry, Middlesex, and Cathrine Van Martry 1774 

Disbrow, John, Perth Amboy, and Sarah Sharp, Perth Amboy 1743 

Disbrow, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Montgomerie, Perth Amboy. 1774 

Disbrow, John, Hunterdon, and Alice Reed 1778 

Disbrow, William, Middlesex, aud Augeltie Shaw, Middlesex . . 1769 

Disosway, Cornelius, Staten Island, and Mary Baldwin 1765 

Ditmars, Johanes, Somerset, and Margaret Whiteuack 1778 

Ditmass, Rem, Somerset, and Helena Van Lowe, Somerset 1739 

Dixon, Anthony, Salem, and Elizabeth Camell, Salem 1683-4 

Dixon, Francis, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Benton, Cumberland. . . L763 

Dixon, Thomas, Burlington, and Catherine Myers 1778 

Dixson, Daniel, Cumberland, and Ann Dayton, Cumberland 1770 

Doan, George, Monmouth, and Lucy Rinnan, Monmouth 1756 

Doan, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Esther Delun. Bucks, Pa. 1751 



Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


19 


Nov. 


13 


Oct. 


27 


Nov. 


14 


Oct. 


27 


July 


18 


Nov. 


G 


July 


13 


Dec. 


11 


Dec. 


13 


June 


19 


Feb. 


7 


July 


12 


April 


1 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


7 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


16 


Feb. 


1 


Jan. 


4 


Nov. 


13 


June 


4 


Sept. 


20 


June 


5 


Nov. 


25 


June 


4 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


7 


Feb. 


14 


June 


15 


Aug. 


12 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


23 


July 


25 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


13 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


6 


Jan. 


8 


July 


11 


April 


i8 


Oct. 


30 


Oct. 


27 


June 


3 



108 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Doan, Samuel, Backs, Pa., and Martha Paxton, Bucks, Pa 1757 May 21 

Dobbin, James, Burlington, and Anne Fox, Burlington 1767 Sept. 7 

Dobbins, James, Somerset, and Anne Hayarman, Middlesex 1739 Nov. 28 

Dobbins, James, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Carty, Burlington 1779 Jan. 12 

Dobbins, Joab, Burlington, and Elizabeth Iredall 1777 Aug. 4 

Dobbins, John, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Murrel, Burlington 1779 Dec. 23 

Dobbins, Mycajah, Northampton, and Hannah Eayres 1781 June 25 

Dobbins, William, Burlington, and Mary Eldridge, Burlington 1774 Mar. 24 

Dobson, Moses, Salem, and Elizabeth Jones 1768 Mar. 1 2 

Dockerty, John, Hopewell, and Catherine Van Noy 1773 Nov. 24 

Dodd, Thomas, Burlington, and Ann Boone 1734 May 8 

Dodderer, Jacob, Sussex, and Lydia Collins, Sussex 1763 Feb. 12 

Dohady, Patrick, Hunterdon, and Jane Temple, Hunterdon 1764 Mar. 26 

Dolbon, Amariah, Gloucester, and Lydia Tailor, Gloucester 1774 Feb. 22 

Dolbow, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Peterson 1781 Nov. 10 

Dole, Isaac, Cape May, and Rachel Corson, Cape May 1761 Oct. 28 

Dolles, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Susanna Clarke 1787 June 1 

Don, Johannes, Essex, and Elizabeth Joralemon, Essex 1740 Dec. 1 

Donaldson, Andrew, Philadelphia, and Hannah Wheaton 1775 Feb. 1 1 

Donally, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Thomas 1777 April 4 

Dondlesbeck, Frederick, Salem, and Barbary Elwell 1766 Dec. 9 

Done, Joseph, Upper Freehold, and Esther Delan, B icks, Pa ... 1751 June 3 

Douelson, Joseph, Cumberland, and Temperance Fithian, CumbeiTd..l774 May 23 

Donham, Renew, Woodbridge, and Mary Heath, Perth Amboy 1757 Aug. 1 

Donham, Elisba, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Freeman, Woodbridge. . . 1752 June 20 

Donham, Ephraim, Woodbridge, and Abigail Morgan, Perth Amboy. . 1750 Feb. 18 

Donham, Isaac, Woodbridge, and Auue Gach, Woodbridge 1759 Aug. 22 

Donham, John, and Sarah Dennis, Woodbridge 1744 June 25 

Donnell, Nathaniel, Jr., Cumberland, and Sarah Faress 1784 June 25 

Donnelly, William, Burlington, and Catherine Johnson, Burlington. ..1775 April 11 

Donnolly, Bryan, Burlington, and Susanna Collins 1738 May 10 

Dooremus, George, Bergen, and Jenny Ryerson 1783 Dec. 3u 

Doran, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Leeds, Burlington 1777 Dec. 13 

Doramus, Henry, Sussex, and Catrina Terhune 1771 Jan. 8 

Doremus, David, and Lea DeBrevort 1779 Feb. 26 

Doremus, Hendrick, Morris, and Margaret Van Winkle, Morris 1760 Sept. 25 

Doremus, Jorris, Bergen, and Margaret Westervelt, Bergen 1768 Oct. 1 

Doriuward, Robert, Burlington, and Elizabeth Otway, Burlington 1767 Oct. 5 

Dorland, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Mary Walker, Burlington 1738 Sept. 18 

Dorland, Samuel, Morris, and Mary Auderson 1778 Nov. 28 

Dorn, Nicholas, Monmouth, and Sarah Smith, Monmouth 1761 Aug. 27 

Doron, John, Burlington, and Mary Steward, Burlington 1773 Sept. 7 

Dorsett, Andrew, Middletown, and Catherine Truax, Middletown. .. 1757 July 21 

Dorsett, James, Monmouth, and Francis White, Monmouth 1766 Feb. 21 

Dorsett, Joseph, Monmouth, and Christian Smith, Hunterdon 1764 Oct. 2 

Dorset, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Burdge, Monmouth 1771 Jan. 21 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 109 

Dorsett, Samuel, and Rachel Brittain, Kings Co., N. Y 1739 Oct. 27 

Dory, James, Burlington, and Ann Mcllvaine 1778 Dec. 9 

Dotey, Ebenezer, Burlington, and Margaret Woolston, Burlington . . . Sept. 21 

Dotey, Ebeuezer, Burlington, aud Mehitabell Shinn, Burlington 1770 July 10 

Dotey, William, Burlington, and Rachel Murphy, Burlington 177G Jan. 6 

Doty, Isaac, Long Island, aud Margaret Thomson, Perth Amboy 1717 Oct. 2 

Doty, Moses, Staten Island, and Aun Disisway, Staten Island 1764 Aug. 7 

Dougau, Edward V., aud Frances Lagrange 1773 Mar. 13 

Dougherty, Bryan, Monmouth, aud Jane Lee, Monmouth 1756 Mar. 16 

Doughten, John, Burlington, and Ann Adams 1762 April 29 

Doughten, John, Gloucester, and Mary Burden. 1770 May 17 

Doughty, Abner, Gloucester, and Christian Johuson, Gloucester 1762 Oct, 28 

Doughton, Samuel, Gloucester, and Susannah Pitcock 1773 July 12 

Doughty, Benjamin, Middlesex, aud Lydia Mundin, Middlesex 1747-8 Feb. 13 

Doughty, Edward, and Millicent Sommers, Great Egg Harbour 1749 Nov. 16 

Doughty, Robert, and Sarah Channell 1732 Oct. 7 

Douglas, George, Burlington, and Atalanah Wood, Burlington 1741 Sept. 28 

Douglas, Joseph, Burlington, and Benjamin Walker 1768 Sept. 23 

Douglas, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Borden, Burlington 1734 Jan. 9 

Douglas, William, Monmouth, and Rebecca Lawrence, Monmouth 1734 Jan. 9 

Douglas, William, Gloucester, aud Hannah Harper 1773 Nov. 16 

Douglass, John, Burlington, and Rachel Pearson, Burlington 1739 Sept. 24 

Douglass, Robert, Burlington, and Lucy Stout 1778 Nov. 16 

Douglass, Thomas, Monmouth, and Rachel De Bow 1773 Aug. 20 

Douglass, William, Hunterdon, and Catherine Vantile, Staten Island . 1759 Dec. 21 

Douu, Thomas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Barton, Gloucester 1761 Jan. 29 

Douw, Volkest, Somerset, and Altie Polhemus, Somerset 1743 May 7 

Dove, John, Woodbridge, and Eunice Dennis, Piscataway 1754 Aug. 10 

Dow, Adrian, Essex, and Mary King, Essex 1748 Feb. 9 

Dowden, John, Piscataway, aud Mary Comes, Piscataway 1747 July 9 

Dowduey, John, Bristol, Pa., and Mary Priestly, Bristol, Pa 1765 Feb. 11 

Dowdney, John, Cumberland, and Sarah Howell 1773 Nov. 20 

Dowdney, Nicholas, Cumberland, aud Sarah Worrel, Cumberland 1771 Dec. 18 

Dowduey, Samuel, Cumberland, aud Martha Reed 1783 Oct. 27 

Downing, Timothy, Burlington, and Sarah Little ' 1783 Dec. 30 

Downs, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Earl, New Hanover... 1759 Jan. 27 

Downs, Samuel, Burlington, and Abigail Austin, Burlington 1783 Nov. 24 

Dowus, William, Gloucester, aud Phanny Lattymore 1778 Mar. 23 

Downs, William, Gloucester, aud Mary Calf us 1779 Mar. 29 

Drago, Peter, Sussex, and Margaret M cCafferty 1768 Nov. 1 

Drake, Abraham, Morris, and Anne Young, Morris 1763 Feb. 23 

Drake, BenjamiD, Hunterdon, and Sarah Wood 1769 April 7 

Drake, Daniel, Hunterdon, aud Phebe Reeder 1777 July 8 

Drake, Garshom, Middlesex, and Rachel Drake 1740 Aug. 25 

Drake, Hugh, Salem, aud Jane Chester 1775 Dec. 1 

Drake, Isaac, Essex, and Ruth Martin, Middlesex 1743 Feb. 23 



HO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Drake, James, Middlesex, and Mary Ross, Middlesex 1765 

Drake, John, and Mary M uncle . 1748-9 

Drake, John, Hunterdon, and Charity Hunt 1779 

Drake, Joseph, and Mary Davis 1749 

Drake, Joseph, Jr., Middlesex, and Catherine Cheeseman, Middlesex. . 1752 

Drake, Joseph, Jr., Middlesex, and Elizabeth Crow, Middlesex 17G4 

Drake, Nathan, Piscataway, aud Ruth Drake, Essex 1752 

Drake, Nathan, Hunterdon, and Tamar Jones 1770 

Drake, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Reeder . . . . 1785 

Drake, William, Bucks, Pa,, and Lydia Drake 1746 

Drake, William, Salein, and Sarah Booth, Salem 1774 

Drinker, Henry, Philadelphia, and Mary Cottier, Philadelphia. ..... 1731 

Driscall, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Auu Clayton, Monmouth 1773 

Driskel, Dennis, Monmouth, and Hannah Wilson, Monmouth 1762 

Driver, John, Burlington, and Mary Sparks, Burlington 1749 

Drue, Thomas, Somerset, and Phebe Ditmus 1781 

Drummond, Gavin, Monmouth, and Abigail Knott, Monmouth 1759 

Drummond, John, Gloucester, and Deborah Corson 1772 

Drummond, Matthew D. , Cumberland, and Temperance Taylor 1784 

Drummond, Robert, Monmouth, and Rebecca Edge, Monmouth . . . 1732 

Du Bjys, Abraham, Somerset, aud Jane Vaudike, Somerset 1747 

Du Bois, Abraham, Salem, and Elizabeth Preston, Cumberland 1761 

Du Bois, Anthouy, Richmond Co., and Martha Morgan, Richmond. . ..1747 

Dubois, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Phebe Denise, Monmouth 1765 

Dubury, James, Gloucester, aud Jane Hodges, Gloucester 1727 

Duche. Andrew, Philadelphia, and Hannah Shords, Burlington 1731 

Duckmanuee, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Davis, Gloucester 3 741 

Duckworth, George, New Jersey, and Jamima Williamson, New Jersey. 1739 

Duckworth, John, Burlington and Sarah Hankins, Burlington 1734 

Duckworth, Joseph, Burlington, aud Esther Oug, Burlington. . . . .1737 

Duckworth, William, Burlington, and Hannah Clevenger, Burlington. 1731 

Duckworth, William, Burlington, aud Mary Wright, Burlington 1731 

Duel, Jonathan, Trenton, aud Mary Appleby 1779 

Duer, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Dane, Bucks, Pa 1768 

Duffel, Jacob, Cumberland, and Ann Ireland, Cumberland 1773 

Duffel, William, Gloucester, and Hannah Haner . 1784 

Duffil, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Burck, Gloucester 1754 

Duffil, John, Gloucester, aud Sarah Burck, Gloucester 1755 

Duffil, John, Gloucester, and Amey Dilkes, Gloucester 1760 

Dnglass, Richard, Monmouth, and Lidia Salter 1739-40 

Dugles, Thomas, and Mary Odonoghue 1695 

Dukemanere, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Topham, Gloucester ...1719 

Dumfe, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth White, Burlington 1739 

Dummer, Robert, and Martha Wearon 1699-1700 

Dumodt, Michael, Morris, and Mary Mandeville 1783 

Dumore, Abraham, Somerset, aud Maritie Voorhees. 1782 



May 


8 


Mar. 


8 


Feb. 


20 


May 


9 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 


27 


Nov. 


8 


May 


21 


Mar. 


1 


Jan. 


27 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


26 


Aug. 


27 


Sept. 


27 


May 


13 


Aug. 


24 


Mar. 


21 


Feb. 


9 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


22 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


4 


Oct, 


15 


June 


19 


June 


21 


May 


28 


June 


26 


Mar. 


20 


June 


1 


Aug. 


21 


Dec. 


6 


April 28 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


16 


Aug. 


2 


May 


15 


May 


12 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


10 


June 


6 


May 


15 


May 


28 


Jan. 


22 


July 


5 


June 


10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. Ill 

Pumout, Henry, Middlesex, and Mary Traverrie. Monmouth 1743 Dec. 20 

Dumont, Henry, Raritan Landing, and Oatharintie Outhout, New Bwk. 1749 Nov. 25 

Duruont, John Baptist, Somerset, and Mary Van Dine 1745 Nov. 6 

Dumont, Peter, .Somerset, and Brachie Vroom, Somerset 1748 May 16 

Dumont, Peter J. B., Somerset, and Susannah Van Middlesworth ...1782 April 13 

Dunbar, Lott, Hunterdon, and Mary Justice 1762 Oct. 23 

Duncan, John, Middlesex, and Ann Dey 1773 Jan. 15 

Duufee, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Jervis, Burlington 1763 Sept. 6 

Dunham, Azariah, Piscataway, and Mary Ford, Morris 1753 May 17 

Dunham, Benjamin, Burlington, and Jane Ogden, Burlington 1772 June 27 

Dunham, David, Middlesex, aud Mary Dunn, Middlesex 1766 Dec. 17 

Dunham, Elijah, Piscataway, and Mary Sharp, Piscataway. ... 1751 April 6 

Dunham, John, Morris, and Margaret Miller, Morris 1780 Mar. 7 

Dunham, John, Morris, and Anne Sherard 1780 May 22 

Dunham, Lewis, Morris, and Jennie Tuthill 1777 May 3 

Dunham, Nehemiah, Hunterdon, and Antye McKinney 1768 Oct. 25 

Duuken, John, Middlesex, and Violet Newell, Middlesex 1 753 Feb. 23 

Dunkiu, John, Salem, and Ann Beaman 1772 May 7 

Duulap, Edward, Sussex, aud Sarah Helme 1768 Sept. 23 

Dunlap, James, Salem, and Elizabeth Worthington 1731 Mar. 29 

Duulap, James, Salem, and Ann Hunter, Salem 1716 Jan. 24 

Dunlap, James, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Snodgrass 1790 April 26 

Duulap, Samuel, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Sargeant, Perth Amboy. 1762 Jan. 25 

Dunn, Benjamin, Piscataway, and Rachel Stelle, Piscataway 1757 June 1 

Dunn, Benjamin, Piscataway, and Edith Davis, Cohansie 1758 Mar. 28 

Dunn, Berujoh, and Sarah Dunham, Piscataway 1744 Mar. 29 

Dunn, Dennis Perth Amboy, aud Elizabeth Kelly, Perth Amboy. .. .1753 April 28 

Dunn, Drake, Middlesex, and Phebe Clawson, Middlesex 1762 April 19 

Dunn, Ebenezer, Salem, and Abigail Copner 1772 June 11 

Dunn, Ephraim, Middlesex, aud Isabella Dunn 1766 Aug. 14 

Dunn, Jeremiah, Piscataway, and Margaret Carman, Salem 1747 May 14 

Dunn, Jeremiah, Piscataway, and Mary Fitz Randolph, Piscataway. . 1765 April 16 

Dunn, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Wheaton 1733 Jan. 18 

Dunn, John, Middlesex, and Anne Ayres, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 11 

Dunn, Jonathan, Somerset, and Nettie Van Peth 1777 Dec. 10 

Dunn, Justus, Middlesex, and Experience Stelle, Middlesex 1760 Oct. 3 

Dunn, Phineas, Piscataway, and Elizabeth Manuiug, Piscataway 1755 July 31 

Dunn, Reuben, Middlesex, and Sarah Fitz Randolph, Middlesex 1770 Oct. 9 

Dunn, William, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Davis, Bucks, Pa, 1729 Dec. 18 

Durboru, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Bumstead, Philadelphia. 1736 July 8 

Durell, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Fenimore 1777 Aug. 21 

Durell, Martin, Burlington, and Sybilla Leeds, Burlington 1784 Aug. 13 

Durham, Andrew, Somer.-et, aud Jane Pierson, Morris 1779 Dec. 21 

Duri, David, Bergen, and Margaret Van Horn 1762 Nov. 16 

Durie, John, Bergen, and Antie Brinckerhoff, Bergen 1774 Aug. 27 

Durlaud, Lambert, Somerset, and Stymie Voorhees. . . 1747 May 5 



112 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Durye, Samuel, Bergen, and Wyntie Banta, Bergen 1744 

Durj'ee, Joost, Long Island, and Maritie Van Low, Somerset 1750 

Dusenbery, Henry, Hunterdon, and Lidia Sweesey 1784 

Dwyer, Denis, Woodbridge, and Jane Insby, Essex 1758 

Dye, Daniel, Middlesex, and Abigail Hutchinson 1773 

Dye, James, Jr., Monmouth, and Margaret Perrine, Monmouth. . .1749-50 

Dye, Nehemiah, Middlesex, and Rachael Wetherell, Middlesex 1765 

Dye, Vincent, East. Division, and Sarah Artepe, Somerset 1746 

Dye, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Ann Gregg, Bucks, Pa 1761 

Dyer, John, Salem, and Elinor Short 1730 

Dyer, John, Burlington, and Margaret Glass, Burlington 1730 

Dyre, Edward, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Dyer, Bucks, Pa 1766 

FEMALES. D 

Dagworthy, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Farguson, Burlington. . .1730 

Dagworthy, Sarah, and John May, Essex 1746 

Dahlbo, Magdalene, and Jonathan Simkins, Upper Penns Neck 1785 

Daily, Frances, and William Tate, Salem 1733 

Daily, Mary, Burlington, and Philip Dingwell, Burlington 1750 

Dalen, Ruth, and Joseph Buck, Cumberland 1779 

Dalles, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and Alexander Dalles, New York 1764 

Dally, Ann, New York, and William Kingsland, Bergen 1742 

Dally, Elizabeth, New Brunswick, and Philip Conine, Perth Amboy. . .1742 

Danalds, Mary, and John Gogiu, Cape May 1771 

Danally, Ruth, and Jacob Gaskill, Burlington 1779 

Danally, Susannah. Burlington, and James Bennet, Burlington 1770 

Dane, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Duer, Bucks, Pa 1768 

Danice, Sarah, and Abraham Alberson, Gloucester 1742 

Daniels, Martha, Cape May, and Joseph Savage, Cape May 1742 

Daniels, Mary, and John Clark, Gloucester 1783 

Daniels, Bachel, and Thomas Whitecar, Fairfield 1780 

Dans, Mary, Monmouth, and Zephaniah Morris, Monmouth 1765 

Dare, Elizabeth, Stow Creek, and James Robinson, Stow Creek 1759 

Dare, Hannah, Deerfield, and Henry Seely, Deerfield 1762 

Dare, Mary, Cumberland, and Benjamin Dare, Cumberland 1773 

Dare, Bachel, Cumberland, and William Brick, Salem 1768 

Dare, Rebecca, and Charles Allen, Cumberland 1778 

Dare, Sarah, and James Breaser, Cumberland 1754 

Dare, Sarah, Bucks Co., Pa., and Andrew Young, Bucks Co., Pa 1761 

Dare, Sarah, Deerfield, and Samuel Wood, Alloways Creek 1767 

Dare, Sarah, and Daniel Shepherd, Cumberland 1778 

Darets, Sarah, Burlington, and Jacob Hooker, Burlington 1744 

Darkin, Hannah, Salem, and Joseph Rolfe, Salem 1741 

Darkiu, Hannah, Salem, and Josiah Rolfe, Salem 1742 

Darkin, Jale, Salem, and David Fitz Randolph, Salem 1740 

Darkin, Sarah, Salem, and John Hunt, Salem 1743 



Aug. 


2 


June 


5 


Mar. 


2 9 


Mar. 


11 


Mar. 


24 


Jan. 


17 


Sept. 


18 


Sept. 


1 


Nov. 


11 


Mar. 


26 


July 


28 


Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


10 


April 


10 


July 


30 


Aug. 


11 


Nov. 


7 


Mar. 


15 


Jan. 


20 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


17 


May 


12 


Nov. 


21 


Aug. 


15 


July 


15 


Sept. 


21 


Dec.; 


19 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


25 


May 


29 


Oct. 


6 


April 


7 


Jan. 


14 


AjJiil 


8 


Aug. 


22 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


27 


April 


27 


Oct. 


10 


May 


6 


May 


25 


Sept. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 113 

Darling, Mary, Burlington, and Jacob Force, Burlington .... 1774 June 21 

Darndt, Sophia, Middlesex, and Charles Vaudiue, Middlesex 1751 Nov. 14 

Darnsell, Sarah, Middlesex, and John Jobs, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 13 

Darvin, Unis, and Roger Sherron, Salem 1754 June 12 

Daton, Hannah, Salem, and David Ogdeu, Salem 1745 Jane 13 

Daughty, Sarah, Somerset, and John Bainbridge, Hunterdon 1740 Jan. 24 

Davenport, Mary, and Elias Marsh, Middlesex 1745 May 1 1 

David, Mary Anna, Salem, and Isaac Davis, Cumberland 17G7 Sept. 23 

Davidson, Christian, Burlington, and Isaac Alloways, Burlington. .. . 1773 Nov. 20 

Davidson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Burr, Burlington 1738 Sept. 4 

Davie, Lenora, and Hendrick Bamicle, Middlesex 1771 Jan. 25 

Davies, Catherine, Monmouth, and Henry Harrison, Monmouth 1739 May 1 

Davies, Elizabeth, and Samuel Morgan, Salem 1731 Sept. 10 

Davis, Ammie, and Jonathan Davis, Cumberland 1783 Jan. 8 

Davis, Amy, Monmouth, and Elisha Johnston, Monmouth 1755 Oct. 28 

Davis, Ann, Philadelphia, and John Miles, Bristol, Pa 1739 Feb. 12 

Davis, Ann. Burlington, and William Corliss, Burlington 1767 July 13 

Davis, Anna, Monmouth, and John Havens, Monmouth 1745 Jan. 21 

Davis, Anne, Monmouth, and Peter Covenhoven, Monmouth 1749 Feb. 5 

Davis, Charity, Salem, and George Bowin, Salem 1738 Aug. 26 

Davis, Dorothy, Salem, and Nicholas Winton, Salem 1699-70 Jan. 16 

Davis, Edith, Cohansie, and Benjamin Dunn, Piscataway 1758 Mar. 28 

Davis, Eleanor, and Samuel Bates, Gloucester 1781 Nov. 12 

Davis, Elizabeth, Burlington and Charles Sheepy, Burlington 1695 Nov. 2 

Davis, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Lyndon, Burlington.. .. 1730 Dec. 23 

Davis, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and David Burdge, Monmouth 1753 Aug. 22 

Davis, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Ephraim Maxson, Monmouth 1764, April 27 

Davis, Esther, and Nehemiah Cowgill, Burlington ...1738 Aug. 1 

Davis, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Duckmanuee, Gloucester 1741 May 28 

Davis, Hannah, Northampton, and Henry Bonlton, Northampton . . .. 1746 Nov. 3 

Davis, Hannah, and William Gray, Burlington 1760 Mar. 26 

Davis, Hannah, Gloucester, and Samuel Gaboon, Gloucester 1770 May 9 

Davis, Hester, and Isaac Fourat, Middlesex . 1768 May 9 

Davis, Jane, Northampton, and Samuel Richardson, Springfield 1770 April 10 

Davis, Judith, Somerset, and Abraham Brokaw, Somerset 1787 Aug. 26 

Davis, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Samuel Hutchins, Elizabeth 1749 Mar. 17 

Davis, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and William Dunn, Bucks, Pa 1729 Dec. 18 

Davis, Mary, Monmouth, and John Curtis, Monmouth 1746 Mar. 31 

Davis, Mary, and Joseph Drake . 1749 May 9 

Davis, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Davis, Burlington 1766 Mar. 20 

Davis, Mary, and Benjamin Bacon, Gloucester 1775 April 18 

Davis, Mary, and Daniel Taylor, Bridgeton . . 1778 Feb. 21 

Davis, Mary, and Charles Hamilton, Somerset 1779 June 17 

Davis, Mary, and John Deul, Gloucester. . . . 1782 Mar. 4 

Davis, Pations, and Robert LivingstoD, Cumberland 1754 Sept. 26 

Davis, Phebe, Newark, and Andrew Pierce, Newark. . 1750 May 3 



114 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Davis, Phebe, Monmouth, and William Bowne, Monmouth 1755 

Davis, Sarah, and Jonathan Hutchinson, Middlesex 1765 

Davis, Sarah, and David Thomas, Pennsylvania 1783 

Davis, Sarah, and Solomon Mason, Burlington 1788 

Davis, Tabitha, and Joseph Whitecar, Cumberland. . 1780 

Davis, Uphame, Monmouth, and Jacob Bennet, Monmouth 1764 

Davison, Aune, Monmouth, and James NixoD, Middlesex 1740 

Davison, Anne, Middlesex, and Aron Vantine, Perth Ainboy.. 1746 

Davison, Catherine, and William English, Burlington 1785 

Davison, Hauuah, and James McCalester, Hunterdon 1780 

Davison, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Fenton, Jr.. Monmouth ...1741 

Davison, Margaret, and John Green, Gloucester 1779 

Davison, Margaret, and Hendrick Schenck, Penns Neck 1780 

Davison, Sarah, and William Anuiu, Somerset 1777 

Davix, Patience, and Peter Devorix, Trenton. . . 1778 

DawsoD, Mary, Burlington, and Preserve Brown, Burlington 1712 

Dawson, Mary, Northampton, and Daniel Still, Chester 1783 

Day, Rebecca, Gloucester, and Thomas Spicer, Gloucester 1740 

Dayton, Ann, Cumberland, and Daniel Dixson, Cumberland. 1770 

Deacon, Catharine, and Ziba Wescote, Great Egg Harbour 1759 

Deacon, Dehorab, and Daniel Brock, Burlington 1784 

Deacon, Jane, and Samuel Gammel, Burlington 1734 

Deacon, Jane, and Stacey Cook, Burlington . . 1782 

Deacon, Jane, and Benjamin Jefferies, Philadelphia. 1785 

Deacon, Meriam, and Pearson Hancock, Burlington. 1779 

Deacon, Rebecca, and Isaac Wetherill, Burlington ... 1776 

Deacon, Sarah, and Anthony Payne, Burlington 1768 

Dean, Charity, Middlesex, and John Fardon, Middlesex 1763 

Dean, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Yocam Wessem, New Jersey 1741 

Dean, Elizabeth, Willingborough, and Joseph Taylor, \Villingboro'gh.l751 

Deau, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joshua Gifford, Monmouth 1740 

Dean, Susannah, and Isaac Scarbrough, Bucks, Pa. . 1763 

Deberd, Catherine, and Richard Borden, Burlington 1780 

De Blow, Mary, aud Martin Fredericks, Morris 1779 

Deboise, Catharine, aud John Baird, Somerset 1779 

Debois, Margaret, Staten Island, and John Thompson, Staten Island. .1757 
De Bon Repos, Hannah, Woodbridge, and John Stelle, Piscataway . . 1768 
Deboogh, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Compton, Monmouth.. .. 1747 

Deboys, Elizabeth, and Stephen Gano, Somerset 1747 

Debow, Elizabeth, and John Imlay, Middlesex.. . . 1773 

Debow, Frances, Freehold, and Lawrence Fenelen, Freehold 1760 

Debow, Rachel, and Thomas Douglass, Monmouth. . . 1773 

Debowe, Ma-garet, Monmouth, aud Samuel Bowne, Monmouth 1763 

Debowe, Sussannah, and Obadiah Bowne, Monmouth 1770 

DeBrevort, Lea, and David Doremus. . 1779 

Dickeudendon, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Stapleford, Phila . . . 1743 



July 


28 


Oct. 


29 


Jan. 


8 


April 


4 


Mar. 


4 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


18 


May 


17 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


16 


Oct. 


23 


Mar. 


3 


Sept, 


20 


Sept. 


23 


Nov. 


11 


Nov. 


3 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


17 


Mar. 


16 


April 


10 


April 


9 


May 


23 


Sept. 


8 


May 


16 


Aug. 


31 


Jan. 


19 


Apiil 


22 


May 


8 


April 


5 


July 


14 


Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


26 


Mar. 


6 


July 


27 


Dec. 


19 


July 


27 


May 


23 


Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


29 


Aug. 


20 


April 


16 


April 


3 


Feb. 


26 


Jan. 


27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Decou, Rebecca, Burlington, and George Morris, Burlington 1731 

Decow, Elizabeth, and Richard Dell . . 1695 

Dedericks, Aaltje, Bergen, and Jacob Bauta, Bergen 1773 

Dedricks, Margaret, and Hendrick Banta, Bergen 1784 

Deffose, Margaret, Salem, and Ebenezer Ashbury, Salem 169 I 

Defrees, Catharine, and John Van Noorstrand, Somerset 1768 

Deforest, Margaret, New York, and Harinains Rutgers, New York . . 1739 

DeGraw, Catherine, Bergen, and Joseph Berry, Gloucester 1772 

DeGraw, Helen, and Philip Berry, Bergen 1743 

DeGraw, Jane, and George Van Iderstine, Essex ... 1794 

Degray, Mary, and John I. Berdau, Bergen 1792 

Degray, Reyushe, Orange Co., N. Y., and Abram Quackenbos, H'keus'k.1771 

Degroat, Frances, and John Vanderhoof, Bergen 1750 

DeGroff, Mary, New Brunswick, and Martin Sollom 1744 

Degroot, Margaret, Somerset, and Benjamin Field, Middlesex 1750 

DeGrow, Hannah, Middlesex, and Peter Moon, Middlesex . 1741 

DeHart, Catharine, Freehold, and Peter Covenhoven, Middletown . . 1749 

Dehart, Gasha, Middletown, and Simon Bergen, Long Island 1707 

Delau, Ann, and Jacob Skaver, Burlington 1759 

Delan, Esther, Bucks, and Joseph Doan, Bucks 1751 

Delany, Margaret, Monmouth, and Patrick Leonard, Monmouth 1765 

Delaney, Sarah, Middlesex, and John Coyll, Middlesex 1749 

Delauey, Sarab, and Frederick Botfield 1787 

Delap, Jane, New Jersey, and John Bisset, New Jersey 1742 

Delaplain, Mary, and Thomas Gittinge, Burlington 1768 

Delatush, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Forrester, Burlington 1776 

Delatush, Sarah, and William Glisson, Burlington 1778 

DeLavoe, Rebecca; and Samuel Paul, Gloucester 1758 

Demarie, Leah, Bergen, and Cornelius DeGraw, Orange Co., N. Y. . . 1765 

Demarest, Aunatye, and Gerrit Zabriskie, Bergen 1786 

Demarest, Elizabeth, and Peter Van Voorhis. Bergen 1785 

Demarest, Elsie, Bergen, and Nicholas Demarest, Bergen 1748 

Demarest, Peggy, Bergen, and Abraham Demarest, Bergen 1763 

Demarest, Rachael, and Areut Schuyler, Bergen 17fc8 

Demarest, Salome, Bergen, and Henricus Schoonmaker, Bergen 1765 

Demarest, Vroutye, and Anthony C. Beam, Bergen 1788 

Demon, Catharine, Somerset, and John Lawrasou, Somerset 1750 

Demorest, Johanna, Bergen, and Joseph Blauvelt, Bergen 1769 

Demorest, Mary, Bergen, and Barent Cole, Bergen 1767 

Demott, Ann, and John Vanhorne, Bergen 1751 

Demott, Elizabeth, and John Gulick, Somerset 1778 

Demott, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Mead, Bergen 1770 

Demott, Morritje, Bergen, and Johanes Van Wagener, Staten Island.. 1757 
Denford, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and Andrew Mason, Pennsylvania. . 1728 
Denice, Catherine, Monmouth, and Garret Hendiickson, Monmouth. .1755 
Deuise, Anne, Monmouth, and David Forman, Monmouth 1757 



ii5 



Oct. 


19 


June 


5 


Jan. 


3 


July 


1 


July 


19 


July 


16 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


25 


Nov. 


2 


July 


4 


June 


20 


April 


20 


Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


18 


July 


27 


May 


16 


Sept. 


27 


June 


3 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


1 


April 


12 


July 


24 


April 


2 


April 


16 


Jan. 


14 


Oct. 


6 


Aug. 


26 


Oct. 


6 


April 


28 


July 


5 


Oct, 


22 


Aug. 


1 


June 


22 


Feb. 


5 


June 


18 


April 


29 


Aug. 


10 


May 


2 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


28 


Dec. 


8 


June 


9 



I 1 6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Denise, Jane, Freehold, and Cornelius Covenhoven, Middletown 1758 Dec. 5 

Denise, Phebe, Monmouth, and Benjamin Dubois, Monmouth 1 765 Oct. 15 

Denisse, Mary, Freehold, and John Schauck, Freehold 1767 July 30 

Denman, Deborah, Monmouth, and Daniel Bells, Monmouth 1764 Mar. 7 

Dennes, Elizabeth, Elizabethtown, and Nathaniel Vail, Elizabethtown. 1748 May 3 

Dennis, Deborah, and John Kinnan, Middlesex 1780 Dec. 4 

Dennis, Eunice, Piscataway, and John Dove, Woodbridge 1754 Aug. 10 

Dennis, Hannah, and John Lambert, Hunterdon 1781 Oct. 6 

Dennis, Increase, and Anthony Woodward, Jr., Monmouth 1760 Oct. 13 

Dennis, Mary, Monmouth, and Benjamin Gaskill, Burlington... ... 1738 Jan. 16 

Dennis, Mary, Gloucester, and John Bryant, Gloucester 1739 Aug. 8 

Dennis, Mary, Philadelphia, and Richard Bulkely, Philadelphia 1767 Aug. 13 

Dennis, Rachel, and James Casseday, Burlington 1758 May 23 

Dennis, Ruth, Piscataway, and Hartsh orne Fitz Randolph, Woodb'dg. 1746 Aug. 16 

Denuis, Sarah, Monmouth, and Thomas Piatt, Burlington 1739 Nov. 1 

Dennis, Sarah, Woodbridge, and John Donham. 1714 June 25 

Dennis, Sarah, Monmouth, and Thomas Shepherd, Monmouth. ..... 1747 Sept. 8 

Dennis, Zilpha, Monmouth, and William Chamberlin, Monmouth .. 1763 July 18 

Dennison, Haunah, New Brunswick, and James Blain, Perth Amboy. . 1748 Jan. 28 

Denny, Bajah, and Isaac Vanneman, Woolwich 1781 Mar. 15 

Denny, Rachel, Gloucester, and Robert Brown, Gloucester 1772 Mar. 25 

Denny, Rachel, and William Thomas, Gloucester 1781 April 24 

DeNormandie, Louisa, and Moses Van Court, Pennsylvania 1780 Feb. 1 

Denton, Sarah, Cumberland, and Ebenezer Kiging, Cumberland 1759 Nov. 27 

Denyce, Susanna, and William Heritage, Gloucester 1771 Aug. 13 

Denyke, Anne, and Garret Schenck, Hunterdon ... 1780 Sept. 26 

Denyse, Nell}', Monmouth, and John Forman, Monmouth 1752 May 2 

Denyse, Helena, Monmouth, and Samuel Forman, Monmouth ...... 1752 May 2 

Deremer, Leah, and Thomas Holcomb, Hunterdon 1778 June 25 

Derickson, Mary, and William Vanlier, Woolwich 1787 Mar. 8 

Derrick, Elenor, and William Gearkart 1770 Oct. 1 

Derrickson, Margaret, Middletown, and Andrie Watre, Freehold 1763 April 18 

Derye, Annatie, Bergen, and Peter Demarest, Bergen 1764 Sept. 26 

Desha, Margaret, Newark, and Peter Game, Newark 1750 Feb. 20 

Devall, Ann, Salem, and John Hampton, Gloucester 1736 Jan. 12 

Devall, Eunice, and Joshua Clark, Cumberland 1759 Oct. 24 

Devall, Mary, Piscataway, and Charles Burnet, Middlesex ... 1750 Mar. 13 

Devanport, Parnell, Hunterdon, and William Kirkpatrick, Hunterdon 1761 July 1 

Devaul, Elizabeth, and Samuel Garwood, Gloucester 1779 Mar. 8 

Deveney, Margaret, Monmouth, and Brian Golloughar, Monmouth. .1743-4 Mar. 14 

Devie, Mary, Monmouth, and Aaron Havens, Monmouth 1762 Aug. 21 

Devine, Martha, Salem, and Richard Bacon. Cumberland 1774 Feb. 24 

Devinne, Catherine, and Joseph Browne, Bergen 1782 July 4 

Devinney, Mary, Freehold, and Richard Pettinger, Freehold 1751 Nov. 19 

Devinney, Phebe, and John Leek 1735 Jan. 12 

Devinny, Leah, Burlington, and Joseph Garwood, J., Burlington 1757 Oct. 30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. II? 

Devinny, Pbebe, Burlington, and Seemore Cramer, Burlington 17CG 

Devisene, Catherine, Essex, and John Brown, Jr., Essex 17C7 

Devoe, Elizabeth, and Abraham Brewer, 1)., Bergen 1788 

Dey, Ann, and John Duncan, Middlesex 1773 

Dey, Barshabe, Monmouth, and James Jobs, Monmouth . 1762 

Dey, Dinah, Monmouth, and William Hillyer, New York 1755 

Dey, Esther, and Aaron Schuyler, Burliugton .... 178-1 

Dey, Lena, Bergen, and John Neafie, Bergen 1762 

Dey, Mary, Cranberry, and Lewis Pearces, Cranberry 1759 

De Young, Mary, New York, and Samuel Britain, Staten Island 1761 

Dianient, Hannah, and Parsons Lummis, Cumberland 1779 

Dicker, Catherine, Burlington, and John Jacobs, Burlington 1774 

Dicker, 1 Catherine, and Hugh Jacobs, Burlington 1781 

Dickerson, Margarett, and Samuel Morgan, Salem 1760 

Dickersou, Martha, Perth Amboy, and Nathan Cooper, Morris 1751 

Dickery, Rachel, Mannington, and William Petersou, Mannington . . . 1765 

Dickey, Margaret, and George Fling, Salem 1735 (?) 

Dickey, Margaret, and Jacob Nixson, Salem 1776 

Dickey, Mary, Salem, and Edmond Nix, Salem 1728 

Dickinson, Margaret, and William Creay, Salem 1754 

Dickinson, Sarah, Salem, and James Bond, Salem 1768 

Dickinson, Susannah, and Curtis Trenchard, Salem 1778 

Dickson, Jane, Gloucester, and John Campbell, Gloucester 1754 

Dickson, Mary, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Hezekiah Ireland, Gt. Egg Harb. 1758 

Dickson, Mary, and Caleb Robinson, Woolwich 1786 

Dickson, Rachel, Salem, and Thomas Hewins, Salem 1745 

Dickson, Susaunah, Salem, and Charles Ruinsey, Salem. 1739 

Die, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Joris Bushkirk, Bergen 1748 

Die, Jain, Bergen, and John Varick, Bergen 1749 

Dildine, Abigail, and Enos Goble, Sussex 1778 

Dilks, Ann, Jr., and Jeremiah Carter, Gloucester. 1757 

Dilks, Hannah, and William Sharp, New Jersey 1779 

Dilks, Rachel, Gloucester, and Joshua Moore, Philadelphia 1750 

Dilks, Sarah, Gloucester, and Samuel Champion, Gloucester,. ... ... .1746 

Dilkes, Amey, Gloucester, and John Duffill, Gloucester 1760 

Dilks,- Catherine, and Hugh Jacobs, Burlington 1781 

Dillen, Susanna, Cape May, and William Goff, Jr., Cape May 1764 

Dillon, Mary, Salem, and James Dillon, Salem 1739 

Dillon, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and Aaron Buck, Shrewsbury 1759 

Dillon, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Harman Enock, Bucks, Pa 1711 

Dilts, Anna, and William Lyons, Hunterdon 1783 

Din, Sarah, Monmouth, and Abijah Merrill, Morris 1763 

Ditmus, Catherine, and Jacobus Van Nuys, Somerset 1781 

1 Query: or Dilks. 

2 Or Dicker. 



June 


12 


Feb. 


5 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


15 


Oct. 


16 


April 


21 


Oct, 


9 


June 


18 


Mar, 


29 


Nov. 


17 


July 


5 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


4 


June 


4 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


22 


Mar. 


26 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


19 


July 


31 


July 


20 


Oct. 


9 


July 


24 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


13 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


29 


May 


23 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


3 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


31 


Dec. 


18 


Mar. 


3 


Jan. 


29 


Oct. 


is 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


28 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


24 


July 


29 


Jan. 


Hi 



I I 8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ditnms, Mary, and Peter Voorhese, Somerset. . . 1779 

Ditmus, Phebe, and Thomas Drue, Somerset 1781 

Disberry, Catherine, Amboy, and John Bowne, Monmouth 1752 

Disbrow, Anne, Middlesex, and Joseph Rue, Middlesex .1752 

Disbrow, Deborah, South Amboy, and James Nowlau, Middletown. . . . 1758 
Disbrow, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Warne, Perth Amboy. . . 1 755 

Disbrow, Hannah, Maidenhead, and Benjamin Oppie, Somerset 1764 

Disbrow, Mary, Middlesex, and Elisha Letts, Middlesex 1772 

Disbrow, Meleny, South Amboy, and Joshua Warne, South Amboy. . . 1762 

Disisway, Ann, Staten Island, and Moses Doty, Staten Island 1764 

Disosway, Charity, Staten Island, and Isaac Prall, Staten Island 1775 

Dixon, Anne, New Jersey, and Mathias Miller, New Jersey 1743 

Dobbins, Rebecca, Gloucester, and Joshua Hopper, Gloucester 1768 

Dobbins, Sarah, Burlington, and John Hollinshead, Burlington 1767 

Dobbs, Leah, and Jacob Bertholf, Bergen . . 1786 

Doble, Phebe, and Thomas Fenton, Bucks, Pa 1784 

Dobson, Mary, and Joseph Bryne, Burlington 1778 

Dodson, Mary, Burlington, and Richard Boyes, Burlington 1683 

Doele, Margrit, and Adam Vanorde, Hackensack 1762 

Dole, Hannah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Ingerson, Gloucester 1728 

Dole, Hannah, and Daniel Ingersol, Gloucester 1773 

Dole, Rebecca, and Joshua Garwood, Gloucester 1769 

Donaldson, Margaret, Darby, and Gustavus Hamilton, Philadelphia. ..1760 

Done, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Samuel Surges, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Donham, Hannah, Somerset and Henry Vennest, Somerset 1751 

Donuell, Mary, and William Clark, Burlington 1779 

Donnelson, Huldah, Pennsylvania, and John Underwood, Pennsylvania. 1728 

Doremus, Fytie, Bergen, and John Hopper, Bergen 1766 

Doremus, Catharine, Bergen, and Jonathan Traphagen, Bergen 1770 

Doremus, Margaret, and William Tearman, Bergen 1788 

Doremus, Alche, and Peter Riker, Pequanock 1783 

Doren, Mary, Burlington, and Robert Baester, Burlington 1774 

Dorland, Lenah, and Rulif Van Arsdale, Somerset 1779 

Dormau, Jane, and Thomas Hooten, Burlington 1778 

Dorn, Nelly, Monmouth, and Hendrick Willson, Somerset.. , 1751 

Dome, Catherine, Monmouth, and John Tipples, Monmouth 1762 

Dorset, Rachel, Middletown, and Gisbert Van Brackel 1743 

Dorsett, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Willims, Freehold 1761 

Dorsett, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Vauderbelt, Middletown .1761 

Dorsett, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Samuel Carhart, Middletown 1764 

Dorsett, Mary, Middletown, and Peter V. D. Hoef, Middletown 1761 

Doster, Rebecca, Burlington, and James Chivers, Burlington 1741 

Dotey, Anne, Burlington, and Job Kindell, Burlington 1775 

Dotie, Mary, New Brunswick, and Isaac Brooks, New Brunswick ] 739 

Doty, Anne, Somerset, and Benjamin Lewis, Somerset 1768 

Doty, Mary, and Zebedee Totten, Staten Island 1770 



Feb. 


1 


Aug. 


24 


May 


27 


Dec. 


2 


April 


3 


Nov. 


3 


Jan. 


9 


Mar. 


12 


Oct. 


28 


Aug. 


7 


Oct. 


12 


Dec. 


27 


Feb. 


15 


Aug. 


25 


Jan. 


14 


June 


26 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


1 


Jan. 


28 


Dec. 


27 


Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


2 


April 


9 


June 


5 


Dec. 


16 


July 


29 


Dec. 


6 


Sept. 


23 


Oct. 


18 


May 


31 


July 


23 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


7 


July 


17 


April 


30 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


15 


June 


30 


Mar. 


11 


April 


1 


Sept. 


28 


Feb. 


27 


Feb. 


11 


May 


26 



Marriage licenses. 1 19 

Doubleday, Marcy, Cape May, and Archable Mickle, Cape May 1762 Feb. 12 

Doud, Desiah, Sussex, and Owen Owens, Sussex . .'. 17G8 Nov. 8 

Dougan, Auu, and Simon Ludwick, Hunterdon 1780 May 30 

Doughty, Anna, Somerset, and Zeah Lewis, Somerset 1760 June 17 

Doughty, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Ellison, Burlington 1758 Mar. 23 

Doughty, Elizabeth, and Euos Lippincott, Burlington .... 1779 Sept. 18 

Doughty, Esther, Hunterdon, aud John Coats, Hunterdon.. 1727 July 22 

Doughty, Margaret, Egg Harbour, and John Ilisley 1758 May 4 

Doughty, Mary, Gloucester, and Abel Lee, Gloucester 1761 Feb. 7 

Doughty, Sarah, and John Humphreys, Burlington 1758 May 8 

Doughty, Sarah, Monmouth, -and John Feuton, Monmouth 1781 Feb. 27 

Doughty, Susannah, Middlesex, and Daniel Leonard, Middlesex 1761 Nov. 20 

Douglass, Ann, and Charles Simms, Trenton . . 1778 Dec. 15 

Douglass, Anne, Sussex, and James McCollougb, Sussex. 1770 June 25 

Douglass. Damarus, Trenton, aud William Till, Philadelphia 1746 Oct. 24 

Doutie, Elizabeth, Amwell, and David Bimbo, Amwell 1749 Dec. 29 

Douw, Anna, Somerset, and Samuel Minor, Somerset .... 1740 Mar. 9 

Dove, Elizabeth, and Michael Layer, Middlesex 1758 Mar. 13 

Dove, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joshua Lee, Middlesex 1739 July 28 

Dove, Isabell, Lower Freehold, and John Buckalew, Amboy 1731 Dec. 25 

Dowdney, Sarah, and Jeremiah Young, Cumberland 1783 April 1 

Dowe, Elizabeth, and Francis Van Winkle, Essex 1785 Feb. 3 

Dowers, Mary, and Enoch W T illson, Great Egg Harbour 1785 Feb. 7 

Down, Jemima, Deptford, and Wdliam Smallwood, Gloucester 1736 Mar. 15 

Down, Martha, Chesterfield, and Joseph Stewart, Chesterfield 1756 Nov. 12 

Downes, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Birrett, New Jersey 1767 Jan. 7 

Downey, Mary, Staten Island, and John Stogdill, Staten Island. 1750 June 9 

..Downs, Barbara, and George Cozens, Gloucester 1783 Oct. 22 

Doz, Martha, and Benjamin Flower . . 1778 Sept. 24 

Drake, Anne, Piscataway, and Lambert Sickles, Piscataway. 1749 July 21 

Drake, Catharine, Middlesex, and Henry Molleson, Middlesex 1749 Mar. 12 

Drake, Christian, Piscataway, and John Webster, Middlesex 1744 Oct. 13 

Drake, Lydia, and William Drake, Bucks, Pa 1746 Jan. 27 

Drake, Lydia, and Matthew Williamson, Sussex. 17S4 Nov. 4 

Drake, Martha, Middlesex, and William Jones, Somerset 1751 Aug. 13 

Drake, Mary, Hopewell, and Charles Woolverton, Amwell 1763 Aug. 8 

Drake, Mary, Middlesex, and Moses Frazee, Middlesex 1764 Mar. 17 

Drake, Mary, and Samuel Titus, Hunterdon 1784 Dec. 15 

Drake, Patience, Middlesex, and John Jones, Somerset 1763 Dec 12 

Drake, Rachel, Middlesex, and Gershom Drake, Middlesex 1740 Aug. 25 

Drake, Rebecka, New Brunswick, and Daniel White, New Brunswick.. 1740 April 28 

Drake, Rutb, Essex, and Nathan Drake, Piscataway ... 1752 Nov. 8 

Drake, Sarah, Piscataway, aud Henry Sharp, Piscataway 1758 Feb. 8 

Drake, Sarah, and James Everingham, Monmouth 1762 Mar. 20 

Drake, Sarah, and William Bings, Hunterdon . . 1780 Jan. 27 

Drake, Ursula, Hunterdon, and Jeremiah Manning, Essex 1758 Sept. 23 



120 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Dramme, Anne, Shrewsbury, and Martin Reet, Shrewsbury 1759 

Draper, Jemima, Burlington, and Peter Renier, Burlington 17-41 

Draper, Jemima, and John Cleaver, Cumberland , . 1780 

Draper, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Bevis, Burlington 1737 

Draper, Mary, and James Thompson, Lower Penns Neck 1784 

Drinkwater, Ann, Middlesex, and Anthony Ham, Middlesex 1747 

Driver, Ann, Gloucester, and Jeffery Chew, Gloucester 1732 

Driver, Anne, Burlington, and Henry Tradeway, Burlington 1685 

Driver, Kachel, Gloucester, and William Middleton, Gloucester 1735 

Driver, Sarah, Burlington, and William Cook, Philadelphia 1730 

Drollinger, Margaret, Salem, and Philip Kelch, Salem 1764 

Droman, Diadame, Shrewsbury, and George Archer, Monmouth 1762 

Drommou, Mary, and Abijah Smith, Shrewsbury . . . ^ 1751 

Drum, Mary, and Richard Harding, Sussex 1775 

Drummond, Mary, and Thomas Ford, Burlington 1782 

Drummond, Ruth, Monmouth, and Joseph Kiunan, Monmouth 1752 

Drummond, Susannah, Saddle River, and Garret Vanderhoof, S. R. . .1779 

Dubelday, Joan, and Daniel Schellinger, Cape May 1758 

Dubois, Sarah, and Henry Wyncoop, Pennsylvania . . 1782 

Duckworth, Anna, Burlington, and Samuel Rose, Burlington 1739 

Duckworth, Mary, Burlington, and Hugh Hartly, Burlington 1740 

Dudin, Mary, and Henry Moore, Middlesex 1747 

Duehurst, Margaret, and Thomas Clarke .... 1692 

Duell, Mary, and James Toy, Chester 1788 

Duffey, Jamima, and Thomas Bennett, Jr. . 1778 

Dugless, Mary, Burlington, and Judiah Lippincott, Burlington 1762 

Dugless, Mary, and William Hendrickson, Monmouth 1762 

Dugroot, Sarah, and Albert Cornell, New York 1763 

Duley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Daniel Goodbody, Monmouth 1757 

Duley, Marah, Monmouth, and William Lawrence, Monmouth 1753 

Dumarest, Elisabet, and Cornelius Van Saen, Bergen 1765 

Dumont, Arianche, and Nicholas W 7 illiamson. Somerset 1778 

Dumont, Charity, Somerset, and George Vroom, Middlesex 1741 

Dumont, Januetje, Middlesex, and Peter Vroom 1750 

Dunbar, Prudence, Trenton, and John Wells, Trenton 1746 

Duncan, Catherine, Pennsylvania, and Joseph Carter, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Duncan, Jane, and Jacob Decow, Burlington 1736 

Dunfee, Mary, Springfield, and Anthony Roads, Springfield 1765 

Dungan, Elizabeth, Oxford, Pa., and Elias Brown, Oxford, Pa 1774 

Dungworth, Esther, and Joseph Kennard 1735 

Dunham, Anna, Amboy, and Uriah Corlies, Monmouth 1752 

Dunham, Anne, Essex, and Isaac Hull, Somerset 1751 

Dunham, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Martin, New Jersey 1782 

Dunham, Hannah, Middlesex, and Joseph Mitchel, Middlesex 1753 

Dunham, Isabella, and John Rattoone, New York 1768 

Dunham, Martha, Perth Amboy, and Edward Griffin, Perth Amboy. . . 1758 



April 


21 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


11 


Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


18 


July 


8 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


8 


July 


9 


May 


12 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


27 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


19 


July 


23 


Dec. 


20 


July 


4 


April 


20 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


29 


May 


27 


Nov. 


2 


Mar. 


27 


Jan. 


14 


Mar. 


27 


April 


22 


Jan. 


26 


Dec. 


31 


Mar. 


19 


Jan. 


9 


May 


5 


Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


20 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


16 


Sept. 


20 


April 


27 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


6 


June 


22 


Nov. 


25 


Jan. 


3 


June 


20 


June 


14 


June 


20 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 12 1 

Dunham, Mary, Somerset, and Samuel Brown, Somerset 1762 

Dimbam, Sarah, Piscataway, and Eenajah Dunn 1744 

Dunham, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Adam Hope, Huuterdon . 1765 

Dunham, Tabitha, Middlesex, and Lambert Merrell, Middlesex.. 1763 

Dunkins, Mary, and George Miller 1731 

Dunlap, Barsheba, Piles Grove, and John Stephens, Piles Grove .... 1776 

Dunlap, Elizabeth, and Alexander Hill, Salem 1756 

Dunlap, Isabella, and John Head Strek, Salem 1752 

Dunlap, Mary, and Elias Craig, Salem. 1773 

Duulapp, Jane, and John Kidd, Salem 1757 

Dunlop, Jean, and John Allen, Sussex 1768 

Dunn, Amy, and Caleb Ayers Cumberland 1760 

Dunn, Catherine, Salem, and David Alexander, Salem 1762 

Dunn, Elizabeth, Stateu Island, and Alexander Gait, Essex 173'J 

Dunn, Elizabeth, Piscataway, and Thomas Fitz Randolph, Piscataway. 1755 

Dunn, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Mashek Hull, Middlesex 1764 

Dunn, Isabella, and Ephraim Dunn, Middlesex 1766 

Dunn, Mary, Burlington, and William Leeds, Burlington 1739 

Dunn, Mary, Middlesex, and David Dunham, Middlesex 1766 

Dunn, Nancy, and Hendrick Van Nortwick, Somerset 1781 

Dunn, Rachel, Middlesex, and Michael Moor, Middlesex 1756 

Dunn, Sarah, Gloucester, and Thomas Briani, Gloucester 1727 

Dunn, Sarah, Pennsylvania, and Thomas Evans, Pennsylvania 1728 

Dunneberger, Elizabeth, and Alexander Quarrin, Philadelphia 1783 

Dupere, Maria, Morris, and James Hyndshaw, Pennsylvania 1746 

Durell, Sarah, Burlington, and John George, Burlington 1765 

Duremes, Leah, and Peter Vreeland 1763 

Duremus, Maritje, Bergen, and Albeit Van Vorhis, New Barbadoes. . .1769 

Dune, Wyntje, Bergen, and Jacob Vreland, Hackensack 1769 

Durragh, Elizabeth, Somerset, and William Dealy, Somerset 1744 

Durye, Sarah, and Rynier Quackenbos, Hackensack 1765 

Duryee, Catherine, and Peter Wilson, New Barbadoes 1781 

Duryee, Dinah, and Denise Vanliew, Somerset 1762 

Dusenbery, Mary, and Joshua Opdycke, Hunterdon 1782 

Dusoswa, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Jonathan Hutchinson, Middlesex. 1737 

Dutton, Priscilla, and John James, Burlington 1778 

Devier, Mary, and James Earwin, Gloucester 1774 

Dye, Catherine, Middlesex, and William Covenhoven, Middlesex 1764 

Dye, Jamathy, and Benjamin Vanderbeck, Windsor 1771 

Dyer, Charity, Bucks, Pa., and Edward Dyre, Bucks, Pa 1766 

Dyer, Comfort, Bucks, Pa., and Humphrey Stringer, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Dyer, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Joseph Furnis, Philadelphia. . 1736 

Dyer, Margaret, Burlington, and Phillip Nold, Burlington 1774 

Dyer, Priscilla, and John Bell, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Dykins, Catherine, Tewksbury, and Joseph Van Kirk, Readingtown. . . 1773 



July 


26 


Mar. 


29 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


28 


July 


27 


Mar. 


11 


Mar. 


16 


April 


8 


May 


25 


Mar. 


8 


Sept. 


29 


July 


30 


Dec. 


19 


Feb. 


18 


May 


26 


Mar. 


3 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


19 


Dec. 


17 


Dec. 


17 


May 


•J 5 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


27 


Jan. 


1 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


2 


April 


16 


April 


25 


Dec. 


15 


Jan. 


11 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


3 


Mar. 


4 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


25 


Dec. 


11 


Feb. 


6 


April 


29 


May 


21 


July 


25 


Sept. 


22 


Mar. 


15 



122 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

MALES. k 

Eagles, William, New York, arid Ann Mackel, Monmouth 1763 

Earick, John, Burlington, and Sarah Gibson, Burlington 1756 

Earl, Edward, Bergen, and Claucy Vrelanrl, Essex 1747 

Earl, John, Burlington, and Estlier Hall, Burlington 1761 

Earl, Thomas, Burlington, and Judith Bjstido, Monmouth 1736 

Earl, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary McLeary. 1785 

Earl, William, New Hanover, and Mary Warren . 1733 

Earle, Laurence, Bergen, and Anne Moore 1762 

Earle, Morris, Bergen, and Rebecca Hastier 1746-7 

Earle, Morris, Bergen, and Martha Bush, Bergen 1751 

Earle, Peter, Bergen, and Rachel Ackerman, Bergen 1767 

Earle, Robert, Bergen, and Mary Smith, Bergen 1763 

Earling, Daniel, Burlington, and Rebecca Herber, Burlington . 1768 

Early, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Prickett, Burlington 1757 

Earwin, James, Gloucester, and Mary Devier ] 774 

Eastbum, John, Middlesex, and Mary Higgins 1769 

Eastburn, Robert, Charleston, S. C , and Abigail Ingles, Perth Amboy. 1768 

East burn, Thomas, Cumberland, and Abigail Jones 1779 

Eastlack, Daniel, Gloucester, and Mary Cheeseman, Gloucester 1740 

Eastlack, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Hillmau 1735 

Eastlack, John, Gloucester, and Mary Bilton, Gloucester 1737 

Eastlack, John, Jr., Gloucester, and Elizabeth Read, Salem 1751 

Eastlack, John, New Jersey, and Jerusa Parks, New Jersey 1770 

Eastwood, Abraham, Middlesex, and Jemima Potter 1738 

Eaten, Benjamin, Salem, and Sarah Vandike, Salem 1765 

Eaten, John, Salem, and Anne Chattel, Salem 1770 

Eaton, Joshua, Salem, and Sarah Swing 1779 

Eaton, William, Pennsylvania, and Ellen Tillington, Pennsylvania. . . 1728 

Eayre, Habakkuk, Northampton, and Mary Jones, Burlington 1747 

Eayre, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Rogers, Burlington 1756 

Eayre, Joseph, Burlington, and Charity Ballenger, Burlington 1767 

Eayre, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Garwood, Burlington 1732 

Eayres, Hosea, Burlington, and Hannah Leeds 1773 

Eckerson, Garret, Orange, N. Y., Derrickie Springstien, Orange, N. Y.1763 

Eckesen, John, Bergen, and Angonietie Banta 1774 

Ecret, Isaac, Burlington, and Lydia Bogart 1778 

Eddey, James, Woodbridge, and Mary Gach, Woodbridge .... 1743 

Eddis, Thomas, Cumberland, and Ann Johnson 1780 

Edgar, Alexander, Middlesex, and Mary Smith, Middlesex 1746 

Edgar, Charles, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Moon, Bucks, Pa 1759 

Edgar, David, Woodbridge, and Hannah Rolph, Woodbridge 1743 

Edgar, John, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Bodine 1776 

Edgar, William, Woodbridge, and Experience Clarkson, Woodbridge. .1751 
Edgar, Thomas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Knaps 1769 



Nov. 


27 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


20 


Nov. 


16 


Sept. 


30 


Feb. 


5 


Sept. 


12 


Dec. 


14 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


23 


Aug. 


7 


Dec. 


12 


Feb. 


23 


April 


16 


Jan. 


4 


April 


22 


May 


6 


Aug. 


23 


June 


28 


Nov. 


8 


June 


24 


May 


29 


May 


22 


Nov. 


8 


July 


13 


May 


8 


June 


12 


Aug. 


4 


May 


24 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


5 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


2 


June 


11 


April 


2 


Aug. 


24 


Mav 


29 


June 


12 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


— 


Feb. 


22 


Nov. 


28 


Mar. 


30 


Mar. 


•25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



123 



Edgarton, Thomas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Saint 1750 April 27 

Edgenian, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Thimble, Burlington. .. 1754 Jan. 7 

Edman, Samuel, Burlington, and Dorothy Powell 1779 Aug. 12 

Edmiston, David, Salem, and Mary Peterson, Salem 17G5 Mar. 26 

Edmiston, Hugh, Cumberland, and Margaret Yeates 1780 April 14 

Edmonds, AarOD, Cape May, and Lydia Eldridge 1790 June 21 

Edmons, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Jane Whilden 1780 Jnly 17 

Edmunds, Dounes, Cape May, and Experience Hand, Cape May ... . 1752 Aug. 10 

Edmunds, Dounes, Cape Ma}', and Mary Hand 1774 Jan. 18 

Edmunds, Richard, Cape May, and Esther Cresse, Cape May. .... 1769 June 21 

Edmunds, Robert, Cape May, and Thankful Barncraft 1781 Feb. 27 

Edsall, Jacobus, Sussex and Hannah Post, Sussex 1777 May 28 

Edsall, Richard, Sussex, and Mary Seward, Sussex 1770 Nov. 29 

Edward, Robert, Pennsylvania, and Susannah Harvey, Pennsylvania. .1728 May 11 

Edwards, Daniel, Salem, and Ruth Ireland 1771 Nov. 4 

Edwards, David, Cape May, and Deborah Thomson, Cape May 1772 Jan. 20 

Edwards, Hummel, Pennsylvania, and Ellen Scaife, Pennsylvania. .1730 July 31 

Edwards, Henry, Pennsylvania, and Mary Bath, Pennsylvania 1736 Dec. 11 

Edwards, James, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Heddy. 1763 May 24 

Edwards, John, Burlington, and Susannah Benuet, Burlington 1746 May 6 

Edwards, John, Burlington, and Letitia Moon, Burlington 1756 Aug. 17 

Edwards, Jonathan, Cape May, and Pnebe Osbou 1766 May 31 

Edwards, Joseph, Cape May, and Elizabeth Ingersol, Gloucester 1752 Aug. 1 

Edwards, Joseph, Cape May, and Susanna Ingerson 1776 Dec. 9 

Edwards, Joseph, Salem, and Mary Hancock 1777 July 7 

Edwards, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Tallman, Burlington 1782 May 16 

Edwards, Owen, Burlington, and Susannah Famsworth, Burlington.. .1732 April 11 

Edwards, Owen, Burlington, and Hannah English 1733 Jan. 8 

Edwards, Philip, Monmouth, and Margaret West, Monmouth 1764 April 4 

Edwards, Richard, Philadelphia, and Jemima Wiseheart, Philadelphia. 1736 Nov. 6 

Edwards, Robert, and Sarah Bennett , 1701 Nov. 20 

Edwards, Samuel, Monmouth, and Margaret Hulit, Monmouth 1749 Oct. 2 

Edwards, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Anna Williams, Philadelphia. . .1731 Sept. 21 

Edwards, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Vaughan 1770 June 19 

Edwards, Webley, Monmouth, and Margaret Wool ley, Monmouth. .. 1712-3 Mar. 3 

Egbert, Daniel, Staten Island, and Sarah Frost, Staten Island 1746 June 18 

Egbert, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Smith, Hunterdon. . 1775 May 

Ege, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Anna Titus, Huuterdon 1774 May 28 

Egger, George, Monmouth, and Arie Beard, Monmouth 1749 July 4 

Eggmen, Bartholomew, Burlington, and Elizabeth Tatum 1759 Nov. 26 

Eglington, Edward, Bullingsport, and Sarah Hoult 1685 May 11 

Eick, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hutchen 1782 Oct. 27 

Eicke, Paul, Hunterdon, and Catherine M'Cerns 1785 Feb. 7 

Elbersen, John, Cape May, and Anne Bancraft 1780 June 22 

Eldredge, Aaron, Cape May, and Elizabeth Stillwell 1761 Jan. 25 

Eldredge, Daniel, Cumberland, and Dorcas Bacon 1789 Jan. 30 



124 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Eldredge, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Sarah Craford, Cape May. „ 1741 

Eldredge, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Phebe Crowell, Cape May 1768 

Eldredge, Robert, Cape May, and Esther Edward 1776 

Eldredge, Silas, Cape May, and Elizabeth Eldredge 1778 

Eldredge, David, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Johnson, Monmouth. . .. . 1748 

Eldredge, Eli, Cape May, and Priscilla Learning, Cape May 1761 

Eldridge, Elisha, Cape May, and Phebe Ludlam, Cape May 1729 

Eldridge, Enoch, Gloucester, and Prudence Irwin 1785 

Eldridge, Jabus, Burlington, and Esther Reeves, Northampton 1746 

Eldridge, Jabez, Burlington, and Mary Hopewell, Burlington 1776 

Eldridge, Jacob, Gloucester, and Sarah Covenover 1764 

Eldridge, James, Burlington, and Ester Rodgers, Burlington 1729 

Eldridge, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Lydia Learning, Cape May 1775 

Eldridge, Jesse, Burlington, and Mary Reese 1778 

Eldridge, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Antrum, Burlington 1744 

Eldridge, Levi, Gloucester, and Sarah Pongard, Gloucester 1 763 

Eldridge, Levi, Cape May, and Abigail Crowell 1766 

Eldridge, Noah, Burlington, and Margaret Haines 1779 

Eldridge, Obadiah, Jr., Burlington, and Ann Wilson, Burlington. ...1740 
Eldridge, Obadiah, Burlington, and Achsah Haines, Burlington.. .. 1764 

Eldridge, Reuben, and Susanna Perkins . . 1735 

Eldridge, Reuben, Burlington, and Ann Endicott, Burlington 1751 

Eldridge, Solomon, Burlington, and Elizabeth Fort 1744 

Eldridge, William, Burlington, and Sarah Crispeu, Burlington 1772 

Eldridge, William, Cape May, and Judith Corson, Cape May 1778 

Eldridge, Jabez, Burlington, and Hannah Forker, Burlington 1771 

Elexander, John, Cape May, and Jane Gollachar, Cape May. 1768 

Elkincton, George, Burlington, and Mary Bingham, Burlington 1683 

Elkinton, George, Burlington, and Sarah Perrine 1748 

Elkinton, George, Burliugton, and Beulah Wells 1783 

Elleson, James, Burlington, and Ann Addis 1758 

Ellet, Andrew, Pennsylvania, and Mary Bayly, Pennsylvania 1727 

Ellicott, William, Essex, and Mary Vanwinkle 1751 

Ellis, Aaron, Burlington, and Susannah Ellison, Burlington 1754 

Ellis, Francis, Burlington, and Leah Brown 1754 

Ellis, George, Gloucester, and Sarah Wild 1735 

Ellis, Isaac, Gloucester, and Sarah Hillman 1785 

Ellis, Jeremiah, Chester, Pa., and Mary Hugh, Chester, Pa 1734 

Ellis, Job, Burlington, and Mary Gard 1769 

Ellis, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Hinchman, Gloucester 1760 

Ellis, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Bullers 1785 

Ellis, Levi, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hillman 1783 

Ellis, Samuel, Gloucester, and Hannah Gilbert 1772 

Ellis, Simeon, Gloucester, and Priscilla Bates, Gloucester 1760 

Ellis, Thomas, Burlington, and Margery Hutchins, Burlington 1740 

Ellis, Thomas, Jr., Gloucester, and Hannah Albertson 1759 



April 


14 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


11 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


22 


June 


20 


Sept. 


20 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


30 


Aug. 


21 


June 


4 


Sept. 


8 


May 


2 


Sept. 


L2 


July 


26 


Aug. 


7 


July 


31 


April 


21 


Nov. 


28 


Dec. 


17 


April 


29 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


20 


Dec. 


10 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


18 


July 


24 


Feb. 


11 


Sept. 


2 


April 


1 


May 


7 


Oct. 


7 


Feb. 


12 


July 


14 


Oct. 


7 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


1 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


13 


Oct. 


31 


Mar. 


24 


July 


L2 


Sept. 


•J 5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



1^5 



Ellis, Thomas, Gloucester, and Anna Humphries, Burlington 1705 April 9 

Ellis, William, Gloucester, and Amy Matlack, Gloucester 1756 Dec. 30 

Ellis, William, Burlington, and Mary Taylor 1779 Oct. 15 

Ellison, Amos, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ellison, Burlington 1760 Nov. 11 

Ellison, Ezekiel, Monmouth, and Awrion Chel Bennet, Monmouth. . . .1762 Oct. 6 

Ellison, James, Burlington, and Hannah Iretou. ... 1778 April 19 

Ellison, Johu, Monmouth, and ( latharine Vandyk, Burlington ....... 1756 Mar. 1 

Ellison, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Doughty, Burliugtou 1758 Mar. 23 

Ellison, John, and Phebe Codington 1774 Oct, 17 

Ellison, Lewis, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Price, Monmouth 1766 Jan. 27 

Ellison, .Samuel, Perth Amboy, and Sarah Barber, Perth Amboy 1750 Jan. 17 

Ellison, Samuel, Middlesex, and Mary Holmes, Monmouth 1762 Feb. 9 

Ellison, Thomas, Middlesex, and Rachel Ellison, Middlesex 1748 Aug. 4 

Ellison, Thomas, Monmouth, and Margaret Mitchell, Monmouth. 1764 May 15 

Elliss, John, Middlesex, and Mary Shores 1770 April 17 

Ellwell, Johu, Salem, and Rachael Garrison, Salem 1727 Mar. 24 

Elmer, Daniel, Cumberland, and Mary Shaw, Cumberland ..1761 Sept. 28 

Elmer, Eli, Cumberland, and Jane Thompson, Bridgeton 1781 Feb. 13 

Elmer, Philimon, Essex, and Catherine Slight 1781 Nov. 

Elmer, Theophilus, Cumberland, and Abigail Lawrence, Cumberland. . 1765 Sept. 3 

Elston, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Pike 1768 Nov. 17 

Eltiuge, Jacobus, New York, and Elizabeth Hall, Somerset 1742 June 12 

Elton, Anthony, and Elizabeth Revell . 1688 Feb. 20 

Elton, Robert, Burlington, and Sarah Woolmau, Burlington.. 1737 April 18 

Elton, Thomas, Burlington, and Margaret Griffin 1769 July 7 

Elvertson, Nicholas, Burlington, and Phebe Taylor 1777 Dec. 8 

Elwell, Israel, Salem, and Margaret Tausey 1773 Dec. 15 

Elwell, Samuel, Salem, and Margaret Phillpot, Salem 1761 Dec. 31 

Elwell, Samuel, Salem, and Anuetha Morgan, Salem 1773 May 17 

Ely, Allison, Middlesex, and Hannah Hammell 1771 Nov. 9 

Ely, George, Jr., Amwell, and Susannah Farle, Amwell 1768 April 27 

Ely, Johu, Hunterdon, and Phebe Allison, Burlington 1731 May 3 

Ely, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Warford, Hunterdon 1762 June 18 

Ely, Joshua, and Rachell Lee 1699 Nov. 9 

Ely, Matthew, Monmouth, and Elleanor Chasy, Monmouth 1761 April 22 

Ely, Noah, Essex, and Perah Merrey, Essex .1748 Sept. 6 

El}-, William, Trenton, and Jemima Hunt 1734 Mar. 25 

Ely, William, Middlesex, aud Mary Hutchason 1767 Mar. 17 

Ely, William, Essex, and Hillitie Radcliff . .'. 1781 May 19 

Emaus, Abraham, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Weaver, Monmouth. ... 1762 Feb. 20 

Emans, Abraham, Monmouth, and Hannah Lane, Hunterdon 1768 Nov. 4 

Etnans, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Sarah Van Duyn, Somerset 1752 Nov. 13 

Emans, Cornelius, Monmouth, aud Johannah Laytou, Monmouth 1703 Jan. 13 

Emans, Elisha, Monmouth, aud Zilphi Emans, Monmouth 1759 Sept, 26 



1 This is ;m English- speaking elerfc 
aantje, the Dutch for Ariana. 



attempt to reproduce phonetically the name Art- 



126 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Etnans, Jacob, Monmouth, aud Margaret Emails, Monmouth. 1755 Jan. 19 

Emans, Thomas, Monmouth, aud Dorsa Burk, Monmouth 1760 July 19 

Emens, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Mary Emans, Monmouth. .... 1747 Dec. 26 

Emeus, John, Monmouth, and Esther Ketchatn, Monmouth 1747 May 4 

Emerson, James, Jr., Hunterdon, and Nancy Reed 1788 Feb. 20 

Emley, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Steward, Monmouth 1767 Feb. 13 

Ernley, Joseph, Burlington, and Phebe Mills ■. . 1772 Nov. 23 

Emley, Samuel, Jr., Burlington, and Catharine Audriss, Burlington. . .1763 May 21 

Emley, Simuel, Monmouth, aud Ann Kirby, Burlington 1775 Nov. 21 

Emley, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wardell, Monmouth 1753 Nov. 14 

Ernley, William, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Saxton, Freehold 1746 July 15 

Emley, William, Monmouth, aud Esther Wright, Monmouth 1775 Sept. 29 

Emmaus, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Margaret Scheuck, Monmouth. . 1750 Dec. 12 

Emons, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Saray Holstead, Monmouth 1767 Sept. 9 

Emons, Nicholas, Sussex, and Catherine Westbrook, Sussex 1765 Mar. 8 

Enclman, William, Monmouth, and Mary Coxe, Monmouth ; 1729 April 28 

Endicot, John, Burlington, aud Ruth Matlock, Burlington 1749 Oct. 19 

Eudicott, Barzilla, Barlington, and Anne Morton, Burlington 1775 April 12 

Endicott, Jacob, Gloucester, aud Melicent Badcock 1769 Nov. 10 

Eudicott, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Welsh 1759 June 19 

England, Edward, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Moran, Burlington 1741 Nov. 4 

England, Poole, 47th Regt. Foot, and Ann Sarjaut 1774 Sept. 1 

England, Thomas, Gloucester, and Ester Adams 1782 Jan. 1 

Engle, John, Burlington, and Haunah Middleton 1737 Nov. 1 

Engle, Samuel, Burlingtcn, and Sarah Myers, Burlington 1775 Aug. 21 

Englehart, Johu, Burlington, and Mary Marian 1779 Sept. 23 

Euglish, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Eddis, Burlington 1744 Aug. 11 

English, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Price 1774 Sept. 24 

English, Amos, Burlington, and Mary Craft, Burlington 1765 Mar. 6 

English, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Lyrlia Vandyke, Burlington 1761 Oct. 5 

English, David, Monmouth, and Jane Robinson, Monmouth 1751 Dec. 14 

Euglish, Isaac, Burlington, and Rebecca Warner, Burlington 1764 Jan. 13 

English, John, Burlington, and Margaret Barris, Bucks, Pa 1744 Sept. 10 

Euglish, John, Jr., Gloucester, aud Anne In«keep, Barlington 1749 Sept. 30 

English, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Laird, Monmouth 1763 May 21 

Euglish, Joseph, Jr., Burlington, aud Mary Butler, Burlington.. 1769 Oct. 27 

Euglish, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail English, Burliugton 1770 June 2 

English, Robert, Monrnouth, and Elinor Newell, Monmouth 1739 Dec. 8 

English, Robert, Monmouth, and Jane Montgomery, Monmouth. ..... 1761 Aug. 25 

English, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hammel, Burliugton ...1761 Nov. 13 

English, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Rockhill 1783 Aug. 28 

Euglish, Thomas, Barlington, and Ann Smith 1733 Feb. 17 

English, Thomas, Jr., Burlington, and Ann Rockhill, Burlington 1768 Mar. 10 

Euglish, William, Burlington, and Catherine Davison 1785 Dec. 3 

Ennis, James, Bergen, and Jane Browers. 1782 May 23 

Enoch, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Haines 1759 Oct. 16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



127 



Enock, Hannan, Bucks, Pa., ami Mary Dillon, Bucks, Pa 1741 Nov. 12 

Ent, Peter, Hunterdon, and Sarah Kent, Hunterdon 1776 Jan. 27 

Eoff, Garret, Morris, and Sarah Heyer, Morris 1 778 Nov. 20 

Erickson, Michael, Monmouth, and Martha Cole, Monmouth. 1746 June 13 

Errickson, Michael, Jr., Freehold, and Mary Francis, Freehold 1751 Oct. 18 

Erickson, Thomas, Middlesex, and Margaret Abrahams, Middlesex ..1761 April 9 

Ernest, Daniel, Burlington, and Sarah Lame 1779 Mar. 13 

Ervin, John, Gloucester, and Mary Bellows, Gloucester 1746 May 1 

Erwin, Walter, and Sarah Bord, Bergen 1751 Aug. 26 

Erwin, William, Sussex, and Achsah Rockhill 1782 June 5 

Esdall, Edward, Burlington, and Mary Kinison, Burlington. . . . 1774 Mar. 14 

Esdall, John, Burlington, and Sarah Ellis, Burlington 1768 Jan. 2 

Esdall, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Palmer, Burlington 1738 July 1 

Esdall, Thomas, Burlington, and Rachel Mullikan, Burlington 1764 June 28 

Esler, Henry, Morris, and Lenah Ryerson, Pumptou 1782 Nov. 1 

Estell, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Ford, Burlington 1761 Nov. 13 

Estell, Samuel, Burlington, and Anne Fort 1759 Dec. 24 

Estell, Thomas, Monmouth, and Lucia Killam, Amboy 1751 Jan. 1 

Esterby, Peter, Bergen, and Catey Freisinger, Bergen 1770 Oct. 22 

Esllack, John, Gloucester, and Patience Hugg, Gloucester 1741 Ang. 1 

Estlack, John, Jr., Gloucester, and Elizabeth Read, Salem 1751 May 29 

Estlack, Samuel, Gloucester, and Ann Breach, Gloucester 1733 Oct. 29 

Estow, Godfrey, Burlington, and Lettis Symons, New Hanover 1785 Jan. 9 

Estwood, Abraham, Monmouth, and Amy Matsan 1758 July 22 

Ettiuger, John, Burlington, and Theodosia Watson, Burlington 1775 Nov. 18 

Evans, Evan, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Salman, Philadelphia 1736 June 14 

Evans, Isaac, Salem, and Hannah Carll, Salem. 1774 Oct. 18 

Evans, Isaac, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Smith, Burlington. . 1777 April 28 

Evans, Isaac, Burlington, and Esther Collins, Burlington 1782 April 1 

Evans, John, Philadelphia, and Sarah Evans, Philadel 1 ihia 1739 Aug. 30 

Evaus, Lott, Burlington, and Lydia Chanuell, Burlington .1756 Aug. 18 

Evans, Nathan, Burlington, and Hannah French 1792 Mar. 7 

Evans, Thomas, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Dunn, Pennsylvania 1728 Aug. 27 

Evens, Evan, Burlington, and Sarah Middleton, Burlington 1777 June 30 

Evens, Jacob, Gloucester, and Abigail Middleton, Gloucester 1757 Feb. 14 

Evens. Miles, and Hannah Buzby . . 1783 June 18 

Evens, Reuben, Woodbiidge, and Catherine Crowell, Woodbridge.. .1754 Oct. 21 

Evingham, William, Burlington, and Abigail Sherrard, Burlington. . ..1773 Feb. 2 

Everett, Israel, Somerset, and Mary Mershon 1777 May 8 

Everiugham, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Sarah Robins, Monmouth . . . 1728 Aug. 8 

Everingham, James, Monmouth, and Sarah Drake 1762 Mar. 20 

Everingham, Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Dinah Lisning, Monmouth. ..1746 Jan. 8 

Everiugham, John, Monmouth, and Hannah Giberson, Monmouth ...1761 July 11 

Everingham, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Vaughn, Monmouth 1750 Oct. 29 

Everingham, Joseph, Mansfield, and Mary Gilbert, Mansfield ... . . 1751 April 19 

Everingham, William, Burlington, and Lydia Jones 1777 Sept. 30 



128 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Everitt, Abel, Hunterdon, and Margaret Beaver 1782 

Everitt, David, Hunterdon, and Catherine Kase. 1786 

Everitt, Zenas, Northampton, Pa 1769 

Evins, Obadiah, Hunterdon, and Sarah Coleman, Hunterdon 1772 

Evirit, Able, Hunterdon, and Bridget McMurty 1781 

Ewan, Absalome, Burlington, and Rachel Grant, Burlington 1764 

Ewan Ambrose, and Ame Trenton, Burlington 1739 

Ewan, Evan, Burlington, and Mehitable Weaver 1770 

Ewan, John, Burlington, and Martha Euocks, Burlington 1737 

Ewan, John, Burlington, and Susannah Burtis 1770 

Ewan, Julius, Burlington, and Anna Motte 1733 

Ewan, Levi, Burlington, and Sarah Shaver 1784 

Ewan, Moses, Burlington, and Bebecca Stokesberry 1782 

Ewans, Barzilla, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hays, Burlington 1764 

Ewen, John, Salem, and Mary Pledger, Salem 1745 

Ewen, John, Salem, and Margaret Fogg, Salem 1758 

Eweus, Jacob, Salem, and Mary Chandler 1750 

Ewetse, Cornelius, New York, and Elizabeth Latham, Monmouth 1743 

Ewiug, Absalom, Burlington, and Kesiah Taylor 1778 

Ewing, George, Cumberland, and Rachel Harris, Hunterdon ........ 1778 

Ewing, James, Cumberland, and Martha Boyd 1778 

Ewiug, Remington, Cumberland, and Phebe Ewing 1784 

Ewing, Samuel, Cumberland, and Mary Miller, Cumberland 1763 

Ewing, Thomas, Cape May, and Latitia Raney, Cape May 1780 

Eyre, George, Burlington, and Rebecca Shreve, Burlington 1754 

Eyre, George, Burlington, and Mary Lippincott 1789 

Eyre, Nathan, Philadelphia and Sarah Key 1791 

Eyres, George, Burlington, and Mary Smith, Burlington 1729 

Ezdall, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Fordham, Burlington 1764 

FEMALES. k 

Earl, Dorothy, Bergen, and Hassel Ryerson, Bergen 1771 

Earl, Elizabeth, New Hanover, and James Downs, Burlington 1759 

Earl, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Thomas Cutwater, Orange Co., N. Y . . .1774 

Earl, Hannah, Hackensack, and Albert Rose, Hackeusack 1772 

Earl, Hannah, New Barbadoes, and William Sorrel, New Barbadoes . . 1774 

Ear), Hanuah, and Daniel Van Horn, Bergen 1782 

Earl, Mercy, Springfield, and Samuel Gibbs, Springfield 1764 

Earle, Anne, Bergen, and Johu Allen, Bergen 1772 

Earle, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Robert Grenohls, Bsrgen 1765 

Earle, Ellenor, Burlington, and John Cawley, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Earle, Eltie, Hackensack, and Gerret Hopper, Hackensack ... 1748 

Earle, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Borden, Monmouth 1730 

Earley, Nancy, Middletown, and Josiah White, Shrewsbury. . 1762 

Early, Phebe, and Josiah Clark, Gloucester. 1775 

Early, Sarah, and James Payne, Hunterdon 1779 



May 


12 


Mar. 


in 


Dec. 






19 


Sept. 


12 


July 


1 


April 


30 


June 


5 


Nov. 


23 


Feb. 


28 


May 


23 


Mar. 


29 


May 


1 


Mar. 


• 2 


Aug. 


21 


Oct. 


7 


Feb. 


25 


Aug. 


20 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


7 


Oct. 


15 


Jan. 


30 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


7 


April 


10 


Sept. 


30 


Mar. 


3 


May 


15 


Sept. 


27 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


27 


July 


23 


Nov. 


18 


May 


13 


Mar. 


18 


April 


17 


Mar. 


28 


July 


29 


April 


26 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


26 


April 


10 


May 


1 


April 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 29 

E:\sely, Dorothy, and Nathan C renders, Burlington. .». . 178G Nov. 30 

Basley, Mary, and William Baiues, Burlington 1778 Jan. 8 

Eastlack, Elizabeth, and William Haiues, Burlington ... 1777 Aug. 4 

Eastlack, Mary, Gloucester, aud Charles Hubbs, Gloucester 1749 Dec. 15 

Eastland, Abigail, Burlington, and Benjamin Barges, Burlington 1731 Nov. 20 

Eastwood, Mary, Piscataway, ami John Campbell, Woodbridge 1758 July 5 

Eastwood, Mary, Springfield, and John Shute, Waterford 1763 May 23 

Eaton. Alice, and Joseph Dillworth, Philadelphia 1734 Nov. 25 

Eaton, Aun, Salem, and Hans Rudolph, Philadelphia 1736 June 3 

Eaton, Ann, Salem, aud Erasmus Kent, Salem 1747 Feb. 17 

Eatton, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and 'Ihoruas Richardson, New Port.. 1755 April 4 

Eatton, Joanna, Monmouth, and Elihu Spencer, Essex 1750 Oct. 15 

Eatton, Lydia, Shrewsbury, and John Wanton, Jr., Rhode Island. . . .1750 Aug. 10 

Eatton, Margaret, and John Berrien 1759 Aug. 16 

Eatton, Sarah, Shrewsbury, aud Richard Tole, New York ... 1761 June 23 

Eayre, -Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Nehemiah Leeds, Burlington 1774 April 4 

Eayre, Hauuah ; aud William VVoolston, Northampton 1771 Feb. 1 1 

E lyre, Martha, Burlington, aud John Haines, Burlington . 1766 July 29 

Eayre, Priscilla, Burlington, and Euoch Haiues, Burlington 1767 April 6 

Eayre, Rebecca, and Phillip Streakes, Jr , Pennsylvania .... 1779 Oct. 21) 

Eayre, Rebecca, Burlington, aud John Cooper, Burlington.. . . 1783 May 1 

Eayres, Anne, Burlington, and Aaron Haines Burlington 1776 Jan. 14 

Eayres, Hannah, and Mycajah Dobbins, Northampton 1781 June 25 

Eayres, Hannah, and John Deacon, Burliugton 1787 Nov. 20 

Eayres, Mary, aud Joseph Woolston, Northampton 1781 June 25 

Eayres, Sarah, Burlington, and Uriah Hiller, Burlington 1746 July 2 1 

Ebert, Catherine, and John Barnes, Burlington 1781 Dec. 17 

Ebzery, Frances, Philadelphia, aud Samuel Foster, Philadelphia 1754 April 19 

Eckhart, Willimyntie, Bergen, aud Ephraim Marcus V. Rhode, Bergen. 1786 Nov. 21 

Eddis, Mary, Burliugton, and Abraham English, Burliugton 1744 Aug. 11 

Eddy, Sarah, and Thomas Heath, Middlesex. 1768 Nov. 29 

Edgar, Catherine, aud Abraham Laiug, Middlesex 1769 Sept. 27 

Edgar, Jennet, Woodbridge, aud Jeremiah Randolph, Woodbridge . . . 1755 July 10 

Edgar, Rebecca, Bristol, Pa., and Robert Patterson, Bristol, Pa 1765 Jan. 29 

Edge, Mary, New Hanover, aud Joseph Branson, Burlington. ..... .1745-6 Mar. 18 

Edge, Rebecca, Monmouth, and Robert Drummoud, Monmouth 1732 Dec. 24 

Ednaoud, Aun, and Stephen Lane, Burliugton 1777 Sept. 8 

Edmond, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Abraham Fort, Burlington 1761 Sept. 7 

Edmunds, Agnis, an i William Abbot, Jr., Hunterdon 1778 April 4 

Edmunds, Judith, Cape May, and Thomas Buck, Jr., Cape May 1771 Jan. 9 

Edmund*, Louisa, aud John Parsous, Cape May 1775 May 30 

Edmunds, Mary, Cape May, and William Simkius, Cape May 1759 Dec. 10 

Edmunds, , Cape May, aud Lot Buck, Cape May 1789 Aug. 15 

Edsal, Anne, Bergen, and Abel Smith, Bergen 17 3 Oct, 22 

Edsall, Charity, and Abel Smith, Hackeusack 1783 Nov. 14 

Edsall, Sarah, Bergen and Job Smith, Bergen 1748 May 27 

9 



130 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Edward, Esther, and Robert Eldredge, Cape May 1776 

Edwards, Dorothy, Gloucester, and Samuel Church, Gloucester 1737 

Edwards, Amy, and Samuel Randolph, Somerset 1762 

Edwards, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Mullin, Burlington 1729 

Edwards, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and George Smith, Monmouth 1741 

Edwards, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Ezra Hand, Cape May 1772 

Edwards, Elizabeth, and Joshua Smith, Peuns Neck 1779 

Edwards, Hannah, MiddletowD, and Peter Tiltou, Middletown 1765 

Edwards, Jane, Cape May, and Jacob Crowell, Cape May 1731 

Edwards, Jane, Gloucester, and William May, Jr., Gloucester 1731 

Edwards, Jane, Cape May, and David Hildrith, Cape May 1769 

Edwards, Nancy, Cape May, and Edward Gogin, Cape May 1718 

Edwards, Margaret, Gloucester, and John Flatcher, Monmouth 1719 

Edwards, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and Peter Baruet 1756 

Edward*, Martha, Cape May, and Peter Corson, Cape May 1757 

Edwards, Martha, Salem, and Michael Dougherty, Salem 1763 

Edwards, Mary, Cape May, aud Ezekiel Mulford, Cape May 1762 

Edwards, Neomy, and Frederick Steelman, Great Egg Harbour 1773 

Edwards, Rachel, Cape May, and Jacob Crowell, Cape May ... 1764 

Egbert, Catharine, Hunterdon, and James Mattison, Hunterdon 1774 

Ege, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Andrew Hart, Hunterdon 1774 

Ege, Sarah, Hunterdon, and John McKinstry, Hunterdon 1775 

Eglington, Elizabeth, Salem, and Samuel Read, S tlem 1727 

Elbertson, Mary, and Levi Stout, Somerset 1782 

Eldredge, Bathia, Cape May, aud C mstantine Foster, Cape May 1773 

Eldredge, Charlotte, Cape May, aud Persons Learning, Cape May 1782 

Eldredge, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Joseph Buck, Cape May 1759 

Eldredge, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Reuben Swain, Cape May 1772 

Eldredge, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Patrick Gamble, Burlington .. 1774 

Eldredge, Elizabeth, and Silas Eldredge, Cape May 1778 

Eldredge, Esther, Cape May, and Abraham Haud, Cape May 1760 

Eldredge, Esther, and Charles Read, Cumberland 1788 

Eldredge, Hannah, and Adam Morris, Cape May 1764 

Eldredge, Hester, and Timothy Matlack, Evesham 1785 

Eldredge, Jane, Cape May, and Rynear Hollinshead, Cape May 1772 

Eldredge, Judith, and Jonathan Mills, Cape May ... 1 767 

Eldredge, Lydia, Cape May, and Henry Stiles, Cape May 1759 

Eldredge, Lydia, aud Aaron Edmonds, Cape May 1790 

Eldredge, Mary, aud Nathaniel Foster, Cape May 1754 

Eldredge, Mary, Cape May, and Edmond Bacon, Cumberland 1766 

Eldredge, Mary, Cape May, and John Shaw, Cape May. ... -. . 1771 

Eldredge, Mary, and Samuel Hollinshead, Cumberland 1785 

Eldredge, Prescila, Cape May, and James Beney, Cape May 1751 

Eldredge, Sarah, Cape May, and Josiah Crowell, Cape May 1764 

Eldrege, Hannah, Cape May, and Nathan Haud, Cape May. 1742 

Eldridge, Charity, Springfield, and Meliutus Woolston, Springfield.. . .1761 



Jan. 


11 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


5 


Sept. 


14 


Jan. 


22 


Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


8 


June 


8 


Jan. 


15 


J uue 


19 


April 


21 


June 


1 


Oct. 


12 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


May 


4 


Oct. 


4 


April 


9 


Aug. 


2 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


10 


May 


4 


Jan. 


26 


June 


1 


Oct. 


21 


July 


10 


May 


12 


May 


12 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


11 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


19 


June 


5 


Dec. 


30 


Jan. 


17 


June 


21 


Mar. 


19 


Mar. 


28 


Jan. 


4 


Sept. 


13 


April 


12 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


23 


May 


30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



131 



Eldridge, Hannah, Salem, aud Joseph Allen, Salem 1750 Juue 18 

Eldridge, Eannah, and Henry Wood, Gloucester 1779 Dec. 17 

Eldridge, Lydia, Cape May, and llisha Hand, Cape May 1736 Aug. 30 

Eldridge, Mary, Evesham, and Samuel Wilkins, Evesham 1783 Oct. 16 

Eldridge, Mary, Middletown, and Henry Strickland, Middletown. 1752 Mar. 14 

Eldridge, Mary, and John Carpenter, Gloucester 1784 Dec. 6 

Eldridge, Sarah, ('ape May, and Stiles, Cape May 17*27 Oct. 3<> 

Eldridge, Sarah, Burlington, and John Harris, Burlington 1737 Mar. 24 

Eldridge, Sarah, and William Cornier, Cape May 1789 Feb. 5 

Eldridge, Sibella, Northampton, and Jaconias Warner, Northampton. . 1770 Mar. 1 

Eldridge, Susannah, and Ezekiel Hutchinson 1749 Juue 5 

Eldridge, Zilpau, and Ellis Hand, Cape May 1777 July 25 

Eldrige, Elizabeth, and Anuauias Sayre, Salem 1779 Mar. 22 

Eldrige, Mary, Burlington, and William Dobbins, Burlington 1774 Mar. 24 

Eldrige, Amy, and John Macklatche, Burlington 1742 June 19 

Elkington, Ann, and S iniuel Lanning, Burlington 1732 Sept. 20 

Elkinton, Ann, Burlington, and Stephen Brookes, Burlington 1740 Aug. 19 

Elkinton, Ann, Burlington, and George Hall, Cumberland 1775 June 20 

Elkinton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Wilcox, Burlington 1728 April 3 

Elkinton, Hannah, Burlington, and William Stockton, Burlington ...1775 Sept. 5 

Elkinton, Jemirnah, Burlington, and Thomas French, Burlington. . . 1746 May 8 

Elkinton, Sabillah, and John Hartmau, Burlington 1771 April 6 

Elkinton, Sarah, and Darling Conrow, Burlington 1778 Aug. 24 

Elleket, Anne, Bucks, Pa., and George Wall, Bucks, Pa 1744 Aug. 22 

Ellis, Abigail, Gloucester, and John Cox, Burlington 1744 Sept. 30 

Ellis, Anna, Shrewsbury, and Asher West, Shrewsbury .... 1756 April 6 

Ellis, Anne, Gloucester, and Peter Champion, Gloucester 1746 June 14 

Ellis, Margaret, Burlington, and Fretwell Wright, Burlington 1738 Aug. 2 

Ellis, Margaret, and William Vanhorn, Burlington 1780 Aug 17 

Ellis, Mary, and Abel Nicholson, Gloucester 1786 Jan. 23 

Ellis, Rachel, Pennshatiken, and Andrew Loy, Pennsylvania 1775 Sept. 29 

Ellis, Sarah, Gloucester, aud Jonathan Thomas, Gloucester 1738 Nov. 15 

Ellis, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Devier, 1 Gloucester 1750 Nov. 28 

Ellis, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Deviue, • Gloucester 1750 Nov. 28 

Ellis, Sarah, Burlington, and John Busby, Burlington 1758 May 9 

Ellis, Sarah, Burlington, and John Esdall, Burlington 1768 Jan. 2 

Ellis, Sukey, Burlington, and Jacob Kidgway, Burlington 1780 Mar. 29 

Ellison, Catherine, Monmouth, and Robert Stout, Monmouth 1761 April 6 

Ellison, Elisabeth, Shrewsbury, and Henry Worth, Shrewsbury 1750 Dec. 3 

Ellison, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Amos Ellison, Burlington 1760 Nov. 11 

Ellison, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Robert Morris, Monmouth. . . „.. 1762 Feb. 10 

Ellison, Hannah, Monmouth, aud Micajah Ketcham, Monmouth 17^4 Aug. 21 

Ellison, Margaret, Middlesex, and James Ross, Middlesex . 1762 Mar. 19 

Ellison, Margaret, aud John Higbee, Middlesex 1780 Juue 26 



1 Apparently a duplication. 



132 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ellison, Martha, Middlesex, and Obadiah Buckalew, Middlesex 1746 

Ellison, Rachel, Middlesex, and Thomas Ellison, Middlesex 1748 

Ellison, Ruth, Shrewsbury, and John Stout, Shrewsbury 1750-1 

EllisoD, Rutb, Freehold, and John Stout, Shrewsbury 1753 

Ellison, Sarah, Middlesex, and Cornelius Lamberson, Middlesex. . . 1752 

Ellison, Sarah, Burlington, and Stepben Havens, Burlington 1784 

Ellison, Susannah, Burlington, and Aaron Ellis, Burlington 1762 

Elltoh, Theodosia, Burlington, and Samuel Allen, Burlington 1754 

Ellwell, Mary, Salem, and John Crayne, Burlington 1727 

Ellwell, Sarah, Salem, and Henry Vanmeter, Salem 1727 

Ellwood, Mary, and Aaron Sharpless, Bristol, Pa 1783 

Elmer, Buhaunab, Cohansie, and Ephraim Dayton, Cohansie 1747 

Elmer, Mary, and Manoah Lummins, Cumberland 1779 

Elmer, Polly, and Edward Lummis, Curnbeiland 1786 

Elmer, Sarah, and James Burk, Cumberland 1785 

Elmer, Susannah, Fairfield, and David Westcote, Fairfield 1758 

Elmer, Theodosia, and James Anderson, Cumberland 1761 

Elmor, Margaret, Salem, and Edward Lummis, Salem. 1737 

Elmore, Sarah, Burlington, and James Dennis, Burlington 1738 

ElstoD, Abigail, Woodbridge, and Natbaniel Bloomfield, Woodbridge. 1748-9 

Elstone, Ay res, and Thomas Force, Woodbridge 1759 

Elton, Anna, and William Rogers, Burlington 1777 

Elton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Johu Lippincott, Burlington 1782 

Elton, Hannah, Burlington, and John Deacon, Jr., Burlington 1748 

Elton, Mary, Burlington, and George Kimball, Burlington 1739 

Elton, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Kendall, Burlington 1684 

Elton, Susannah, Burlington, and Thomas Gardiner, Burlington 1748 

Elvill, Sarah, and Gabriel Cox, Salem. . 1779 

Elweel, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Holton. Salem 1745 

Elwell, Barbara, and Frederick Dondlesbeck, Salem 1766 

Elwell, Esther, Piles Grove, and Adam Ruderford, Piles Grove. . . .*. . 1761 

Elwell, Mary, Greenwich, and John Ashbrook, Gloucester. . . 1736 

Elwell, Rachel, Salem, and William Brick, Salem 1731 

Elwell, Rboda, Pitts Grove, and Henry Richman, Pitts Grove 1770 

El will, Johanna, Pilesgrove, and William Simons, Easthampton 1759 

Ely, Elizabeth, Trenton, and James Price, Hunterdon 1737 

Ely, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Joseph Higbee, Jr., Hunterdon 17.42 

Einans, Asene, Monmouth, and Asber Layton, Monmouth 1762 

Emans, Johannah, Shrewsbury, and John Romine, Shrewsbury 1763 

Emans, Margaret, Monmouth, and Jacob Emans, Monmouth 1755 

Emans, Margaret,' Monmouth, and John Mathews, Monmouth 1755 

Emans, Mary, Monmouth, and John Vannest, Monmouth 1739 

Emans, Mary, Monmouth, and Benjamin Emeus, Monmouth 1747 

Emans, Rebecca, Hunterdon, and Dirck Low, Hunterdon 1747 

Emans, Rebecca, Middlesex, Joachim Gulick, Somerset 1751 

Emans, Zilpha, Monmouth, and Elisha Emans, Monmouth 1759 



Feb. 


14 


Aug. 


4 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


28 


Dec. 


23 


June 


1 


May 


4 


Mav 


7 


Feb. 


19 


Sept. 


4 


May 


7 


Dec. 


29 


Aug. 


5 


April 


15 


May 


9 


Jan. 


6 


Au^. 


1 


Mar. 


20 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


23 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


1 


Mar. 


16 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


25 


June 


16 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


25 


Dec. 


9 


Aug. 


24 


June 


28 


June 


1 


May 


18 


Jan. 


31 


April 


19 


Dec. 


24 


April 


16 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


19 


Feb. 


4 


Jan. 


21 


Dec. 


26 


June 


1 


Nov. 


30 


Sept, 


26 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 33 

Embly, Sophia, Momnoutb, and John McGbee, Monmouth 1727 

Emeus, Phebe C, and Alexander Rowand, Gloucester 1785 

Emley, Auu, and Aaron Forman, Hunterdon 1769 

Emley, Auu, Atnwell, and William Reading, Amwell 1775 

Eiuley, Haunah, Hunterdon, and Richard Holeombe, Hunterdon. . . . 1774 

Emley, Mary, and George Holloway, Burlington 1761 

Eiuley, Partheuia, Burlington, and Tobias Poleinus, Monmouth 1718 

Emley, Rebecca, Upper Freehold, and Stephen Pangboru, Middlesex.. 1742 

Emley, Rebecca, Kingwood, and Daniel Potts, Kingwood 1766 

Emley, Sarah, New Hanover, and Samuel Cox, Jr., Burlington 1774 

Einniens, Mary, Readiugtown, and ( reorge Schamp, Readiug 1775 

Emmius, Rebekah, Hunterdou, and Dauiel McKienzy, Hunterdou . . . 1747 

Emmous, Catharine, aud Ralph Schanck, Amwell 1779 

Emmuuds, Sarah, aud John Alleu, Somerset 1775 

Emons, Caubachia, Monmouth, and Jaques Denyse, New York 1755 

Emons, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and David Starkey, Freehold 1764 

Emrie, Abigail, Pennsylvauia, and Charles Townsend, Pennsylvania. . . 1730 

Endicott, Anue, Burlingtou, aud Reuben Eldridge, Burlington 1751 

Endicott, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Gaskill, Jr., Burlington. . .1767 

Engersol, Dinab, aud Jonathau Read, Great Egg Harbour 1764 

Eugersol, Jane, aud David Sayres, Gloucester 1764 

Engersol, Mary, Gloucester, aud Joseph Champion, Gloucester 1755 

England, Mary, aud Robert Letford, Gloucester 1785 

Euglaud, Rebecca, Burlington, aud John Webb, Burlington 1740 

England, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Hermann Aldridge, iSalem 1733 

Engle, Charity, and Amos Willits, Springfield ] 778 

English, Abigail, Burlington, and Joseph English, Burlington 1770 

English, Ann, aud Nathaniel Imla.y, Burlington 1771 

English, Anne, Burlington, and Thomas Addis, Burlingtou 1749 

English, Esther, and Addam Marckall 1741 

English, Hannah, and Owen Edwards, Burlington 1733 

English, Isabel, Gloucester, aud Samuel Paul, Gloucester 1757 

English, Jaue, and Emer Jackson, Monmouth 1772 

English, Margaret, and Jeremiah Smith, Alloways Creek 1778 

Euglish, Margaret, and Frauds Wood 1781 

Euglish, Mary, Gloucester, and Elias Gaudy, Cape May 1737 

Euglish, Mary, Burlington, aud James Craft, Jr., Burlington 1740 

Euglish, Mary, Monmouth, and Coouradt Heudrickson, Monmouth. ..1759 

English, Mary, and Isaac Hancock, Burlingtou 1782 

Euglish, Sarah, Burlington, and Edward Hancock, .Burliugton 1742 

English, Sarah, and Andrew Frambus, Gloucester 1783 

English, Susauuah, and Euyl Ballangy, Cape May 1838 

Eunis, Mary, Bergen, aud Jonathan Grimes, Bergen 1761 

Enoch, Anne, Springfield, and James Vernon, Springfield 1783 

1 Query: Hughey. 



June 


5 


Aug. 


2 


April 


27 


Dec. 


6 


April 


23 


July 


25 


Dec. 


7 


Nov. 


29 


Aug. 


8 


Oct. 


17 


Feb. 


2 


April 


17 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


10 


May 


9 


Mar. 


16 


May 


18 


April 


29 


June 


18 


Sept. 


26 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


13 


June 


5 


Oct. 


1 


May 


9 


June 


2 


April 


5 


July 


H) 


June 


8 


Jan. 


8 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


17 


July 


8 


Oct, 


16 


June 


17 


Oct. 


•Jl 


June 


18 


Feb. 


6 


Jan. 


23 


Jan. 


5 


April 


18 


Oct. 


1 


April 


12 



134 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENT'S. 

Enochs, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Gaskill, Burlington 1748 Nov. 16 

Euochs, Abigiil, and Robert Fargnson, Burlington 1784 Oct. 9 

Enochs Martha, Barliugton, and John E wan, Burlington 1737 Nov. 23 

Ent, Ann, Amwell, and John Tyson, Ainwell 1772 June 6 

Eut, Susanna, Amwell, and Thomas Ruchman, Kingwood ... 1774 April 5 

Eov,l Lsnty, Somerset, and Richard Compton, Somerset 1775 Aug. 31 

Erexison, Anne, and Nathan Cresse, Cape May 1774 Dec 24 

Erhert, Heyltie, Bergen, and Daniel Christie, Bergen 1770 Oct. 9 

Erickson, Christian, Freehold, and Peter Tice, Freehold 1750 Feb. 23 

Erie, Tammisin, and Thomas Frost, Newark 176 1 Nov. 1 

Ernest, Mary, and John Stackhouse, Chester 1783 June 2 

Ernest, Sarah, Burlington, and David Gaskill, Burlington 1774 Nov. 9 

Errixson, Rebecca, Cape May, and William Goff, Cape May 1770 Oct. 3 

Erskine, Eliz ibeth, and Robert L. Hoopsr, Jr., Trenton 1781 Oct. 13 

Ervin, Elisabeth, Gloucester, and Matthew Tomlins, Gloucester 1772 Mar. 20 

Ervin, Mary, and Elias Lsonard, Burlington 1779 Feb. 18 

Erviue, Elizabeth, and John Cunningham, Burlington 1781 Dec. 31 

Erwiu, Jane, and John Hewson, Burlington 1779 May 14 

Erwin, Mary, and John Pricket, Burlington 17G8 Dec. 4 

Erwin, Patience, Gloucester, anil Gabriel Hugg, Gloucester 1728 April 10 

Erwin, Sarab, Gloucester, and James Cooper, Gloucester 1761 Mar. 27 

Esdaile, Lydia, and S imuel McCulley, Burlington 1787 Nov. 29 

Esdall, Mary, Burlington, and Arthur Campbell, Philadelphia 1764 Sept. 11 

Esdel, Jane, and Joseph Brown, Burlington 1786 Mar. 15 

Esdell, Sarah, and Thomas Meyers, Philadelphia 1788 July 17 

Eslo. Catharine, and John Willsou, Burlington 1778 Sept. 11 

Eslon, Mary, Burlington, and Jacob Buruhart. Burlington 1773 Jan. 30 

Eslow, Sarah, and Joshua Bishop, New H, mover 1780 Feb. 26 

Eson, Catharine, Monmouth, and Julius Sutton, Monmouth 1741 July 17 

Estill, Hannah, New Hanover, and James Watson, New Hanover 1774 Jan. 5 

Estill, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Mullen, Burlington 1775 Mar. 19 

Estill, Rhoda, and Philip Johnson, Burlington 1776 Aug. 10 

Estill, Sarah, Burlington, and William Mnrril, Burlington 1783 Dec. 4 

Estlack, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Norton, Gloucester 1737 July 23 

Estlack, Sarah, and James Mickell, Gloucester 1732 Dec. 30 

Esturgans, Martha, Burlington, and William Rogers, Burlington.. .. 1754 Aug. 19 

Eustace, Rachel, and Jonathan Fithi;in, Cumberland 1780 Mar. 25 

Evans, Bathsheba, and Job Lippiucott, Burlington 1794 Feb. 24 

Evans, Elizabeth, and Arney Lippiucott, Burlington 1779 Jan. 2 

Evans, Hannah, Salem, and William Adams, Salem 1762 Feb. 16 

Evans, Hannah, Cape May, and Neri Hand, Cape May 1775 Sept. 15 

Evans, Jemima, and John Hurley, Gloucester 1784 Jan. 30 

Evans, Jerusha, and Joseph Leigh 1775 Mar. 2 1 

Evans, Martha, Burlington, and Benjamin Watson, Evesham 1767 Feb. 11 

l Usually written Eoff. 



Marriage licenses. 135 

Evans, Mary, Bucks, Pa., ami Bartholomew Young, Bucks, Pa 1730 

Evans, Mary, and Frauds Philpot, Lower Penns Neck 1772 

Evans, Mary, and Nathaniel Cox 1772 

Evans, Rebecca, Cape May, and Thomas Scott, Cape May 1776 

Evans, Sarah, Philadelphia and John Evans, Philadelphia 1739 

Evans, Susannah, Burlington, and James L'ppincott, Burlington 1771 

E/ehnaii, Sarah, Monmouth, aud Robert Brown, Middlesex 1745 

Evens, Elizabeth, Huuterdpu, and Jonathan Furmau, Trenton 1764 

Everiugham, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Solomon Ivius, Burlington. . . 1742 

Everingham, Hanuah, and Joseph Ivins, Burlington 1741 

Everiugham, Mary, Mansfield, aud John Watson, Mansfield 1766 

Everitt, Phebee, aud Matthew Hixson, Hunterdon ... 1728 

Everly, Ann, antl William Hugg, Jr., Gloucester 1773 

Everugham, Charity, and Cornelius Rowe, Middlesex 1767 

Evertsou, Mary, Woodbridge, and Wheeler J. Case, Dutchess Co. , N. Y. .1768 

Eves, Aune, Burlington, and Jonathan Lippincott, Burlington Co 1746 

Eves, Anne, Burlington, and John Lippincott, Burlington 1746 

Eves, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Heulings, Burlington 1775 

Eves, Mary, Evesham, aud Samuel Pine, Gloucester 1775 

Eves, Rachel, Burlington, and John Himmit, Burlington 1774 

Ivins, Esther, Gloucester, and John Butterworth, Gloucester 1729 

Evis, Rebecca, and Joseph Harker, Gloucester. . 1782 

Evoll, Margaret, and S jlomon Chandler 1779 

Evouts, Elizabeth, Middletown, and William Woolley, Middletowu . . . 1754 

Evingham, Amy, Mansfield, and Asa Page, Mansfield . . 1773 

Evviugham, Rachel, Monmouth, and Richard Harrison, Jr., Burl'g'n. 1736 

Ewan Lstitia, Burlington, and Joseph Johnson, Burlington 1775 

Ewan, Rebecca, Northampton, aud William Bass, Northampton 1784 

Ewau, Susannah, Burlington, and Micajah Carter, Burlington 1744 

Ewen, Hannah, and Thomas Anderson,' Sussex 1786 

Ewing, Anua, aud John Lauiug, Cumberland 1785 

Ewing, Aune, Burlington, and John Lame, Burlington 1758 

Ewing, Anue, Alloways Creek, and Daniel Smith, Alloways Creek 1779 

Ewing, Martha, Springfield, and Richard Watkinson, Springfield 1771 

Ewing, Mary, Burlington, aud Robert Colcott, Burlington 1771 

Ewing, Mary, and Richard Caruthers, Cumberland 1780 

Ewing, Phebe, and Remington Ewing, Cumberland 1784 

Ewing, Sarah, Cumberland, and William Carll, Cumberland 1773 

Ewing, Sarah, and Bartholomew Rudulph, Cumberland 1779 

Ewing, Sarah, aud Jonathan Learning, Cape May 1780 

Ewing, Tamar, Burlington, aud Joshua Woolston, Burlington 1770 

Eyre, Elizabeth, and Uriah Wilkins, Burliugton 1792 

Eyre, Hope, and Shinn Oliphant, Burliugton ] 787 

Eyre, Martha, Burlington, and William Gordon, Burlington 1765 

Eyre, Mary, Burliugton, and John Campbell, Burlington 1765 

Eyre, Rachel, and Robert Marland, Burlington. 1769 



Feb. 


26 


April 


9 


Dec. 


19 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


30 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


28 


Oct. 


13 


Nov. 


22 


Oct. 


22 


Aug. 


16 


June 


3 


May 


10 


Sept. 


28 


June 


10 


Mar. 


13 


Mar. 


13 


Jan. 


16 


Jan. 


16 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


10 


Nov. 


27 


Sept. 


18 


July 


25 


Jan. 


20 


June 


21 


Nov. 


27 


April 


13 


Feb. 


12 


Mar. 


19 


Mar. 


10 


April 


26 


Feb. 


18 


April 


18 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


16 


Jan. 


30 


May 


24 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


6 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


17 


June 


10 


Mar. 


6 



I36 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 
Eyres, Ann, and Thomas Adams, Burlington.- 1785 

MALES. ^ 

Fagen, James, Burlington, and Mary Quigley, Burlington 1772 

Fageus, James, Burlington, and Mary Arey, Burlington . 1769 

Fagins, William, Burlington, and Patience Jervis, Burlington 1768 

Fairchild, Nathauiel, Pequanock, and Elizabeth Munson, Pequanock. . 1779 

Faitoute, George, Monmouth, and Euphamia Titus . . . . 1779 

Falkersou, Derrick, Somerset, and Sarah Falkerson, Somerset ... ... 1752 

Fall, Philip, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Howgon, Perth Amboy 1757 

Falkiubridge, David. Little Egg Harbour, Faith Cook, Shrewsbury . .1767 

Falkner, Jess, Burlington, and Isabell Jones, Pennsylvania 1741 

Fanyurk, Mathias, Hunterdon, and Susannah Fansiles •. . . 1735 

Fardon, John, Middlesex, and Charity Dean, Middlesex 1763 

Farguson, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Dagworthy, Burlington — 1730 

Farguson, Robert, Burlington, and Abigail Euocks 1784 

Farguson, Shadrack, Burliugton, and Lydia Nicholas 1786 

Farley, John, Somerset, and Mary Cliue, Somerset 1775 

Farmer, Audrevv, Burlington, and Jemima Cuuniugham 1763 

Farmer, Jasper, Perth Amboy, and Susanna Skinner, Perth Amboy. .1771 
Farmer, John, Bristol, Pa., and Ann Olive Grager, Pennsylvania. ... 1732 

Farney, Patrick, Morris, and Catherine Grosse 1772 

Farnsworth, Aineriah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Whiteeraft, Burl'g'n.1776 

Farnsworth, John, Hunterdon, and Deborah McCarty Sussex 1768 

Farnum, Thomas, Middletown, and Elizabeth Andrews, Mi klletown. . 1750 

Farquar, John, Burlington, and H tnuah Clark, B irliugton 1750 

Farra, Isaac, Philadelphia, and Sarah Aves 1759 

Farrell, Robert, Burliugton, aud Rebecca Lucus 1734 

Farrell, James, Freehold, aud Mary French, Freehold 1751 

Farrell, George, Burlington, and Elizabeth Atkihsou, Burlington 1766 

Farrill, James, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Sheckels. ... 1780 

Fay, Edward, and Hannah Vau Horue. ... 1772 

Farrington, Joseph, Burliugton, and Rebecca Alcott, Burliugton 1761 

Faulkiugburg, Jacob, and Phebe Southard, Burlington 1764 

Feagan, James, Burlington, and Alice Kirby, Burlington 1740 

Feagin, James, Moumouth, aud Amy Beumire, Monmouth. 1767 

Feasch, John Jacob, and Susan Lawrence 1790 

Feavel, John, Moumouth, and Joanna Applegate, Middlesex 1737 

Feighte, Joseph, Bergen, and Dorcas Ackermau 1790 

Feild, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Margaret Degroot, Somerset 1750 

Feilds, William, Hunterdon, and Sarah Furman 1780 

Felgelder, Johu, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Adams, Gloucester 1729 

Feneler, Lawrence, Freehold, aud Frauces Debow, Freehold 1760 

Fenimore, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Mary Hutchins, Burliugton. ...1774 
Feuimore, Caleb, Burlington, and Elizabeth Fenimore, Burlington. . . . 1774 
Feuimore, Charles, Burlington, aud Ann Laquard, Gloucester 1744 



May 30 



Juue 


27 


Dec. 


23 


Jan. 


7 


June 


23 


Nov. 


4 


Jan. 


28 


Nov. 


9 


Mar. 


18 


Aug. 


25 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


19 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


9 


Nov. 


3 


Jan. 


30 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


13 


Juue 


4 


Sept. 


14 


June 


15 


July 


28 


Jan. 


6 


April 


20 


Sept. 


11 


Sept. 


23 


July 


24 


July 


20 


Feb. 


24 


Mar. 


8 


Feb. 


6 


Juue 


2 


April 


21 


Mar. 


11 


Mar. 


3 


Dec. 


5 


Sept. 


13 


May 


22 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


4 


April 


28 


Sept. 


20 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 137 

Fenimore, Jophet, Burlington, and Charity Parker, Burlington 1780 

Fenimore, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Fennirnore, Burlington 1773 

Fenimore, John, Jr., Burlington, and Rachel Carson, Burlington 1775 

Fenimore, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Vanhorne 1777 

Fenimore, Pearson, Burlington, and Mary Williamson, Burlington . 1775 
Fenimore, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Newell, Burlington. ..... 1730 

Fenimore, Richard, Burlington, and Hannah Alien, Burlington 1759 

Fenimore, William, Burlington, and Rachel Humphreys 1742 

Fenimore, William, Burlington, and Mary Wilkinson, Burlington 1757 

Fennel, Patrick, Piscataway, and Ann Joues, Piscataway 1748 

Fennirnore, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Scattergood, Burlington 1775 

Fennirnore, John, Burlington, and Sarah Bryant, Burlington 1730 

Fennirnore, John, Monmouth, and Mary White, Monmouth 1765 

Fennirnore, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Perkins, Burlington 1766 

Fennirnore, William, Burlington, and Joyce McFanlin, Burlington . . 1739 

Fentou, Eleazer, and Elizabeth Stacy 1690 

Fentou, Ephraim, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Pearson, Bucks, Pa 1736 

Fenton, George, Jr., Burlington, and Elizabeth Scroggy 1777 

Fenton, John, Jr.. Monmouth, and Margaret Davison, Monmouth .. 1741 

Fenton, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Doughty, Monmouth 1781 

Fentou, Joseph, and Haunah Kuowles . . 1786 

Fenton, Robert, Burlington, and Grace Bowyer, Burlington 1762 

Fenton, Samuel, Burlington, and Rebecca Kent ... 1769 

Fenton, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Phebe Doble 1784 

Fenton, William, Burlington, and Hannah Hughes ... 1773 

Fenton, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Kindall, Burlington 1773 

Ferdon, Jacob, Bergen, and Ellenor Vanblercum, Bergen 1748 

Ferguson, Alexander, Burlington, and Mary Barry, Burlington 1757 

Ferguson, Charles, Gloucester, and Hannah Wilkins, Gloucester.. . 1761 

Ferguson, John, Burlington, and Eleanor Willson, Trenton 1768 

Ferncel, Peter, Monmouth, and Susannah Tilton, Monmouth 1742-3 

Ferrill, 1 Moses, Sussex, and Rachel Featherby 1773 

Ferril, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Compton 178U 

Feshie, William, Orange, N. Y., and Elizabeth Blauvelt, Orange, N. Y.1762 

Fetters, Erasmus, Salem, and Sarah Chambers, Salem 1750 

Feust, John, Jr., Middlesex, and Margaret Wall 1780 

Few, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Sarah Smith 1779 

Field, Derk, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Smock, Middlesex 1749 

Field, Edward, Bucks, Pa., aDd Grace Smith 1784 

Field, Elijah, Burlington, and Mary Gibbs, B ulington 1771 

Field, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Archer, Burlington 1772 

Field, Jeremiah, Middlesex, and Servia Sabriuy 1770 

Field, Job, Philadelphia, and Mary Lyons, Burlington 1770 

Field, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Fisher, Somerset 1744 

1 Query: Terril. 



Oct. 


23 


May 


21 


Oct. 


1 


Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


24 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


18 


Aug. 


22 


April 


26 


July 


20 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


31 


July 


v2 


July 


16 


Feb. 


2 


April 


12 


Mar. 


12 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


27 


Nov. 


4 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


17 


June 


26 


July 


29 


Aug. 


9 


April 


22 


April 


18 


April 


28 


Dec. 


8 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


12 


Aug. 


15 


Oct. 


26 


Nov. 


9 


May 


20 


Nov. 


15 


Aug. 


13 


Jan. 


28 


April 


10 


Oct. 


1 


July- 


2 


May 


4 



138 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Field, John, Middlesex, and Phebe BoCaw 1781 

Field, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Newberry, Burlington 1741 

Field, Joseph, Cape May, and Mary Birlow, Cape May. 1765 

Fiel i, Nathan, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Thomas, Pennsylvania 1770 

Field, Patrick, Burlington, and Elizabeth Kindall, Burlington 1740 

Filer, John, Jr., Cumberland, and Sarah Worton 1759 

Fine, John, Somerset, and Anne Marsh, Somerset 1717 

Finlaw, David, Salem, and Sarah Adams 1771 

Finlaw, James, Salem, and Mary Thompson, Salem 17G2 

Fiulaw, John, Salem, and Sarah Worthington, Salem 1759 

Finley, William, Gloucester, and Mary White, Gloucester 1762 

Finney, Henry, Philadelphia, and H mnah Brown, Philadelphia 1739 

Finnegan, Christopher, Burlington, and Deborah Lawrence 1746 

Firestone, John, Salem, and Susanna Sivil. ... 1774 

Fish, Alexander, Gloucester, and Dinah Adams, Gloucester 1737 

Fish, Caspar, Gloucester, and Sarah Collins, Philadelphia 1742 

Fish, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Benuet 1752 

Fish, Michael, Gloucester, and Diana Fish, Gloucester 1737 

Fish, Robert, Somerset, and Ann Johnson 1786 

Fisher, David, Burlington, and Mary Allen, Burlington. . 1766 

Fisher, Fulcard, S unerset, and Elizabeth Smyth, Monmouth 1763 

Fisher, Hendrick, S jmerset, and Elizabeth Fontine. . 1761 

Fisher, Hendrick, Somerset, and Elizabeth Blair 1783 

Fisher, Henry, Cranberry, and Rebecca Vaughn, Freehold 1756 

Fisher, Jeremiah, and Catherine Brokaw 1769 

Fisher, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Hoogland , 1778 

Fisher, Jonathan, Perth Atnboy, and Elizabeth Walker, Perth Amboy. 1740 

Fisher, Joseph C , Philadelphia, and Mary Learning 1782 

Fisher, Michael, Gloucester, and Patience Flaunigau, Gloucester 1771 

Fislear, Jacob, Burlington, and S.ivinah Clem, Burlington 1744 

Fister, Philip, Hunterdon, and Mary Worner 1780 

Fisyuer, Peter, Bargen, and Mary Leziere, Bergen. . 1760 

Fitch, James, Hunterdon, and Rachel Stout, Hunterdon. 1764 

Fitch, Samuel, Middlesex, and Jane Johnson, Middlesex 1739 

Fitchet, George, Staten Island, and Hester Pearce, Elizabeth Town. . . 1759 

Fitchett, James, and Christantia Vaucarrick 1735 

Fithiau, Ephraim, Cumberland, and Atheliah Gaston ] 780 

Fithian, George, Cumberland, and Sarah Mulford 1782 

Fithian, Joel, Cumberland, aud Elizabeth Fithian 17s0 

Fithian, John, Cumberland, and Eunice Johnston 1759 

Fithian, John, Cumberland, and Mary Brown, Cumberland 1765 

Fithiau, Jonathan, Cumberland, aud Rachel Eustace 1780 

Fithiau, Jonathan, Salem, and Sarah Holliugshead. . 1786 

Fithian, Josiah, Salem, and Mary Johnson, Salem 1733 

Fithian, Samuel, Cumberland, and Abigail Moore 1750 

Fithian, William, Cumberland, and Mary Tomlinson 1785 



Jan. 


2l' 


Nov. 


24 


April 


19 


July 


23 


July 


16 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


27 


June 


7 


Sept. 


11 


April 


28 


Oct. 


25 


Mar. 


28 


Nov. 


20 


Dec. 


12 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


13 


Aug. 


12 


May 


30 


Feb. 


5 


June 


7 


June 


7 


Oct. 


12 


Oct. 


11 


Dec. 


9 


Nov. 


28 


Aug. 


6 


Sept. 


17 


June 


21 


Jan. 


2 


June 


2 


Feb. 


2 


July 


25 


Jan. 


19 


Jan. 


5 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


4 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


2 


Dec. 


10 


Sept. 


26 


Mar. 


25 


Nov. 


28 


June 


2 


Oct. 


25 


Nov. 


17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. i$$ 

Fitz Garrald, Thomas, Salem, and Ann Tracy, Salem 17G7 

Fitzpatrick, Abner, and Elizabeth Carroll 1779 

Fitz Randolph —see also Randolph. 

Fitzraudolph Benjamin J., Somerset, and Elizabeth Redmore, Som'rs't. 1727 

Fitz Randolph, Benj., B'd Br'k, and Jane Margaret Long, P'th A.nb'y 1759 

Fitz Randolph, Daniel, Monmoutb, and Margret Stewart 1760 

Fitz Randolph, David, Salem, and Jale Darkiu, Salem .... 1740 

Fitz Randolph, Ephraim, Piscataway, and Rachel Stelle, Piscata way. .1752 
Fitz Randolph, Harts home, Woodbridge, and Rnth Dennis, Piscat'w'y. 1746 

Fitz Randolph, Jacob, Middlesex, and Anne Webster 1780 

Fitz Randolph, James, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Line, Woodbridge 1775 
Fitz Rxudolph, Nathaniel, Woodbridge, and Ursula Stewart, Woodbge.1743 
Fitz Rindolph, Reuben, Piscataway, and Mary Herriot, Woodbridge 1757 
Fitz Randolph, Thomas, Piscataway, and Elizabeth Duun, Piscataway 1755 
Flanagan, Patrick, Hunterdon, and Mary Thomson, Philadelphia. . . . 1773 

Fianegan, Thomas, Salem, and Elizabeth Smith, Salem 1739 

Flaningam, George, Gloucester, and Patience Collins, Gloucester.. ...1769 
Flauingatn, Isaac, Gloucester, and Susannah Chew, Gloucester. .... .1761 

Flaningam, Patrick, Gloucester, and Sarah Chew 1762 

Flaningam, Samuel, Gloucester, and H tnnah Woolston, Gloucester. .. 1768 

Flaningam, George, Gloucester, and Sarah Jennings, Gloucester 1736 

Flauneiw, John, Perth Amboy, and Abigail Loof burrow, Perth Amboy. 1749 

Flatcber, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Edwards, Gloucester 1749 

Flego, John, Burlington, and Susanna Leonard, Burlington 1775 

Fleming, Alexander, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Pensiler 1765 

Fleming, Richard, Gloucester, and Catharine Fisher, Gloucester 1759 

Fleming, Joseph, Jr., Gloucester, and Susan uah Sickles 1784 

Flen, William, Monmouth, and Mary Vangrelt, Monmouth. 1749 

Flen, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Lambertson, Monmouth 1762 

Flick, Ebenezer, Gloucester, and Margaret Brown 1783 

Flick, Philip, Burlington, and Amy Borden, Burlington 1754 

Flick, Thomas, Gloucester, and Zillah Batten 1784 

Fling, George, Salem, and Margaret Dickey 1735 

Fliuner, Henry, Burlington, and Catherine Breman. . 1784 

Flitcraft, Francis, Cumberland, and Jemima Leeds 1784 

Flitcraft, Henry, Burlington, and Rhoda Johnson. Burlington 1766 

Flitcraft, Isaiah, Burlington, and Lucretia R.ikestraw 1773 

Flitcraft, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Meredith, Burlington 1762 

Flittraft, William, Burlington, and Mary Bogar, Burlington 1770 

Flower, Benjamin, and Martha Doz . 1778 

Flowers, William, Burlington, and Martha Norton, Burlington 1739 

Floyd, Perry, Hunterdon, and Mary McBride 1778 

Foerd, Samuel, Jr., Woodbridge, and Charity Frazee, Woodbridge . . .1757 

Fogg, Daniel, Salem, and Grace Ponton 1769 

Fogg, Joseph, Salem, and Mary Streat, Salem 1775 

Folks, Isaiah, Burlington, and Alice Lawrence, Burlington 1728 



Mar. 


4 


July 


30 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


25 


May 


25 


July 


11 


Aug. 


16 


Nov. 


4 


May 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


8 


May 


26 


July 


30 


Dec. 


1 


Feb. 


17 


May 


10 


Aug. 


27 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


9 


April 


4 


Oct. 


12 


Mar. 


1 


July 


17 


Sept. 


1 


Aug. 


20 


Nov. 


13 


Oct, 


28 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


24 


Sept. 


6 


Jan. 


22 


July 


14 


Jan. 


28 


Sept. 


16 


May 


27 


Mar. 


13 


Aug. 


7 


Sept, 


24 


Feb. 


26 


Feb. 


21 


July 


5 


Nov. 


4 


May 


11 


Mar. 


22 



146 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Follwell, William, Burlington, and Anne Potts, Burlington 1727 

Folwell, John, Burlington, and Mary Gibbs, Burlington 1771 

Folwell, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Warren, Burlington 1766 

Folwell, Nathan, Springfield, and Jane Chalmer, Springfield 1748 

Folwell, Nathan, Burlington, and Catharine Spike, Burlington 1761 

Folwell, Nathau, Burlington, and Hope Atkinson 1785 

Foot, William, Sussex, and Mary Coppinger, Sussex 1772 

Forbes, Alexander, 42d Regt., and Christein MeKensey 1762 

Force, Benjamin, Woodbridge, and Anne Scudder, Elizabeth Town.. . . 1758 

Force, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Darling 1774 

Force, Jacob, Burlington, and Betsy Arnold, Burlington 1781 

Force, Jonathan, Middletown, Pa., and Susannah Rossell 1782 

Force, Joseph, Burlington, and Mercy Adams, Burlington 1774 

Force, Matthew, Burlington, and Jane Sidtnan, Burlington 1772 

Force, Samuel, Woodbridge, amd Sarah Freeman, Woodbridge 1754 

Force, Samuel, and Mary Freeman, Woodbridge 1750 

Force, Thomas, Woodbridge, Agnes Elstone 1759 

Ford, Benjamin, Chester, Pa., and Sara Key 1782 

Ford, Benjamin, Chester, Pa., and Henrietta Hooff 1784 

Ford, Charles, Burlington, and Elizabeth Shinn 1768 

Ford, Gabriel W., Morris, and Frances Gualdo 1790 

Fordam, John, Philadelphia, and Hannah Bickley, Philadelphia 1730 

Ford, John, Hunterdon, and Anna Vanhess 1782 

Fordham, Richard, Philadelphia, and Susanna Poinsett 1733 

Ford, Thomas, Burlington, and Rachel Leek, Burlington 1747 

Ford, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Drummond 1782 

Ford, William, Essex, and Margaret Mathews, Monmouth 1740 

Ford, William, Middlesex, and Ann McColm, Middlesex. 1762 

Foul, William, Burlington, and Sarah Wills 1783 

Foreman, Jonathan, Cape May, and Anna Hand, Cape May 1771 

Forest, John, Gloucester, and Catherine Miller, Salem 1771 

Forker, Adam, Burlington, and Hannah Gaskill, Burlington 1749 

Forker, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Knight 17S1 

Forman, Aaron, Hunterdon, and Ann Euiley 1769 

Forman, Aaron, Morris, and Rebecca Potts 1780 

Forman, David, Monmouth, and Anne Deuise, Monmouth 1757 

Forman, George, Somerset, and Lidia Gordon, Monmouth 1753 

Forman, John, Monmouth, and Bebecca Taylor, Monmouth 1750 

Forman, John, Monmouth, and Nelly Deny s e, Monmouth 1752 

Forman, John, Hunterdon, and Charity Hunt 1770 

Forman, John, Jr., Burlington, and Phebe Matther 1783 

Forman, Lswis, Middletown, and Aft'ey Van Emburgh, Middletown . . 1756 

Forman, Peter, Monmouth, and Eleanor Williams, Monmouth 1742 

Forman, Samuel, Monmouth, and Helena Deuyse, Monmouth 1752 

Forman, Simuel, Monmouth, and Margaret Forman, Monmouth 1772 

Forman, Thomas, Monmouth, and Jane Throgmorton 1769 



11 

6 

12 



Dec. 6 

Sept. 13 

June 16 

July 21 

April 6 

Feb. 4 

July 4 

Nov. 19 

April 2 

June 21 

April 27 

Dec. 17 

Jan. 11 

Aug. 15 

July 4 

Jan. 15 

Jan. 23 
Oct. 
May 
Dec. 

Jan. 25 

Sept. 27 , 

Jan. 13 

Mar. 6 

July 2 

Feb. 19 

June 23 

Dec. 29 

April 19 

June 15 

Feb. 21 

Aug. 25 

Mar. 17 

April 27 

Jan. 26 

June 9 

Nov. 7 

Mar. 21 

May 2 

June 10 

Nov. 25 

Sept. 28 

Dec. 7 

May 2 

Jan. 19 

Oct. 31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 141 

Forquer, William, and Elizabetb May, Gloucester 1763 

Forrester, John, Burlington, Elizabeth Delatush, Burlington 1776 

Forrester, William, Philadelphia, and Susanna Lowner, Philadelphia. .1731 

Porsitb, John, Burlington, and Alice Herd, Burlington 1756 

Forsyth, .J elm, Burlington, and Lncretia Taylor, Burlington 1768 

Fort, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Edrnond, Burlington 1761 

Fort, John, Burlington, and Hannah Marriott, Burlington 1731 

Fort, John, Jr., Burlington, and Elizabeth Woolston 1756 

Fort, John, Jr., Burlington, and Martha Gaskill, Burlington 1779 

Fort, Joseph, Burlington, and Hester Nailer 1784 

Fort, Marmaduke, Burlington, and Mary Cousins, Springfield 1738 

Fort, Marmaduke, Burlington, and Elizabeth Marriot, Burlington 1775 

Fort, Marmaduke, Burlington, and Achsah Bates ... , 1777 

Fort, Roger, Burlington, and Joanna Lebby, Burlington ' 1733 

Fort, Samuel, Burlington, and Avis Burdsal . . 1768 

Fortenberry, John, and Elizabeth Murphy 1773 

Fortiner, Daniel, Gloucester, and Bathsheba Trench, Gloucester. . . . 1748 

Foster, Amariab, Burlington, and Mary Prickett, Burlington 1748 

Foster, Benjamin, Piscataway, and Martha Sutton, Piscataway 1751 • July 

Foster, Charles, Cape May, and Abiah Townsend 1764 

Foster, Christopher, Cape May, and Lydia Hand 1732 

Foster, Constantine, Cape May, and Bithia Etdridge, Cape May 1773 

Foster, Cryten, Gloucester, and Hene Maria Moreter Bonnell 1769 

Foster, Ebenezer, Essex, and Mary Beach, Essex 1750 

Foster, Henry, Cape May, and Rhoday Smith. . 1777 

Foster, Jeremiah, Cumberland, and Sarah Smith, Cumberland 1778 

Foster, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Sarah Peterson, Egg Harbor 17-2 

Foster, Jeremiah, Gloucester, aud Elizabeth Hewes 1783 

Foster, Jeremiah, Jr., Cumberland, and Priscilla Preston 1784 

Foster, John, Cape May, aud Patience Foreman 1761 

Foster, John, Monmouth, and Easter Vaughn, Monmouth 1766 

Foster, John, Burlington, and Anna Gibbs, Burlington 1776 

Foster, Jonathan, Cape May, and Hannah Willden, Cape May 1759 

Foster, Nathaniel, Cape May, and Mary Eldreelge 1754 

Foster, Nicholas, Burlington, aud Martha Arnold 1778 

Foster, Reuben, Freehold, aud Mary Throckmorton, Freehold 1750 

Foster, Salathiel, Cape May, and Judith Hudges 1787 

Foster, Samuel, Philadelphia, an:l Frances Ebzery, Philadelphia 1754 

Foster, Samuel, Cape May, and Mary Smith 1774 

Foster, Stephen, Cape May, and Abigail Stevenson 1762 

Foster, Uriah, Burlington, and Aune Lord, Burlington 1770 

Foster, William, Burlington, and Sarah Bishop 1779 

Foster, William, Burlington, and Mary Cross, Burlington 1779 

Foster, William, Burlington, and Auna Haines 1788 

Foueserits, Jeau Baptist, Gloucester, and Hukln Falkner 1776 

Fourat, Isaac, Middlesex, and Hester Davis 1768 



July 


25 


Mar. 


16 


Oct. 


5 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


5 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


3 


Dec. 


27 


July 


5 


Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


2 


Oct. 


23 


May 


29 


April 


12 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


27 


July 


28 


July 


15 


July 


8 


Oct. 


16 


Jan. 


18 


June 


1 


Nov. 


20 


Aug. 


24 


Sept. 


18 


Oct. 


19 


Nov. 


16 


Oct. 


1 


Dec. 


15 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


May 


27 


July 


28 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


18 


June 


21 


Oct. 


5 


April 


19 


April 


25 


Oct. 


4 


Nov. 


12 


Oct, 


11 


Dec. 


9 


Jan. 


17 


Dec. 


10 


May 


9 



I42 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Fowler, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Miriam Wright, Burlington 1736 

Fowler, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Alice Steward 1749-50 

Fowler, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Jorman 1781 

Fowler, John, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Murfy, Bucks, Pa 1754 

Fowler, Jonathan, Burlington, and Hannah Lawrence, Chestei field.. . .1742 

Fowler, Matthew, Sussex, and Catharine McCormick 1768 

Fox, Gunnar, Gloucester, and Magdalena Seeley 1758 

Fox, Henry, Cumberland, and Barbary Ruff, Cumberland 1767 

Fox, John, Hunterdon, and Catherine Hummer. 1778 

Fox, Jonathan, Burlingtcu, and Sarah Forman 1763 

Fox, Patiick, Burlington, and Hannah Baker, Burlington 1772 

Foy, Patrick, Monmouth, and Phebe Cooper, Monmouth 1748 

Frambes, Peter, Gloucester, and Elsey Somers 1784 

Fnynbus, Andrew, Gloucester, and Sarah English 1783 

Francis, Richard, and Mary Majore . .... 1694 

Francis, Richard, Monmouth, and Sarah Applegate, Monmouth 1766 

Francis, Robert, Monmouth, and Susannah Throckmorton, Monmouth. 1765 

Franklin, James, Gloucester, and Sarah Lord 1770 

Franklin. John, Gloucester, and Mary Graisbuiy, Gloucester 1743 

Frazee, Aaron, Middlesex, and Hannah Ross 1768 

Frazee, James, Middlesex, and Rachel Frambles, Elizabeth Town. . 1770 
Frazee, Jonathan, Woodbridge, and Labell Freeman, Woodbridge . 1762 

Frazee, Moses, Middlesex, and Mary Drake, Middlesex 1764 

Frazee, Stephen, Monmouth, and Hannah Gifford, Monmouth 1765 

Frazer, David, Hunterdon, and Rachel Anderson, Hunterdon 1771 

Frazer, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Foster, Burlington 1 780 

Frazer, Robert, Burlington, and Margaret Carr, Burlington 1767 

Freas, Frederick, Salem, and Catherine Miller 1775 

Freas, George, Salem, and Catherine Halter 1772 

Fredericks, Frederick, Morris, and Margaret Clark 17^4 

Fredericks, Martin, Morris, and Mary DeBlow 177i) 

Freeing, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Adams 1778 

Freeland, Enoch, Bergen, and Marritie Terhune 1788 

See also — Vreeland. 

Freeman, Abraham, Middlesex, and Abigail Clarkson, Middlesex 1763 

Freeman, Alexander, Middlesex, and Grace Randolph, Middlesex. . . 1748 

Freeman, Asahal, Monmouth, and Mary Morris, Monmouth 1757 

Freeman, Edward, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Tharp 1746 

Freeman, Henry, Woodbridge, aud Abigail Carman, Woodbridge. ...1739 

Freeman, Henry, Jr., Woodbridge, and Mary Read, Woodbridge 1742 

Freeman, Isaac, Woodbridge, and Sarah Tappeu, Woodbridge ...... 1742 

Freeman, Isaac, Jr., Woodbridge, and Phebe Fitz Randolph, W'dbdge. 1759 

Freeman, James, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Pain, Woodbridge 1759 

Freeman, James, Middlesex, and Catharine Brooks 1768 

Freeman, Jesse, Cape May, and Rachel Lee, Great Egg Harbor 1760 

Freeman, John, Hunterdon, and Martina Johnsou, Hunterdon •. . . 1735 



Dec. 


29 


Feb. 


19 


Dec. 


24 


Feb. 


26 


Sept. 


20 


Aug. 


6 


April 


24 


Nov. 


26 


May 


22 


May 


12 


June 


19 


Mar. 


30 


Mar. 


9 


Jan. 


5 


July 


8 


Feb. 


3 


A pril 


8 


Mar. 


1 


June 


22 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


3 


Jan. 


16 


Mar. 


17 


May 


16 


Sept, 


28 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


9 


April 


17 


Oct. 


30 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


6 


July 


20 


June 


5 


Juue 


29 


Jan. 


11 


Dec. 


7 


Sept. 


30 


Sept. 


8 


July 


1 


Nov. 


23 


Juue 


19 


May 


16 


Sept. 


15 


Feb. 


27 


Sept. 


15 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 1 43 

Freeman, John, Middlesex, and Sarah ttutphin 1772 June 16 

Freeman, Jonathan, Middlesex, and Mary Perkins, Middlesex 1760 April 12 

Freeman, Joseph, Jr., Middlesex, and Deborah Rowling, Middlesex. . .1763 Aug. 23 

Freeman, Thomas, New York, and Grace Cosby 1733 June 14 

Freeman, William, Woodbridge, and Sarah Berry 1745 Dec. 7 

Freeman, William, Woodbridge, and Charity Taylor, Woodbridge 1750 Dec. 5 

Freeman, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hews 1758 Sept. 25 

Freestone, John, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Mitchell, Bucks, Pa 176.) Jan. 5 

French, Benjamin, Bordentown, and Martha Hall, Bordeutown 1742 Jan. 29 

French, Charles, Gloucester, and Sabella Stoakes 1783 May 27 

French, Jackson Browu, Burlington, and Catheriue Lawrence 1790 .Oct. 1 

French, James, Burlington and Sarah Ferguson 1779 Oct. 12 

French. Joseph, New Jersey, and Hannah Horn, Raritau Lauding . 1749 Jan. 3 

French, Thomas, Sulem, and Isabel Mason, Salem 1733 July 13 

French, Thomas, Burlingtou, and Jamimah Elkeutou, Burlington ..1746 May 8 

French, Thomas, Burlington, and Mercy Coxe 1769 April 22 

French, Thomas, Cape May, and Hannah Peasuer 1774 Nov. 14 

French, Uriah, Burlington, and Rachel Ingersall, Burlington 1771 June 29 

French, William, Middlesex, and Antie Seabring, Middlesex 1742 Dec. 28 

French, William, Burlington, and Lydia Taylor, Bordentown. 1748 Sept. 20 

Frent, Morgan, Cumberland, and Dorcas Moore, Cumberland 1762 June 9 

Fresnean, Peter, New York, and Agnes Watson, Monmouth 1750 Mar. 12 

Friend, Ephraim, Salem, aud Bridgitta Suecks, Salem 1731 June 5 

Frizilier, John, Perth Amboy. and Sarah Brookin 1757 Dec. 10 

Frohock, John, Bucks, Pa., aud Elizabeth Parker 1732 July 4 

Frost, John, Bucks, Pa., and Grace Searle, Bucks, Pa 1732 June 6 

Frost, Thomas, Newark, and Tammisin Erie 1764 Nov. 1 

Fry, John, S.ilem, and Mary Braithwaite, Salem 1727 May 4 

Fryer, John Casparus, Morris, and Helena Van Etteu, Morris 1742 June 18 

Fulkerson, John, Morris, and Catherine Slaught 1781 April 13 

Fulkerson, Fulkerd, Morris, and S irah Schellenger 1780 Jan. 12 

Fulkison, Cornelius, Somerset, and Frinche Van Dyke, Somerset 1764 Dec. 11 

Fuller, John, Salem, and Ellenor Lewis, Salem 1683 July 16 

Fulliugsby, John, Burlington, and Olive Brazintou, Burlington.. ...... 1774 Dec. 5 

Fulper, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Catherine Hoppock, Hunterdon 1774 May 7 

Fulton, Robert, Burlington, and Cathriue ^ parburn, Burlington .... 1756 Oct. 4 

Fulton, Robert, Burlin^trn, and Mary Rogers, Burlington 1765 July 19 

Fundrau, William, Perth Amboy, and Deborah Islestine, Perth Amboy. 1752 Dec. 18 

Funk, Peter, Monmouth, and Mariah Rogers, Monmouth 1753 Mar. 5 

Funk, John, Middlesex, aud Charity Hageman, Middlesex 1718 April 15 

Funtine, John. Middlesex, and Lydia Boyce, Middlesex 1759 July 4 

Furman, John, Jr., Princeton, and Zeuah Letts, Middlesex 1768 May 14 

Furman, John, Hunterdon, and Phebe Hunt 1779 Mar. 30 

Furman, Jonathan, Freehold, and Sarah Throgmorton, Freehold. .. 1745-6 Feb. 11 

Furman, Jonathan, Trenton, aud Elizabeth Evens, Hunterdon 1764 Oct. 13 



144 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Furrnan, l Richard W., Trenton, and Sarah Rickey 1786 Oct. 19 

Furman, Samuel, Somerset, aDd Elizabeth Corle, Somerset. 1748 May 24 

Fumes, Beujamin, Burlington, and Dorothy Higginbottom, Burlingt'n.1745 Aug. 23 

Furnis, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Dyer, Philadelphia 1736 May 21 

Fye, Nicholas, Gloucester, and Rose Repert, Gloucester 1761 Aug. 4 

FEMALES. ^ 

Faber, Huldah, Monmouth, and Francis Chadwick, Monmouth 1764 Nov. 1 

Fagau, Elinor, Mansfield, and Urah Thompson, Mansfield 1771 Sept. 28 

Fageu, Jean, Bucks, Pa., and Francis Titus, Jr., Bucks, Pa 1763 Aug. 17 

Fairchild, Jane. Morris, and Silas Goble, Morris 1744 Aug. 22 

Fairchild, Mary, Morristown, and Caleb Tuttle, Morristown 1779 Nov. 30 

Fairchild, Pheby, Morristown, and Abraham Talmage, Morristown 176S Dec. 2 

Fairly, Mary, Burlington, and Hugh Middleton, Burlington 1744 Sept. 25 

Fairman, Elizabeth, and John Palmer, Philadelphia ... 1743 June 7 

Falkeson, Sarah, Somerset, and Derrick Falkeson, Somerset 1752 Jan. 28 

Falkner, Huklu, and Jean Baptist Foueserits, Gloucester 1776 Dec. 10 

Falks, Alice, Burlington, and Charles Bowker, Burlington 1770 Oct. 5 

Fauger, Bathiah, Middletown, and Joseph Wilson, Middletowu 1765 Aug. 21 

Fannin?, Thankfull, Burlington, and Daniel Cail, Burlington 1770 June 1 

Fansiler, Susanah, and Mathias Fanyurk, Hunterdon 1785 Mar. 5 

Faress, Sarah, and Nathaniel Donnell, Jr , Cumberland 1784 June 25 

Fargie, Alida, and Cornelius C. Roosevelt, Orange Co., N. Y. 1781 Oct. 17 

Faris, Elizabeth, Windsor, and William Vaughn, Windsor .1759 Feb. 5 

Fariss. Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Edward Adaire, Bucks, Pa 1732 Aug. 1 

Farle, Susannah, Amwell, and George Ely, Jr., Amwell 1768 April 27 

Farlee, Molly, Hunterdon, and Simon Wyckoff, Hunterdon 1770 April 28 

Farley, Ellenor, Amwell, and Peter Ruuk, Amwell 1774 Mar. 30 

Farmar, Elizabeth, and Peter Goelet, New York ? 1775 Oct, 26 

Farmer, Margaret, and John Smith, Hunterdon 1733-4 Jau. 28 

Farmer, Mary, and George Greenfield, Philadelphia 1730 April 24 

Farmer, Sarah, and Jacob Clants, Springfield 1779 Juue 3 

Farnsworth, Hannah, and Robert Ashton 1747-8 Feb. 15 

Farnsworth, Sarah, Bordentown, and John Opdike, Burlington 1744 Oct. 7 

Farnsworth, Susannah, Burlington, and Owen Edwards, Burlington. . .1732 April 11 

Farril, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and James Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1763 Sept. 13 

Farrow, Martha, Burlington, and Solomon Laeds, Gloucester 1765 Jan. 30 

Farrow, Sarah, and Peter Grapevine, Gloucester 1779 July 19 

Faucett, Mary, and Charles Lock 17 

Faulkerson, Elizabeth, and Baruaby McGraw, Morris 1777 Aug. 5 

Faulkinburg, Hannah, Lt. Egg Hbr, and John Southard, Lt. Egg Hbr.1767 Mar. 25 

Favio, Sarah, Burlington, and James Warner, Burlington 1767 Aug. 29 

Fawsett, Ester, Gloucester, and John Holm, Gloucester 1732 July 22 

i A pencil note in the manuscript index says: "His first wife was Hannah Middleton, 
born 1755 ; died 178:V 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



145 



Fearne, Rebecca, Gloucester, and John Gitbens, Gloucester 17-11 Nov. '■' 

Featherby, Rachael, and Moses Ferrill, Sussex. 1773 Dec. 7 

Feedling, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Johannes Ott, Philadelphia. ... 1751 June 25 

Fegans, Elie, and George Morris 1783 Dee. 17 

Fell, Mary, and Richard Meredith 1769 July 22 

Fenimore, Hannah, Burlington, and Amos Hutcbins, Burlington.. .. 1772 April & 

Fenimore, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Caleb Fenimore, Burlington. . . . 177-4 April 28 

Fenimore, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Cooper, Pennsylvania. .1774 Nov. 12 

Fenimore, Elizabeth, and John Durell. Burlington 1777 Aug. 21 

Fenimore, Hope, Springfield, and Abraham Claypoole, New Hanover. .1774 Dec. 7 

Fenimore, Rachel, aud John Pittinger, Burlington 1778 Oct. 24 

Fenimore, Rebecca, and Paul Wilmerton, Burlington 1778 April 30 

Fenimore, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Stevenson, Burlington. . .1763 May 4 

Feunell, Sebina, Sussex, and William Kelley, Sussex 1769 Feb. 20 

Fenner, Catharine, and Henry Carkkuff, Hunterdon 1767 Nov. 23 

Fennimore, Anne, Willingborow, aud Joseph Mullen, Bridgetown 1748 Dec. 24 

Fennimore, Joan, Burlington, and George Dearon, Burlington 1728 Jan. 1 

Fennimore, Mary, Burlington, aud William Morrell, Burlington 1730 Oct. 28 

Fennimore, Rebecca Burlington, aud Robert Lucas, Burlington 1730 May 18 

Fennimore, Rebecca, Burlington, and Benjamin Moor, Jr., Burlington. 1730 Oct. 27 

Fennimore, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Fennimore, Burlington. . .1773 May 24 

Fennimore, Sarah, and Daniel Newton 1781 June 5 

Fenton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joseph Hoye. Burlington.. 1763 Jau. 15 

Fenton, Hannah, and John Johnson, Burlington 1779 Nov. 9 

Fenton, Man', Burlington, aud John Ashton, Bucks, Pa 1765 Feb. 13 

Fenton, Pamela, and Henry Still, Burlington. . . 1777 Dec. 9 

Fenton, Phebe, and Thomas Quicksall, Burlington 1748 Cot. 15 

Fenton, Rachel, and Nathaniel Wilkinson, Burlington 1735 Dec. 1 

Fenton, Sarah, Burlington, and Jacob Johnson, Burlington .. 1733 July 19 

Fenton, Sarah, Burlington, aud George Applegate, Burlington 1763 Nov. 14 

Fentou, Vashti, and Obadiah Ireton, Burlington . . 1754 Jan. 21 

Feorigiu, Elizabeth, aud Jacob Lawrence, Jr., Burlington 1767 Oct. 14 

Ferguson, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Muriel, Burlington 1758 April 4 

Fergusou, Jennet, and George Peinter, Burlington 1789 Aug. 13 

Ferguson, Margaret, aud George Painter, Burlington . . 1785 Oct. 5 

Ferguson, Mary, aud Simon Simonson, New York 1786 Oct. 25 

Ferguson, Sarah, aud James French, Burlington 1779 Oct. 12 

Fergueson, Jane, and Joseph Thornton, Philadelphia 1787 June 7 

Ferris, Polly, Burlington, and John Beck, Burlington 1 780 June 20 

Ferry, Mary, Hopewell, and Samuel Davis, Cumberland 1759 Jan. 11 

Ferver, Margaret, Morris, and James Bleuchrill, Morris 1774 June 8 

Field, Abigail, Mansfield, aud James Peters, Mansfield 1773 Aug. 26 

Field, Chanty, Bucks, Pa., and James Pierson, Bucks, p a 1749 Oct, 30 

Field, Hannah, Middlesex, and John Gerisb, Somerset 1749 Mar. 28 

Field, Mary, Hopewell, and Ezekiel Rose, Amwell 1772 Nov. 18 

Field, Mary, and Thomas Read, Philadelphia 1779 Aug. 27 

10 



146 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Field, Phoebe, Burlington, and Abijah Watkius 1773 Oct. 1 

Field, Rebecca, Burlington, and Samuel Taylor, Jr., Burlington 1741 Oct. 3 

Field, Sarah, Middlesex, and John Pool, Somerset 1748-9 Mar. 9 

Field, Sarah, Burlington, and Micajah How, Hunterdon. . . . . 1770 Jan. 22 

Fielding, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and John Oat, Philadelphia .1751 June 25 

Fight, Catharine, and Daniel Packer, Greenwich 1771 Sept. 21 

Fiudlaw, Sarah, Cumberland, and Ebenezer Smith, Cumberland 1772 Nov. 17 

Fine, Mary, and Peter Kinuan, Bergen 1780 June 20 

Fine, Rachel, and William Nicoll, Bergen 1788 Dec. 27 

Finley, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Nathan Paul, Gloucester 1761 June 20 

Finley, Jane, Gloucester, and James Miller, Gloucester 1765 Oct. 28 

Finley, Jamsen, and Nathan Paul, Gloucester 1784 Sept. 28 

Finnise, Margaret, and Isaac Rinnerson, Somerset 1779 Dec. 25 

Firks, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Richard Scarrum, Monmouth. . . 1728 Aug. 15 

Fish, Anna, and Elias Conover, Monmouth 1780 Oct. 14 

Fish, Diaua, Gloucester, and Michael Fish, Gloucester ... 1737 Aug. 12 

Fish, Hannah, Gloucester, and George Gilbert, Gloucester 1728 Oct. 24 

Fish, Lydia, Monmouth, and John Pearce, Monmouth 1746 Oct. 17 

Fish, Rebecca, and Thomas Burrough, Gloucester 1777 Sept. 8 

Fish, Susannah, Gloucester, and Joseph Belles, Gloucester 1741 Jan. 11 

Fisher, Catherine, Gloucester, and Richard Fleming, Gloucester 1759 Sept. 1 

Fisher, Elizabeth, Somerset, and John Field, Middlesex 1744 May 4 

Fisher, Elizabeth, and Henry Kauaday, Somerset 1781 April 28 

Fisher, Hannah, Burlington, and Daniel Stockton, Burlington 1728 July 1 

Fisher, Letitia, Gloucester, and Moses Cox, Gloucester 1754 Oct. 18 

Fisher, Margery. Philadelphia, and David McMurtrie, Philadelphia. . . 1754 Mar. 18 

Fisher, Mary, Monmouth, and Guisbert Lane, Monmouth 1746 Mar. 26 

Fisher, Mary, Amwell, and Thomas Willson, Atnwell 1768 May 14 

Fishear, Mary, and John Ryer, Bergen 1784 Feb. 27 

Fisher, Neeltie, Somerset, and Heudrick Suydam, Somerset 1751 June 1 

Fisher, Sarah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Lodys, Salem 1742 Oct. 15 

. Fitcher, Elizabelh, Somerset, and Peter Vredenburg, New Brunswick.. 1746 Dec. 17 

Fitchet, Catharine, and Robert Gibbs, Burlington 1756 April 15 

Fitchel, Mary, Somerset, and Richard Davis, Somerset 1740 Sept. 28 

Fithiau, Abigail, and Nathan Shaw, Cumberland 1754 July 17 

Fithian, Ann, Cumberland, and Latin Ware, Cumberland 1768 Feb. 15 

Fithiau, Elizabeth, and Joel Fithian, Cumberland 1780 Feb. 2 

Fithian, Esther, Cumberland, and Thomas Maskell, Cumberland 1768 Mar. 27 

Fithian, Hannah, Cumberland, and Nathan Leek, Cumberland 1761 Dec. 1 

Fithian, Hannah, Cumberland, and William Barker, Cumberland 1766 April 10 

Fithian, Mary, Jr., Cumberland, and William Sayres, Cumberland . . 1762 May 25 

Fithian, Mary, and Joshua Brick, Cumberland 1786 Mar. 28 

Fithian, Rebecca, and Thomas Brown, Cumberland 1780 May 29 

Fithian, Temperance, Cumberland, and Joseph Donelson, CumbeiTnd. 1774 May 23 

Fits Randell, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas James, Monmouth 1764 June 6 

Fitz, Mary, Salem, and Thomas Boon, Salem 1767 Feb. 17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 147 

Fitzgerald, Bridget, Burlington, and James Thomas, Burlington 1731 Aug. 21 

Fitzgerald, Elizabeth, Greenwich, and Jacob West, Sussex 1773 Dee. 9 

Fitzgerald, Mary, Cumberland, and Samuel Bacon, Cumberland 1767 April 2 

Fitzgerald, Mary, Sussex, and David Johnson, Sussex 1778 April 2 

Fitz Gerrald, Susanna, Elsinburrough, and John Denn, Salem 1772 Feb. 15 

Fitzhuge, Mary, cluster, and Jeremiah Hinds, Burlington 1739 May 29 

Fitz Randolph— see also Randolph. 

Fitzpatrick, Mary, Monmouth, and Marroaduke Horseman 1744 Mar. 16 

Fitz Randolph, Abigail, and Richard Carman 1742 July 21 

Fitz Randolph, Catharine, and Thomas Bowlby, Morris 1715 June 10 

Fitz Randolph, Catherine, Piscfttaway, and Israel Thornell, Middlesex. 1753 Jan. 1 

Fitz Randolph, Catherine, and Nathaniel Martin, Middlesex 1758 May 30 

Fitz Randolph, Catherine, Perth Amboy, and Gilbert Sherer, N. York, 1763 Dec. 28 

Fitz Randolph, Catharine, and William B. Jelf, Morris . 1776 April 6 

Fitz Randolph, Charity, Burlington, and Michael Bennet, Burlington.. 1774 Nov. 14 

Fitz Randolph, Frances, Woodbridge, and James Crowell, Wd bridge. .1759 Jan. 17 

Fitzrandolph, Grace, Somerset, and Stephen Jones, Somerset 1728 June 22 

Fitz Randolph, Johanna, Woodbridge, and James Rowland, W'db'dge. 1756 Nov. 9 

Fitz Randolph, Johanna, and Jacob Thorn, Middlesex 1769 Dec. 30 

Fitz Randolph, Margaret, and James Clarkson, Middlesex 1743 Dec. 26 

Fitz Randolph, Margaret, "Woodbridge, and William Waller, W'db'dge. 1750 Sept. 1 

Fitz Randolph, Mary, Woodbridge, and Samuel Coddington, W'db'dge. 1756 Oct. 16 

Fitzrandolph, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and David Piukerton, Bucks, Pa 1757 May 12 

Fitzrandolph, Mary, Middlesex, and Jonas Baldwin, Middlesex 1763 Oct. 18 

Fitzrandolph, Mary, Piscataway, and Jeremiah Dunn, Piscataway , . . 1765 April 16 

Fitz Randolph, Mary, Middlesex, and James Bray, Morris 1771 Oct. 3 

Fitz Randolph, Phebe, Woodbridge, and Isaac Freeman, Jr., W'b'dge. 1759 June 19 

Fitz Randolph, Rachel, Woodbridge, and Nicholas Shotwell 1744 June 2 

Fitz Randolph, Rachel, Piscataway, and Thomas Holton, Piscataway 1750 Aug. 25 

Fitz Randolph, Rebecca, Middlesex, and Thomas Mattis, Middlesex. . .1749 June 2 

Fitz Randolph, Rebecca, Woodbridge, and Robert Clarkson, W'db'dge. 1758 Aug. 7 

Fitz Randolph, Rebecca, and John Stockton, Somerset 1780 June 24 

Fitz Randolph, Sarah, Monmouth, and William Haywood, Monmouth. 1761 Nov. 13 

Fitz Randolph, Sarah, Middlesex, and Reuben Dunn, Middlesex 1770 Oct. 9 

Fitzwater, Deborah, and Christopher Clymer, Philadelphia 1734 Feb. 3 

Fitzwater, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and Thomas Hogg, Philadelphia. . .1734 Feb. 6 

Flanningam, Amy, and David Peterson, Gloucester 1785 Mar. 14 

Flanningam, Patience, Gloucester, and Michael Fisher, Gloucester.. . .1771 June 21 

Flanningam, Anne, Gloucester, and James Jayard, Gloucester 1760 Feb. 2 

Flannigham, Aun, and Benjamin Weatherby, Gloucester 1783 Dec. 1 

Flannigan, Priscilla, Gloucester, and Arthur Hamilton, Gloucester. . . .1769 Mar. 23 

Flanigin, Jane, Burlington, and Patrick Welsh, Burlington 1734 Mar. 11 

Flannagan, Mary, and Thomas Johnson, Salem 1776 Mar. 14 

Flannagan, Mary, and James Coakley, New Jersey 1778 April 27 

Flanningham, Llizabeth, Gloucester, and Jacob AlbertsoD, Gloucester. 1770 Mar. 12 

Flanningham, Sarah, and William Wilkins, Gloucester 1773 May 27 



148 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Flat, Hannah, and Edward Booth, Maryland 1779 

Flatt, Elizabeth, Sussex, and Hugh Black, Sussex 1773 

Flatt, Mary, Woodbridge, and Edward Wilkison, Woodbridge 1763 

Flatt, Sarah, and John Myers, Middlesex. 1783 

Fleming, Agues, and Timothy Wood, New York 1767 

Fleming, Anne, Perth Amboy, and William Card, Perth Amboy 1739 

Fleming, Christian, Monmouth, and Safty Layton, Monmouth 1765 

Fleming, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and John Sherrerd, Amwell 1764 

Fleming, Esabella, and Jacob Servas, Amwell 1766 

Fleming, Mary, Hunterdon, and George Alexander, Hunterdon 1766 

Flemming, Christian, Monmouth, and Samuel Romine, Monmouth . . 1760 

Flewellin, Hannah, Gloucester, and Tatum Williams, Gloucester 1761 

Flewelling, Ruth, and Humphrey Owen, Gloucester 1756 

Flick, Catharine, and Ellet Howell, Trenton 1777 

Flint, Margaret, and John Adams, Burlington 1769 

Flood, Jane, Somerset, and John Steel, Somerset 1738 

Floyd, Rebecca, and Joseph Clark 1775 

Fluellin, Phebe, and Benjamin Holme, Gloucester 1772 

Fogg, Hannah, Alloways Creek, and Samuel Stretch, Alloways Creek. 1762 
Fogg, Hannah, Alloways Creek, and William Walker, Alloways Creek. 1767 

Fogg, Margaret, Salem, and John Ewen, Salem 1758 

Fogg, Margaret, Upper Al. Creek, and John Walker, Upper Al. Creek. 1772 

Folke, Rebecca, Burlington, and Samuel Horseman, Monmouth 1727 

Folkerson, Elizabeth, and Jacob Merrill, Morris 1781 

Folsom, Mary, Piscataway, and Timothy Connor, Piscataway 1750 

Folsom, Rachel, Piscataway, and Ebenezer Collins, Piscataway 1751 

Fulwell, Ann. Burlington, and William Cooper, Gloucester 1768 

Folwell, Elizabeth, and Abner Page, Burlington 1782 

Folwell, Hannah, and Joseph Aaronson, Burlington 1736 

Folwell, Hope, Burlington, and Benjamin Aaronson, Burlington 1767 

Folwell, Sarah, and Daniel Harvey, Burlington. 1777 

Folwell, Sarah, Burlington, and John Atkinson, Burlington 1745 

Fonk, Catherine, and Peter Johnson, Middlesex 1781 

Fontine, Elizabeth, and Hendrick Fisher, Somerset 1764 

Fontine, Lydia, Middlesex, and Adrian Laforge, Jr., Staten Island . 1763 
Foord, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and Richard Cutler, Jr., Woodbridge. . 1750 
Foord, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Timothy Bloomfield, Jr., Woodbridge. 1749 

Foord, Sinty, and Jacob Halenbeck 1762 

Ford, Anna, and Isaac Larowe, Hunterdon 1780 

Ford, Anne, Burlington, and James Cubberly, Burlington ... 1777 

Ford, Elizabeth, and Thomas More, Salem 1732 

Ford, Elizabeth, and Andrew Bankson 1778 

Ford, Esther, and James Silver, Allentown 1745 

Ford, Hannah,- Burlington, and Daniel Estell, Burlington 1761 

Ford, Mary, Woodbridge, and Nathaniel Heard, Woodbridge 1752 

Ford, Mary, Middlesex, and James Manning, Middlesex 1752 



Feb. 


28 


Aug. 


23 


April 


30 


Feb. 


20 


Dec, 


28 


Nov. 


9 


Jan. 


4 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


29 


April 


28 


Feb. 


1L 


Dec. 


8. 


Dec. 


27 


Nov. 


19 


May 


11 


Mar. 


23 


June 


25 


May 


22 


Feb. 


23 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


Feb. 


9 


Jan. 


23 


Jan. 


31 


July 


29 


May 


4 


Sept. 


9 


Aug. 


25 


Mar. 


13 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


21 


April 


9 


June 


7 


Dec. 


8 


April 


3 


May 


22 


Mar. 


16 


April 


23 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


24 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


13 


Feb. 


14 


Mar. 


21 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 149 

Ford, Mary, Morris, and Azariah Dunham, Piscataway 1753 

Ford, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Samuel Parker, Jr., Woodbridge 1764 

Ford, Sarah, and William PattisoD, Maidenhead 1780 

Ford, Tabitha, and Vanroom Robins, Nottingham 1783 

Fordham, Elizabeth, Burlington, and James Ezdall, Burlington 1764 

Fordon, Mary, Bergen, and Thomas Moore, Bergen 17 IS 

Foreman, Mary, Cape May, and Aaron Learning, Jr., Cape May 1738 

Foreman, Patience, and John Foster, Cape May 1761 

Foreman, Patience, and Jacob Hand, Cape May. 1774 

Forester, Susannah, and Francis Van Winkle, Essex 1777 

Forgison, Ellener, Cumberland, and William Love, Cumberland 1763 

Forker, Hannah, Burlington, and Jabez Eldridge, Burlington 1771 

Forman, Charity, and Joseph Cox, Hunterdon 1775 

Forman, Elizabeth, and Kenneth Perine, Monmouth 1769 

Forman, Hannah, Monmouth, and Peter Covenhoveu, Monmouth 1756 

Forman, Hannah, Upper Freehold, and Edward Tayler, Up. Freehold. 1762 

Forman, Lydia, Monmouth, and Jonathan Rhea, Monmouth 1753 

Forman, Margaret, Monmouth, and Samuel Foiemau, Monmouth.... 1772 

Forman, Mary, Monmouth, and Robert Rhe, Monmouth 1714 

Forman, Mary. Monmouth, and Joseph Throckmorton, Jr., Monmouth. 1747 
Forman, Phebe, Middletown Point, and Hartshorne White, Middletown. 1759 

Forman, Priscilla, Monmouth, and George Walker, Monmouth 1747 

Forman, Sarah, and Jonathan Fox, Burlington. 1763 

Forman, Susannah, and Thomas Woodward, Jr., Upper Freehold. .. 1762 

Forrest, Barbara, Salem, and William Hampton, Salem 1764 

Forster, Margaret, Middlesex, and Ezekiel Bloomrield, Middlesex. ... 1741 

Fort, Anne, and Samuel Estell, Burlington 1759 

Fort, Aune, New Hanover, and Henry Shinn, New Hanover 1770 

Fort, Anne, Burlington, and Daniel Mitchell, Burlington 17o3 

Fort, Edith, Burlington, and Thomas Price, Burlington 1747 

Foit, Elizabeth, and Joseph Betts, Burlington 1768 

Fort, Esther, Burlington, and Stephen Murphy, Burlington 1721) 

Fort, Johanna, Burlington, and John Lee, Burlington 1727 

Fort, Lettice, and James Kelley, Burlington 1777 

Fortiner, Bathsheba, and Thomas Smith, Gloucester . . . . 1763 

Fortune, Hope, and Benjamin Bispham, Gloucester 1783 

Fortune, Mary, Gloucester, and Richard Saunders, Gloucester 1763 

Foster, Abigail, Cape May, and William Jonson, Cape May 1742 

Foster, Barsheba, and Lot Buck, Cape May 1783 

Foster, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joseph Frazer, Philadelphia 1780 

Foster, Esther, and William Dangerfield, Burlington 1778 

Foster, Hannah, and William Wilgus, Upper Freehold 1 769 

Foster, Hannah, and Butler Thomson, Cumberland 1779 

Foster, Hannah, and John Bispham, Gloucester 1785 

Foster, Jemima, Hunterdon, and Tunis Johnson, Hunterdon 1752 

Foster, Lettice, Burlington, and Nehemiah Lamb, Burlington 1772 



Max- 


17 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


27 


April 


22 


Feb. 


13 


Aug. 


5 


Feb. 


22 


Oct. 


2 


May 


5 


Jan. 


7 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


1 


June 


9 


May 


24 


Oct. 


8 


Jan. 


19 


Dec. 


18 


May 


4 


July 


11 


Oct. 


22 


May 


12 


Oct. 


13 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


24 


Nov. 


13 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


23 


Sept. 


18 


Jan. 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Oct. 


1 


Feb. 


6 


Sept. 


30 


April 


19 


May 


9 


Jan. 


23 


April 


6 


Sept. 


11 


Jan. 


26 


July 


27 


Aug. 


18 


Sept. 


12 



150 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Foster, Martha, Ringwood, and Samuel Ruckrnan, Ringwood 1772 

Foster, Mary, Burlington, and Robert Gilham, Burlington 1737 

Foster, Mary, Cape May, and Ephrairn Stratton, Cape May 17G3 

Foster, Mary, Burlington, and Edmond Bower, Burlington 1765 

Foster, Susannah, Burlington, and Henry Murphy, Burlington 1775 

Foster, Tabittha, and John Robertson, Cape May 1786 

Foulks, Elizabeth, and Richard Kirby, Burlington , 17-19-50 

Fowler, Freelove, Or'geCo., N. Y., and Thomas Simonds, Or. Co., N. Y.1771 

Fowler, Elizabeth, and Robert Rogers, Monmouth 1780 

Fowler, Emily, and Uriah Nail, Greenwich 1779 

Fowrman, Mary, and Jonathan Smith, Maidenhead 1779 

Fox, Abalon, and John Miller, Pennsylvania 1786 

Fox, Anne, Burlington, and James Dobbins, Burlington 1767 

Fox, Deborah, Cape May, and George Morton, Cape May 1764 

Fox, Grace. Perth Amboy, and Isaac Bunnell, Perth Amboy 1763 

Fox, Mary, Gloucester, and John Hoffman, Gloucester '..... 1749 

Fox, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Abraham Burgeau, New York 1764 

Fox, Mary, and Joseph Budd, Jr., Burlington 1781 

Fox, Rachel, and John Lewis, Bucks, Pa 1780 

Frame, Martha, and Nathaniel Skinner 1770 

Frances, Anne, Gt. Egg Harbor, and David Patton, Gt. Egg Harbour.. 1760 

Francis, Ellinor, Freehold, and Alexander Steward, Middlesex 1757 

Francis, Margaret, and Denise Denise, Monmouth 1768 

Francis, Mary, Freehold, and Michael Errickson, Jr., Freehold 1751 

Francis, Susanna, Gloucester, and Charles Camel, Gloucester , 1750 

Francis, Valleriah, and Elisha Hornor, Monmouth 1773 

Franklin, Mary, and Jacob Simp, Springfield 1775 

Franklin, Winifred, Burlington, and James Bruce, Middlesex 1768 

Frances, Sary, Monmouth, and Andrew Brown, Monmouth 1767 

Fraser, Abigail, Cumberland, and Foster Wescote, Cohansey 1748 

Frasie, Hannah, Middlesex, and John Boyle, Somerset 1761 

Frasier, Catharine, Monmouth, and Richard Porter, Hunterdon 1749 

Fraze, Mary, Essex, and John Moore, Middlesex 1751 

Frazee, Charity, Woodbridge, and Samuel Foerd, Jr., Woodbridge .. 1757 

Frazee, Esther, Elizabethtown, and John Brown, Woodbridge 1754 

Frazee, Jane, Bordentown, and Amos Willis, Burlington 1747 

Frazee, Mary, Woodbridge, and William Ruualls, Woodbridge 1758 

Frazee, Posthumas, Middlesex, and Michael Moore, Middlesex 1740 

Frazie, Catharine, and John Southard 1761 

Frazier, Jane, and Henry Casey, Hunterdon . . 1768 

See Vreeland. 

Freeland, Antye, and Jerry Van Riper, Bergen 1787 

Freeland, Beeltye, and David Blair, Essex 1783 

Freeland, Catharine, and Thomas Post, Essex 1784 

Freeman, Charity, Middlesex, and William Kent, Middlesex 1756 

Freeman, Desire, Middlesex, and Timothy Brown, Hunterdon 1763 



July 


4 


Aug. 


10 


July 


20 


Oct. 


22 


Nov. 


7 


June 


17 


Jan. 


30 


Oct. 


19 


Sept, 


16 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


24 


Mar. 


20 


Sept. 


7 


Mar. 


26 


Dec. 


3 


Nov. 


1 


June 


13 


Oct. 


27 


Sept. 


12 


June 


19 


June 


5 


Oct. 


25 


April 


11 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


22 


April 


6 


Nov. 


4 


Sept. 


19 


Nov. 


24 


May 


31 


Aug. 


7 


Nov. 


17 


Nov. 


13 


July 


5 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


16 


Mar. 


15 


Dec. 


31 


Oct, 


26 


Feb. 


24 


Jan. 


20 


Mar. 


17 


July 


23 


May 


1 


Feb. 


23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Freeman, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and Elisha Donham, Woodbridge. .1752 

Freeman, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Thomas Morris, Middlesex 1755 

Freeman, Isabel], Woodbridge, and Jonathan Frazee, Woodbridge... 1762 

Freeman, Lucretia, and James Willson, Hunterdon 

Freeman, Martha, Middlesex, and John Anderson, Kssex 1763 

Freeman, Mary, Woodbridge, and Samuel Force. 1750 

Freeman, Mary, Woodbridge, aud John Pain, Woodbridge 1758 

Freeman, Sarah, Woodbridge, and John Smith, Woodbridge 1739 

Freeman, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Samuel Force, Woodbridge 1754 

Freisinger, Caty, Bergen, and Peter Esterby, Bergen 1770 

French, Ann, and George Peacock, Burlington.. 1788 

French, Bathsheba, Gloucester, and Daniel Fortiuer, Gloucester. .. 1748 

French, Hannah, and Nathan Evans, Burlington 1792 

French, Hester, Gloucester, and Vespasion Kemble, Gloucester 1771 

French, Hope, Gloucester, and Isaac Kay, Gloucester 1748 

French, Hope, and Titan Leeds, Burlington 1759 

French, -Jemima, Gloucester, and Francis Kay, Gloucester 1743 

French, Jemimah, and Jacob Borton, Burlington 1790 

French, Lydia, and Gabriel Allen, Bordentown 1782 

French, Margaret, Burlington, and William Hooper, Burlington .... 1744 

French, Mary, Burlington, and Nathan Middleton, Burlington 1736 

French, Mary, Burlington, and Abraham Sharp, Burlington 1735 

French, Mary, Freehold, and James Farrell, Freehold. . . 1751 

French, Mary, and Hugh Creighton, Gloucester 1759 

French, Mary, Burlington, and John Reily, Burlington 1771 

French, Mary, and William Ivins, Burlington 1773 

French, Mary, Burlington, and Nathaniel Parker, Philadelphia 1773 

French, Rebecka, Monmouth, and David Parker, Monmouth 1761 

French, Rebeckah, and John Peirson, Maidenhead 17 s 2 

French, Sarah, Burlington, and William Shinn, Burlington 1756 

Frenet, Ann, Burlington, and Thomas Robinson, Burlington 1757 

Fresneau, Agnes, and James Kearny, Monmouth . . 1771 

Friend, Ann, and Nicholas Roberts Robinson, Pennsylvania 1773 

Fries, Deborah, and Michael Sholts, Monmouth 1772 

Fritson, Mary, Freehold, aud John Huggiu, Freehold 1746 

Frost, Hester, Monmouth, and Marcus Hedden, Monmouth 1779 

Frost, Margaret, Essex, and Stephen Salmon, Essex 1751 

Frost, Sarah, Staten Island, and Daniel Egbert, Staten Island 1746 

Fry, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Samuel Poling, Middletown 1755 

Fry, Margaret, and John Warrick, Gloucester 1784 

Fry, Mary, Middletown, and John Poling, Middletown 1755 

Fulford, Mary, and James Chapman, Trenton ... 1777 

Fulkarson, Anne, Somerset, and Leonard Smock, Somerset 1749 

Fullerton, Elizabeth, Elizabethtown, and George Nicolls, Elizabethan. 1740 

Funk, Catey, Bergen, and Abraham Brewer, Bergen 17(53 

Furier, Isabel, and William Brooks, Salem 1745 



'5i 



Juno 


20 


June 


2 


Jan. 


16 


Apiil 


1 


Jan. 


15 


Sept. 


30 


Feb. 


9 


July 


4 


Oct. 


22 


Feb. 


25 


July 


28 


Mar. 


7 


July 


21 


Feb. 


23 


Jan. 


• 


July 


7 


April 


21 


July 


16 


Dec. 


2 4 


April 


15 


.Mar. 


9 


Se] t. 


11 


Aug. 


10 


April 


4 


April 


7 


June 


1 


Sept. 


23 


Oct. 


5 


June 


24 


Aug. 


15 


June 


5 


Dec. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


31 


April 


2 


June 


18 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


11 


Mar. 


11 


April 


23 


July 


19 


April 


3 


A pril 


2 


Aug. 


27 



152 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Furinan, Abigail, and John Bennet, Hunterdon 1779 

Furman, Anne, Cape May, and Joshua Shaw, Jr., Cape May 1773 

Furman, Elizabeth, and Levi Stout, Hunterdon. ... 1778 

Furman, Jane, Freehold, and Thomas Tomson, Freehold 1770 

Furman, Martha, Cape May, and Jacob Schellinger, Cape May 1772 

Furman, Sarah, and William Fields, Hunterdon 1780 

Furman, Zelika, Cape May, and Josiah Hand, Cape May 1787 

Furnace, Lucretia, and Thomas Bishop, Burlington 1779 

Furnis, Mary, and Henry Vanhook, Cumberland 1784 

Furniss, Edith, and John Potts Neide, Cumberland 1790 

Furniss, Elizabeth, and Isaac Channen, Burlington 1780 

Fury, Catharine, and Abraham Gifford, Burlington 1771 

MALES. G 

Gack, Thomas, Woodbridge, and Keturah Clawson, Wood-bridge.. .. 1759 

Gage. Thomas, The Hon. Brig. Genl., and Margaret Kemble 1758 

Gagard, John Gloucester, and Mary Porch, Gloucester 1735 

Gaimon, William, Monmouth, and Margaret Bills, Monmouth 1755 

Gaith, Samuel, Perth Amboy, -and Elizabeth Smith, Perth Amboy .. 1749 

Gale, Abel, Burlington, and Lydia Cramer, Burlington 1740 

Gale, Abell, Burlington, and Mary Gale, Burlington. . . 1749 

Gale, David, Burlington, and Mary Wainwright, Burliugton 174 L 

Gale, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Powell, Burliugton ... 1747 

Gale, James, Little Egg Harbor, and Hannah Gaunt 1784 

Gale, John, Pennsylvania, and Mary Plumley, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Gale, John, Bristol, Pa., and Alice Vanhorn 1782 

Gale, Joseph, Burlington, and Massey Allen 1783 

Gale, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Kille, Burlington 1739 

Gallogher, John, and Elizabeth Shadaker 1704 

Galpiug, Thomas, Cumberland, and Ruth Gland, Cumbeiland 1749 

Gait, Alexander, Essex, and Elizabeth Dunn, Staten Island 1739 

Gamble, Patrick, Burlington, and Elizabeth Eldridge, Burliugton. ...1774 

(ramble, Samuel, Burlington, and Rachel Johnson, Burlington 17G5 

Gamble, William, Burliugton, and Elizabeth Talman, Burlington. . . . 177G 

Gammel, Samuel, Burlington, and Jaue Deacon 1734 

Gaudy, David, Cumberland, and Phebe Blizard, Cumberland 1761 

( randy, Elias, Cape May, and Mary English, Gloucester 1737 

Gaudy, Elias, Great Egg Harbor, and Mary Covenovcr 1764 

Gaudy, John, Cape May, and Lydia Williams 1774 

Gaudy, Thomas, Cape May, and Elizabeth Yong 1768 

Gandy, Thomas, Cumberland, and Naomi Blizard. . . 1779 

Gandy, Uriah, Cape May, and Lydia Bauer 17C7 

Gandy, Zebulon, Gloucester, and Anne Lee, Gloucester 1757 

Gano, Stephen, Somerset, and Elizabeth Deboys 1747 

( liuo, Stepbeu, Orange, N. Y., and Cornelia Vavason 1782 

(rausvoort, Leonard, Jr., Albany, N. Y., and Mary Vanranselear 1777 



Sept. 


6 


May 


17 


Dec. 


1 


Oct. 


22 


Jam 


22 


Sept. 


12 


June 


26 


May 


18 


May 


3 


Jan. 


26 


Mar. 


11 


Oct. 


16 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


July 


12 


June 


13 


June 


16 


May 


19 


July 


3 


Nov. 


4 


Mar. 


3 


July 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Mar. 


16 


Oct. 


8 


April 


5 


Jan. 


15 


Feb. 


18 


May 


12 


Sept. 


13 


June 


15 


April 


10 


Sept, 


3 


June 


17 


Sept. 


26 


Aug. 


30 


Dec. 


12 


Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


23 


Mar. 


25 


May 


23 


Oct. 


21 


Mar. 


3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 53 

Gard, William, Burlington, and Margaret Bowker 1779 Jan. 29 

Gardenner, James, Gloucester, and RachelHowel 1781 Feb. 16 

Gardiner, Benjamin, Burlington, and Phebe Borden, Hunterdon 1737 May 18 

Gardiner, Thomas, Burlington, and Susannah Elton, Burlington 1718 June 16 

Gardiner, Thomas M., Burlington, and Keturah Campion 1777 Sept. 7 

Gardiner, William, Burlington, and Mary Jourdan 1779 Mar. 17 

Gardner, George, Gloucester, and Rachel Scott 1771 Oct. 28 

Garlan, John, New Jersey, and Katheriue Sauford 1782 Feb. 16 

Garlick, Josiah, Cape May, and Lucy Brookes 173S Sept. 14 

Garner, Henry, Gloucester, and Drewsilla Bryant, Gloucester. 1765 April 30 

Garno, Peter, Newark, and Margaret Desha, Newark 1750 Feb. 20 

Garrabrants, Cornelius, Bergen, and Lena Van Horn 1784 Oct. 24 

Garrabrants, Garrabrant, Essex, and .Catherine Pier, Essex. 1747 Oct. 28 

Garrat, Valentine, Staten Island, and Martha McKissock, Staten Isl'd 1746 May 21 

Garrebrance, Mindert, Bergen, and Lybetie Post, Bergen 1767 Dec. 19 

Garretson, Daniel, Cape May, and Mary Osborn, Cape May 1761 June 19 

Garretson, Elijah, Cape May, and Tabitha Godfrey 1777 May 6 

Garretson, Jacob, Bergen, and Catharine Post, Bergen 1761 Jan. 21 

Garretson, James, Cape May, and Sarah Goldin 1760 April 28 

Garretson, Joshua, Cape May, and Phebe Scull, Cape May 1763 Nov. 23 

Garrisse, Gsrret, Essex, and Caty Van Busseu, Bergen 1774 Mar. 26 

Garrison, Abraham, Monmouth, and Mary Hartshorne, Monmouth ... 1744 Nov. 29 

( rarrison, Abraham, Bergen, and Mary Bogart 1780 Jan. 

Garrison, Abraham, Bergen, and Mary Ryerson 1784 Aug. 12 

Garrison, Abraham T., Bergen, and Jane Henniou 1788 June 19 

Garrison, Daniel, Staten Island, and Antie Wooglom, Staten Island. ..1743 June 14 

Garrison, David, Salem, and Sarah McCall, Salem 1764 Aug. 18 

Garrison, David, Salem, and Rebecca Coperthwaite, Burlington 1770 Mar. 17 

Garrison, David, Salem, and Elizabeth Kially 1773 April 9 

Garrison, Gemaliel, Salem, and Christiana Keen, Cumberland 1762 Oct. 8 

Garrison, George, Hunterdon, and Mary Prall 1754 Sept. 26 

Garrison, Henry, Essex, 'and Jane Post, Essex 1761 Mar. 1 1 

( rarrison, Isaac, Salem, and Elizabeth Lawrence, Salem 1727 Mar. 24 

Garrison, John, Salem, and Mary Graves, Salem 1768 Feb. 22 

Garrison, John, Jr., Hunterdon, and Mary Barber 1780 Mar. 29 

Garrison, Seger, Salem, and Susanna Huckiugs, Salem. 1738 May 30 

Garrison, Samuel, Salem, and Mary Morgan, Salem 1768 July 28 

Garrison, William, Salem, and Catherine Newkark. Salem 1758 Jan. 16 

Garrison, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Powell, Cumberland 1769 Jan. 28 

Garritse, Hendrick, Essex, and Hillegont Van Wincle, Bergen 1771 April 24 

Garritson, Garrit R., Somerset, and Anna Terhune 1778 April 10 

Garritson, John, and Nancy Tours 1783 April 24 

Garritson, Marinas, Essex, and Nautie Lisk 1778 May 19 

Garritson, Noah, Cape May, and Mary Golden 1737 Nov. 1 

Garritson, Rem, Cape May, and Esther Hand 1761 Oct. 13 

Garvey, Alexander, Monmouth, and Catharine Hardin, Monmouth . . 1759 July 31 



154 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Garwood, Abraham, Burlington, and Amey Haines, Burlington 1776 

Garwood, Hezekiah, Burlington, and Gaitree Hamniel, Burlington . . . 1765 

Garwood, James, Burlington, and Hannah Horner, Burlington 1756 

Garwood, James, Burlington, and Bethia Webb, Burlington 1766 

Garwood, John, Burlington, and Hester Haines, Burlington 1764 

Garwood, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Adams 1784 

Garwood, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Antrum, Burlington. . . . 1732 

Garwood, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Pancoast, Gloucester 1766 

Garwood, Joseph, Jr., Burlington, and Leah Devinney, Burlington 1757 

Garwood, Joshua, Gloucester, and Rebecca Dole 1769 

Garwood, Obadiah, Burlington, and Mary King, Burlington 1756 

Garwood, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Devaul 1779 

Garwood, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Sharp, Burlington 1763 

Garwood, William, Burlington, and Charity Gaskill, Northampton ... 1766 

Garwood, William, Burlington, and Bridget O'Donely 1787 

Gash, Martin, Burlington, and Ann Johnson, Burlington 1766 

Gaskel, Josiah, Burlington, and Mary Weaver, Burlington 1754 

Gaskill, Abraham, Burlington, and Ann Crammer 1784 

Gaskill, Benjamin, Burlington, and Mary Dennis, Monmouth 1738 

Gaskill, Benjamin, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Eudicott, Burlington. . .1767 

Gaskill, Caleb, Burlington, and Hope Bossell, Burlington 1765 

Gaskill, David, Burlington, and Sarah Ernest, Burlington 1774 

Gaskill, Ebenezer, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wood, Burlington 1731 

Gaskill, Ebenezer, Burlington, and Hester Gould 1769 

Gaskill, Edward, Burlington, and Elizabeth Harker, Burlington 1766 

Gaskill, Edward Jr., Burlington, and Elizabeth Li ppincott, Burlington. 1732 

Gaskill, Jacob, Burlington, and Ruth Donally 1779 

Gaskill, James, Burlington, and Abigail Stockton, Burlington 1754 

Gaskill, Job, Burlington, and Elizabeth Haines, Burlington 1758 

Gaskill, Job, Burlington, and Lois Prickett. 1768 

Gaskill, John, Burlington, and Martha Parker, Burlington 1764 

Gaskill, John, Burlington, and Mary Walling, Burlington 1779 

Gaskill, Joseph, Burlington, and Rachel Grant, Burlington 1767 

Gaskill, Joseph, and Sarah Cramer 1768 

Gaskill, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Pointset 1777 

Gaskill, Josiah, Burlington, and Martha Gaskill, Burlington 1760 

Gaskill, Levi, Burlington, and Lydia Powell, Burlington 1767 

Gaskill, Moses, Burlington, and Lydia Budd, Burlington 1774 

Gaskill, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Enochs, Burlington 1718 

Gaskill, Samuel, Burlington, and Sybella Collins 1759 

Gaskill, Samuel, Burlington, and Susannah Garvey 1784 

Gaskill, Stephen, Burlington, and Laviuah Gaskill ,., 1748 

Gaskill, Zorobabel, and Marby Jones 1783 

Gaston, James, Monmouth, and Lydia Toyrscott . . 1773 

Gaston, John, Monmouth, and Charity Cheesman 1760 

Gaston, Joseph, Somerset, and Margaret Lines, Somerset 1772 



22 
4 
6 
9 



Sept. 25 

Jan. 11 
May 
Mar. 
Mar, 
Mar. 

Mar. 27 

June 9 

Oct. 20 

Nov. 29 

Aug. 17 

Mar. 8 

Nov. 12 

May 17 

Aug. 7 

Dec. 27 

Aug. 19 

Aug. 18 

Jan. 16 



June 18 
July 15 
Nov. 9 
June 21 
Jan. 14 
Sept. 23 
Aug. 1 
May 12 
Oct. 30 
Mar. 6 
June 9 
June 7 
Aug. 
Aug. 
Dec. 
Jan. 
Jan. 
Dec. 
Sept 
Nov. 16 
Dec. 19 
Jan. 6 
Jan. 30 
Nov. 13 
April 20 
Feb. 4 
Nov. 2 



19 
4 
5 
4 
9 

11 
1 



marriage licenses. 155 

( lauiitt, Aslier, Burlington, and Mary Stockton 1787 June 26 

Gautier, Andrew, Jr., and Mary Brown 1772 Oct. 6 

Gearhart, William, and Elinor Derrick 1770 Oct. 1 

( reberson, James, Monmouth, and Hannah Lemmon 1774 July 30 

Geberson, Joseph, Middlesex, and Christian Sutton 1771 Mar. 3 

( reddeman, John, New Brunswick, and Elizabeth Brown, New Bwk. . . 1711 July 5 

< lee, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Barrit, Gloucester 17G2 April 22 

Gelbert, George, Burlington, and Hannah Hays 1783 Sept. 10 

George, John, Burlington, and Sarah Durell, Burlington 17(i5 Mar. 2 

George, John, Burlington, and Sarah Perry, Burlington 1772 Dec. 31 

George, Thomas, Monmouth, and Rachel Sheppard, Monmouth 1758 Mar. 2 

Gerbrautse, Gerbraut, New Jersey, and Wyntie Van Winckle, Bergen 1739 Kov. (5 

Gerish, John, Somerset, and Hannah Field, Middlesex 1719 Mar. 28 

Gerish, Levi, Somerset, and Sarah Bond, Somerset 1751 May 23 

Gerrebrants, Gerrebrant, and Mercy Winne 17G9 Oct. l8 

Gervan, I William, and Ivatherine Kingsland 1779 May 14 

Gethens, Daniel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Proud 1784 Mar. 25 

Gethens, John, Gloucester, and Rebecca Feame, Gloucester 1741 Nov. 3 

Gezell, Wentzell, and Elizabeth Scoggin 1758 May 20 

Gibbins, Jacob, Monmouth, and Hannah Taylor, Monmouth 1737 May 4 

Gibbin, Nicholas, Salem, and Anne Hodge, Salem. . 1731 Mar. 1G 

Gibbon, John, Cumberland, ami Esther Seeley, Cumberland 1761 Mar. 31 

Gibbon, Nicholas, Cumberland, and Ann Thompson 178G April 27 

Gibbons, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Mary Crawford 1754 Mar. 12 

Gibbs, Benjamin, Burlington, and Phebe Ridgeway, Burlington 1748 Sept, 7 

Gibbs, Edward, Gloucester, and Hannah Matlack. 1758 Au<*. 21 

Gibbs, Francis, Burlington, and Martha Hall, Burlington 1748 Oct. 22 

Gibbs, Jacob, and Elizabeth Casson 1701 Mav 1G 

Gibbs, John, Burlington, and Sarah Brown, Burlington 1765 Mar. 10 

Gibbs, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Clark 1757 J une 18 

Gibbs, Joseph, Springfield, and Rhoda Harker, Springfield 1770 Aug. 28 

Gibbs, Lucas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Smith, Gloucester 1762 Dec. 13 

Gibbs. Mahlon, Burlington, and Mary Wilson, Burlington 1776 Sept. 30 

Gibbs, Robert, Burlington, and Catherine Fitchett 1756 April 15 

Gibbs, Samuel, Springfield, and Mercy Earl, Springfield 1761 April 17 

Gibbs, Seth, Burlington, and Alice Stevenson 1788 Oct. 20 

Gibbs, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Phagens 17S1 Jan. 16 

Gibson, Caleb, Gloucester, and Hannah Sloane 1774 Nov. 7 

Gibson, Isaac, Burlington, and Arm Bird, Gloucester 1750 Nov. 29 

Gibson, James, Gloucester, and Hannah Ashbrook, Gloucester 1763 Jan. 8 

Gibson, John, Burlington, and Auu Morton, Burlington 1741 Nov. 23 

Gibson, John, Burliugtou, and Sarah Marriott, Burlington 1749 April 8 

Gibson, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Tice 1782 April 8 

i In the records of the Second River (Belleville) Reformed (Dutch) Church appears the 

baptism of Anachua (Annatie— Hannah) , child of William Gevan and Catrina Kingsland, 
Nov. 1."). 1779. 



156 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Gibson, Samuel, Burlington, and Catharine Clayton, Burlington 1782 

Giese, Reynier V.,1 Bergen, and Annatie Vau Winkle, Essex 1760 

Giffiug, Francis, Hunterdon, and Margaret Sermon, Hunterdon 1731 

Gifford, Abraham, Monmouth, and Katharine Linch, Monmouth 1741 

Gifford, Abraham, Burlington, and Catherine Fury 1771 

Gifford, Amariah, Monmouth, and Mary Harbert, Monmouth 1758 

( Hfford, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Mary Johnston 1774 

Gifford, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Blanchard, New Brunswick. . . 1743 

Gifford, John, Monmouth, and Lidia Burdge, Monmouth 1767 

Gifford, John, and Hannah Crane 1779 

Gifford, Joshua, Monmouth, and Hannah Dean, Monmouth 1740 

Gifford, William, New Jersey, and Hannah Ashmore, New Jersey 1727 

Gifford, William, Burlington, and Catherine Taylor.. 1734 

Gifford, William, Monmouth, aud Margaret Miers, Monmouth 1763 

Gifford, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Smith, Burlington 1774 

Gilbert, Benjamin, Burlington, and Mary Scott, Burlington 1761 

Gilbert, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Bunting 1772 

Gilbert, George, Gloucester, and Hannah Fish, Gloucester 1728 

Gilbert, Samuel, Middlesex, aud Elizabeth Spencer, Middlesex 1741 

Gilbertson, John, Jr., Monmouth, and Margaret Robins, Monmouth. . 1750 

Giles, Lewis, Burlington, and Margaret Wissing, Burlington 1771 

Gilham, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Foster, Burlington ... 1737 

Gilkyison, Andrew, Shamong, Pa., and Edith Gilbert 1776 

Gill, James, Gloucester, and Hannah Hinchman, Gloucester . . 1747 

Gill, John, Gloucester, aud Zillah Batten. Gloucester 1765 

Gill, Matthew, Jr., Gloucester, and Elizabeth Tailor 1785 

Gill, Thomas, Burlington, aud Hannah Hollinshead, Burlington. . . .1743-4 

Gill, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary VVallis 1762 

Gillam, Robert, Burlington, and Grace Pedrick, Springfield 1745 

Gilleland, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Cjrnbs, Middlesex 1752 

Gillham, Lucas, Burlington, and Auu Indicott, Burlington 1740 

Gillespie, James, Morris, and Jane Marsh, Morris 1771 

Oilman, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Higiugs 1762 

Gilman, Owen, Salem, and Elinor Barber. 1731 

Oilman, William, and Sarah Gilman = 1743 

Gilmore, Alexander, Salem, and Esther Cobner, Salem 1775 

Giukins, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Susannah Wright, Burlington ...1754 

Githens, George, Gloucester, and Mary Alison 1774 

(lithens, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hurst 1774 

( lithings, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Delaplain 1768 

Giveson, John, Burlington, and Lydia Giveson 1759 

Glackon, John, Monmouth, aud Catharine Sfcelle 1738 

( rlanville, Marius, Hunterdon, aud Hannah Smith 1747 

Gleeson, John, Gloucester, and Mary Scott 1786 

1 See Van Giese. 



Mar. 


3 


Oct. 


31 


Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


1 


Oct. 


16 


Nov. 


13 


June 


16 


Jan. 


3 


April 


7 


April 


7 


April 


5 


May 


8 


May 


16 


Feb. 


11 


April 


12 


Aug. 


18 


Mar. 


14 


Oct. 


24 


Aug. 


27 


Oct. 


29 


Aug. 


28 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


26 


May 


28 


April 


8 


Aug. 


15 


Jan. 


9 


May 


18 


M ar. 


21 


Sept. 


19 


Feb. 


10 


May 


9 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


18 


June 


14 


Jan. 


5 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


31 


April 


2 


Feb. 


3 


Nov. 


14 


April 


16 


Jan. 


9 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



157 



Q-Iew, Bichard, Burlington, and Ann Mills 1778 

Gliff, Richard, Backs, Pa., and Isabel Yates, Backs, Pa 1729 

Glisson, William, Burlington, and Sarah Delatusb 1778 

Glover, Richard, Pennsylvania, and Rachel ('lurk, Pennsylvania.. .. 1728 

Goble, Euos, Sussex, and Abigail Dildine 1778 

( table, Silas, Morris, and Jane Fairchild, Morris 17 1 I 

Goble, Timothy, Morris, and Rebecca Morris, Morris 1779 

( to U'rey, Andrew, Cape May, and Abigail Smith 1770 

Godfrey, Elijah, Cape May, and Martha Swain, Cape May 1769 

( S-odfrey, James, Cape May, and Phebe Towusend, Cape May 17<»5 

Godfrey, Nathan, Cape May, aud Rachel Cresse, Cape May 1780 

Godfrey, Philip, Cape May, and Ruth Osborn, Cape May 1718 

Godfrey, Philip, Cape May, and Phebe Smith 1775 

Godfrey, Thomas, and Martha Wheaton 1786 

Godley, Edward, Kingwood, and Hannah Mulford, Kingwood 1770 

Godwin, David, Bergen, and Catherine Waldron 1791 

Goelet, Francis New York, and Elizabeth Leonard, Perth Amboy 1752 

Goelet, James, Burlington, aud Sarah Lawrence 1788 

Goelet, Peter, New York, and Elizabeth Farmar 1775 

Goetschius, Mauritius, Bei'gen, and Elizabeth Monanely, 1 Bergen 1749 

Goff, Nathan, Cape May, and Marcy Shaw 1780 

Goff, William, Cape May, and Rebecca Errixsou, Cape May 1770 

Goff, William, Jr., Cape May, and Susanna Dillen, Cape May 1764 

Goffe, Jeremiah, Cape May, aud Assinah Wheaton, Cape May 1739 

Gofforth, William, Gloucester, and Rebecca Roberts 1774 

Goforth, Thomas, Gloucester, and Martha Stratton, Burlington, ...... 1762 

( login, Edmond, Cape May, and Marcy Edwards, ( 'ape May 1748 

Gogin, John, Cape May, aud Mary Danalds 1771 

Goheene, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Bridget Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Golborn, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Cassidy, Philadelphia. 17^1 

Golden, Elias, Monmouth, and Nelle Hendrickson, Monmouth 1761 

Golden, Joseph, Middletown, aud Catherine Johnson, Middletowu ...1754 

Golden, Joseph, Jr., Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Lain 1752 

( x ilden, William, Hunterdon, and Christian Hortman 1777 

( I »li ler, John, Cumberland, and Abiah Teel 1777 

( roldin, Isaac, Cape May, and Hannah Miekell 1772 

Goldin, Nathan, Cape May, aud Hannah Lord, Cape May 1730 

Golding, Joseph, Cape May, and Phebe Garretson 1760 

Goldtrap, Johu, Somerset, and Catharine Marlat, S imerset 1750 

Goldy, John, Burlington, and Mary McCulley 1784 

Goldy, Samuel, Burlington, aud Jerusha Curtis, Burlington 1765 

Goldy, Samuel, Burlington, aud Ann Toy, Burlington 1770 



Jan. 10 
Feb! 17 
Jan. 14 
May 10 
Jan. 1 
Aug. 22 
Nov. 15 
Jan. 5 
Nov. 8 
Feb. 26 
Sept. 11 
Oct. 19 
Feb. 4 
Nov. 13 
Dec. 17 
Mar. 17 
June 20 
July 19 
Oct. 26 
Feb. 23 
Jan. 19 
Oct. 
( >ct. 
May 14 
June 1 
Oct. 9 
June 1 
Dec. 17 
Aug. 22 
Nov. 7 
July 30 
Dec. 30 
Feb. 4 
June 28 
Dec. 6 
Nov. 2 
Feb. 17 
Sept, 12 
July 14 
Oct. 16 
Feb. 2 
Sept. 29 



3 
18 



1 In the Scraalenburgh (Bergen county) Reformed (Dutch) Church records, under date 
of Fell. 24, 1750, is entered the marriage of Mauritzius Goetschius and Elsje M'Connel, 
which is doubtless correct. Elsewhere her name is riven as Mackenelt, Mekandely, etc. 



158 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Golloughar, Brian, Monmouth, and Margaret Deveney, Monmouth. .1743-4 Mar. 14 

Golloway, Andrew, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Adington, Pa 1727 Oct. 30 

Gomez, John, Bergen, and Cornelia Berdan 1786 Mar. 27 

Goodberlet, Oswell, Somerset, and Agnis Mungal 1786 May 31 

Goodbody, Daniel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Daley, Monmouth 1757 Dec. 31 

Goodeuough, Samuel, Monmouth, and Catharine Leppett, Monmouth 1755 July 11 

Goodown, Evans, Hunterdon, and Abigail Roberts, Hunterdon 1772 Jan. 10 

Goodwin, Lewis, Salem, and Rachel Nickerson 1779 April 20 

Goodwin, William, Salem, and Mary Morris, Salem 1744 Feb. 13 

Goolcl, Thomas, Middlesex, and Martha Williamson, Middlesex 1744 Dec. 5 

Gordeu, David, Monmouth, aud Rebecca Andrews, Monmouth 1746-7 Feb. 13 

Gordon, Archibald, Middlesex, and Siche Van W'icklen 1779 April 12 

Gordon, Charles, Monmoutk, and Mary Newell, Monmouth 1739 Dec. 4 

Gordon, Charles, Monmouth, and Jerusha Walker, Monmouth 1747 Oct. 22 

Gordqp, Charles, Monmouth, and Catherine Morford, Monmouth. 1761 Nov. 2 

Gordon, David, Monmouth, and Hannah Lloyd, Monmouth 1740 Aug. 6 

Gordon, David, Monmouth, and Easter Parent, Monmouth .1767 April 13 

Gordon, John, Essex, and Elizabeth Main, Bergen 1742 Aug. 11 

Gordon, John, Hunterdon, and Susanna Lane. 1778 Mar. 19 

Gordon, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Margaret Cole, Monmouth 1748 Dec. 5 

Gordon, Robert, Monmouth, and Patience Mount, Monmouth. . . 1742 Dec. 18 

Gordon, Peter, New Jersey, and Mary Craig, Monmouth 1742 Dec. 13 

Gordon, William, Burlington, and Martha Eyre, Burlington 1765 Aug. 17 

Gorman, John, Hunterdon, and Lydia Schanell 1768 Dec. 2 

Gorrell, James, Cumberland, and Sarah Jackson, Cumberland 1768 Oct. 27 

Gosling, David, Perth Amboy, aud Elizabeth Blain, Perth Amboy .... 1756 June 23 

Gosling, James, aud Phebea [Warren?] 1775 April 7 

Gosling, John, Burlington, aud Sarah Budd, Burlington 1736 Dec. 13 

Gosling, John, Jr., Gloucester, and Hannah Cole, Gloucester 1750 Oct. 27 

Gosling, Richard, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Green 1777 Mar. 29 

Gould, Anthony, Cumberland, and Phebe Lummis 1 "81 Mar. 6 

Gould, David, Morris, and Catharine Budd, Morris 1761 Jan. 6 

Gove, William, New Brunswick, and Catherine Miller, New Brunswick. 1739 Jan. 8 

Governeur, Bernard, Bergen, aud Eleanor Ryerson, Reading Town 1763 Sept. 19 

Goyon, William, Monmouth, aud Wyntie Longstreet, Monmouth 1742 Oct, 1 

< xiaaf, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Acres 1768 J uly 4 

Grace, Philip, Cumberland, and Suria Morris 1782 Oct. 12 

( iraham, Thomas, Newton, and Deborah Morin 177 1 Nov. 9 

( Graham, William, Somerset, and Sarah Manfort, Hunterdon 1714 Dec. 7 

Graham, William, Orange, N. ¥., and Margaret Bayley, Orange, N. Y.1776 May 16 

Graisbury, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Lydia Matlack, Gloucester 1767 Dec. 17 

Graisbury, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Letitia Shivers 1775 Dec. 26 

Graudin, Daniel, Monmouth, and Sarah Throckmorton, Monmouth. . .1749 Sept. 20 
Grandiu, Lewis, Staten Island, and Catharine Vaudike, Staten Island 1749 Nov. 16 

Grandin, John, Monmouth, aud Abigail Lippincott, Moumouth 1747-8 Mar. 19 

Grandine, Amice, Monmouth, and Patience Throckmorton 1732 Sept. 23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



159 



Grandine, Samuel, Monmouth, and Susannah Johnson, Hunterdon 1752 

Grandon, Bernard, Burlington, and Sarah Pointsway, Burlington 1710 

Grant, Alexander, New York, and Rebecca Stout, MiddlotowD 1763 

Grant, David, Somerset, and Elizabeth Vantile, Somerset 1762 

Grant, James, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Philips, Philadelphia 1736 

Grant, John, Monmouth, aud Sarah Irous, Monmouth 1750 

Grant, Joseph, Burlington, and Susannah Gaskill, Burlington 1770 

( irant, Josiah, Burlington, and Mary Letts 1773 

Chant, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Harber 1778 

Grapevine, Peter, Gloucester, and Sarah Farrow 1779 

Graten, Christian, Monmouth, and Anua Palmmar, Monmouth 1762 

Grave, John, and Abigail Pierson, Middlesex 1744 

Graves, Joseph, Monmouth, and Lydia Woodmansee, Monmouth 1741 

Graves, Joseph, Salem, aud Elizabeth Vaneman, Salem 1750 

( irav, Arthur, Hunterdon, and Mary Reading 1778 

Gray, John. Gloucester, and Esther Gilcott, Gloucester. . 1739 

< 5-ray, John, S:\lem, aud Mary Rose, Salem. 1762 

Gray, Lynch, Trenton, and Irene Adam? . . . 1778 

Gray, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Mary Harman, Philadelphia 1740 

( Iray, William, Burlington, and Hannah Davis 1760 

Greaves, Robert, Burlington, and Elizabeth Martin 1778 

Green, Ambrose, Middlesex, aud Jemima Smith, Middlesex 1758 

Green, Benjamin, Salem, aud Elizabeth B:icon . 1766 

Green, Charles, Kent, Del., and Sarah Skeer 17i'>4 

Green, Daniel, Burlington, aud Mary Johnston .1750 

Green, George, Burlington, and Ann Thomson 1750 

Green, Gilbert, Burlington, and Rosanna Parks, Burlington 1771 

Green, Henry, Monmouth, and Catherine Wall, Monmouth 1755 

Green, Johu, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Browning, Gloucester 1737 

Green, John, Philadelphia, and Saran Broadgate, Philadelphia 1738 

Green, John, Bucks, Pa., aud Mary Jackson, Jr., Backs, Pa 1758 

Green, John, and Charity Stanton 1765 

Green, Johu, Gloucester, and Hannah Burden, Gloucester 1774 

Green, John, Burlington, aud Rebecca West, Burlington 1776 

Green, John, Salem, aud Ruth Proctor 1778 

Green, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Davison 1779 

Green, Joseph, Trenton, and Elizabeth Marshon, Hunterdon 1738 

Green, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Cunningham, Burlington. . 1764 

Green, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Stockton 1786 

Greenfield, George, Philadelphia, and Mary Farmer 1764 

Greenman, Thomas B. , Salem, and Elizabeth Vanmeter. . 1784 

Greenman, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Vanmeter, Salem 1730 

Greenwood, Joseph, and Hannah Blackless 1759 

Gregg, Robert, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Taylor, Bucks, Pa 1737 

Greggs, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Yocamencha Sutfin, Monmouth. . . 1703 
Gregory, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Willson, Burlington 1776 



Dec. 


22 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


3 


Dec. 


22 


April 


18 


Oct. 


24 


July 


19 


July 


19 


Oct. 


15 


April 


13 


May 


8 


April 


3 


Feb. 


8 


April 


14 


June 


4 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


26 


Mar. 


17 


Feb. 


13 


Oct. 


25 


April 


9 


June 


1 


Oct. 


15 


Oct. 


9 


June 


30 


July 


9 


May 


6 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


24 


Feb. 


5 


Mar. 


27 


Mar. 


3 


June 


15 


July 


2 


April 


27 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


3 


April 


24 


May 


19 


Nov. 


2 


June 


11 


Sept. 


8 



160 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Gregory, Joseph,, Salem, and Elizabeth Bonell, Philadelphia 1727 

Gregory, Reuier, Salem, and Hannah Wade 1731 

Grenolds, Robert, Bergen, and Elizabeth Earle, Bergen 1765 

Gridley, Judah, Morris, and Catharine Vangelder 1779 

Griffin, Edward, Perth Amboy, and Martha Dunham, Perth Amboy. . . 1758 
Griffin, James, Burlington, and Bridget Maxfield, Burlington ... , 1740 

Griffiug, Moses, Cape May, and Sarah Stillwell 1770 

Griffith, Abel, Salem, and Rebecca Miles, Salem ... 1771 

Griffith, John, Essex, and Abigail Camp, Essex 17G1 

Griffith, Morgan, Burlington, and Mary White, Burlington 1740 

Griggs, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Copperthwaite 1778 

Grimes, George, Salem, and Mary Eodgers, Burlington 1743 

Grimes, Jonathan, Bergen, and Mary Ennis, Bergen. 1761 

Grinding, William, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Bathford 1760 

Griscomb, Samuel, Philadelphia and Rebecca James, Philadelphia ..1741 

Griscom, Samuel, and Rebecca George 1741 

Griswold, Joseph, Middlesex, and Matilda Clark 1778 

Groff, Garret, Salem, and Amy Stratton, Burlington 1764 

Groff, John, Gloucester, and Keziah Treadway 1773 

Groff, Richard, Gloucester, and Hed.v Beeds 1779 

Groom, Moses, Middlesex, and Mary Brown, Middlesex 1765 

Grover, James, Jr., Monmouth, and LydiaBowne, Monmouth 1752 

Grover, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Robins ... 1773 

Grover, Joseph, Monmouth, and T heodosia Brown, Monmouth 1742 

Grover, Silvanus, Middletown, and Valeria Tilton, Middletown 1757 

Grubb, Adam, Gloucester, and Lydia Robnett 1773 

Gruffyth, John, Gloucester, and Susannah Young, Gloucester 1754 

Guest, Henry, and Ruth Bong, Middlesex 1748 

Guest, Henry, Gloucester, and Jane Simkins, Salem 1775 

Guest, John, Bergen, and Sarah Van Emburgh 1740 

Guest, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Jordan 1767 

Guest, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Vanneman 1773 

Guest, Lewis, New Brunswick, and Neeltje Van Cleve, New Brunsw'k. 1743 

Guest, Lewis, Monmouth, and Jane Lawrence 1747 

Guest, William, Gloucester, and Christian Archad 1735 

Guest, William, Gloucester, and Hannah Lurich, Gloucester 1764 

Guest, William, Jr., Gloucester, and Esther Ayres 1771 

Guerrat, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Burgess, Burlington 1765 

Guild, John, Hunterdon, and Abigail Howell 1780 

Guiunop, John, Burlington, and Anne Brittain, Monmouth 1749 

Gulick, Abraham, Somerset, and Anne Rider 17fe0 

Gulick, Abraham, Somerset, and Aylle Probosco ... 1781 

Gulick, Hendrick, Hunterdon, and Mary Williamson 1754 

Gulick, Joachim, Somerset, and Rebecca Emans, Middlesex 1751 

Gulick, John, Somerset, and Elizabeth Demott 1778 

Gulick, John, Middlesex, and Margaret Vandike 1780 



Jan. 


6 


Feb. 


10 


July 


29 


May 


17 


June 


20 


Jan. 


21 


Oct, 


17 


June 


6 


Feb. 


3 


Aug. 


7 


Dec. 


14 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


1 


Aug. 


25 


Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


6 


Mar. 


31 


Nov. 


15 


July 


17 


Jan. 


18 


Feb. 


7 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


20 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


1 


April 


12 


June 


29 


Dec. 


19 


Sept, 


15 


Jan. 


6 


Oct. 


14 


Dec. 


24 


June 


27 


May 


5 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


19 


July 


4 


Dec. 


29 


May 


24 


Feb. 


11 


Mar. 


3 


Sept. 


26 


Nov. 


30 


Dec. 


31 


Nov. 


10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. l6l 

Gumal, William, Salem, and Susannah Haller 1777 

Guyoiit, David, Bristol, Pa., and Margaret Gilmore, 1779 

Gwin, Johrj, Trenton, and Eeziab Olden 1784 

Gwinness, John, Morris, and Rachel Bruing, Essex 1772 

FEMALES. ^ 

Gach, Anne, Woodbridge, and Isaac Donham, Woodbridge 1759 

Gach, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and Elisha Inslee, Woodbridge 1741 

Gach, Esther, Woodbridge, and Jacob Shotwell, Woodbridge 1754 

Gach, Martha, Woodbridge, and Samuel Raudol, Woodbridge 1750 

Gach, Mary, Woodbridge, and James Eddey, Woodbridge 1743 

Gach, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Nathaniel Pike, Woodbridge 1747 

Gaidden, Elizabeth, Woolwich, and Henry Weever, Woolwich 1772 

Gale, Dinah, and John Staunton, Burlington 1732 

Gale, Katherine, Little Egg H'b'r, and John Sheene, Little Egg H'b'r 1745 
Gale, Margaret, Pennsylvania, and Joseph Thornton, Pennsylvania.. . . 1729 

Gale, Mary, Burlington, and Abell Gale, Burlington 1749 

Gale, Sarah, and Benjamin Skickhouse, Bristol 1782 

Gallagher, Elinor, Burlington, and Richard Singleton, Burlington .... 1739 

Gallahaughn, Ann, and Charles Hamilton, Salem 1767 

Gallasby, Ruth, Cumberland, and Ephraim Brick, Cumberland 1764 

Galligher, Catharine, and Oliver Paterson, Somerset . . 1781 

Gaudy, Deborah, Gloucester, and Reubin Ireland, Gloucester 1744 

Gandy, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Hugh Hathoru, Cape May 1761 

Gaudy, Mary, Gloucester, and Thomas Lee, Gloucester 1757 

Gaudy, Rhoda, Cape May, aud John Bartson, Cape May 1763 

Gandy, Susannah, and Gabriel Reagain, Cape May 1749 

Ganneau, Jane, Hunterdon, and Alexander Vanpelt, Somerset 1751 

Ganno, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, aud Abraham Pettinger, Somerset 1738 

Gano, Elizabeth, aud Garret Nafies, Middlesex 1780 

Gansevoort, Garretie, and John D'Wandelaer, Jr 1777 

Gant, Catherine, Monmouth, and Thomas Chamberlain, Monmouth. . . 1747 

Gant, Caty, and Hezekiah Steehnau, Egg Harbour 1785 

Gant, Mary, Monmouth, and John Chamberlain, Monmouth 1749 

Garabrants, Catherine, and Hendricus Kr.yper, Bergen 1750 

Gard, Mary, aud Job Ellis, Burlington. 1769 

Gardeuer, Hellenah, Salem, and Thomas Taylor, Salem. . 1769 

Gardiner, Sarah, and Joseph McCully, Burlington. 1781 

Gardiner, Rebecca, and George Kiudall, Burlington 1740 

Gardiner, Bathsheba, Burlington, and Timothy Thomas, Burlington. . 1774 

Gardiner, Hauuah, and Samuel Stockton, Burlington 1784 

Gardiner, Sarah, and Abraham Perkius, Burlington 1733 

Gardner, Catharine, Middlesex, and James Oldden, Middlesex 1746 

Gardner, Elizabeth, and Moses Warner, Evesham 1782 

( rardner, Hannah, and Adam Chew, Gloucester 1783 

Gardner^ Jane, and James Morrow, Sussex. ... 1770 

11 



May 


6 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


21 


Eeb. 


28 


Aug. 


22 


Aug. 


18 


April 


3 


Oct. 


20 


May 


29 


Sept. 


16 


Mar. 


2 


Oct. 


6 


Mar. 


3 


Dec 


24 


May 


19 


Nov. 


4 


Sept. 


20 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


14 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


15 


Aug. 


13 


Mar. 


25 


Nov. 


30 


July 


8 


May 


6 


Oct. 


2 


Mar. 


a 


Mar. 


3 


May 


4 


April 


8 


Dec. 


1 


May 


24 


Mar. 


23 


Aug. 


11 


Mar. 


28 


Dec. 


25 


Aug. 


18 


June 


11 


Dec. 


4 


April 


3 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


4 


Nov. 


13 



1 62 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Gardner, Mary, and John Stockton, Burlington . 1777 Oct. 11 

Garish, Bloomey, and Denmore Bevis, Little Egg Harbour 1784 Feb. 2 1 

Garitson, Martha, and Samuel Oram, Cape May ... 1778 Nov. 16 

Garner, Phebe, and Jacob Matthews, Gloucester 1772 Feb. 25 

Garrabraut, Jane, and Cornelius Best, Hunterdon 1784 Dec. 15 

Garrason, Rachael, Salem, and John Ellwell, Salem 1727 Mar. 24 

Garrebrance, Freyntje, Bergen, and Joost Meebe, Orange Co. , N. Y. 1769 Mar. 18 

Garretse, Frontie, Bergen, and Jacob Van Winkle 1719 Dec. 6 

Garretson, Hannab, Salem, and John Loper, Salem ; . . 1757 Dec. 10 

Garretson, Mary, Middletown, and Elias Bailey 1759 Feb. 8 

Garretson, Mary, and Hugh Holmes, Cape May 1789 Sept. 7 

Garretson, Phebe, and Joseph Golding, Cape May 1760 Sept. 12 

Garretson, Sarah, Somerset, and Aereys Vanaisdalen, Somerset 1747 Mar. 22 

Garribrant, Jane, and John Vanhome, Bergen.. 1785 Mar. 24 

Garrison, Amy, Cumberland, and Benjamin Lupton, Cumberland ...1761 Aug. 25 

Garrison, Barbara, and John Voorhees, Somerset 1778 Mar. 21 

Garrison, Catherine, and William Ker, Middlesex 1770 Oct. 5 

Garrison, Damaris, Cumberland, and Jonathan Barnes, Cumberland. . 1762 Mar. 24 

Garrison, Esther, and Daniel Hand, Cape May 1774 Oct. 8 

Garrison, Hannah, Cumberland, and William Hind, Cape May 1775 Nov. 17 

Garrison, Jane, and Garrabrant Van Houten , 1791 Jan. 18 

Garrison, Maria D., New York, and Samuel Reid, Freehold 1775 Dec. 29 

Garrison, Phebe, Stow Creek, and Abraham Vanwincle, Stow Creek.. 1774 Mar. 9 

Garrison, Phebe, and Thomas Vickery, Lower Penns Neck 1780 Feb. 1 1 

Garrison, Rebekah, and Samuel McCliutock, Cumberland 1779 Jan. 12 

Garrison, Rebecca, and William Williams, Pennsylvania 1782 Nov. 3 

Garrison, Roda, and Stephen Lupton, Cumberland.. 1778 Oct. 21 

Garrison, Sarah, Amwell, and John Sutphin, Amwell 1773 Dec. 18 

Garritse, Catharine, and Hendrick Kip, Bergen. 1790 Nov. 22 

Garritson, Jerusha, and Richard Shaw, ('ape May 1761 June 19 

Garritson, Mary, Hunterdon, and John Kelsey, Hunterdon 1774 Aug. 16 

Garvey, Susannah, and Samuel Gaskill, Burlington 1784 Jan. 6 

Garwood, Ann, Burlington, and John Hopper, Gloucester 1737 Dec. 5 

Garwood, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Delatush, Burlington.. .. 1759 April 18 

Garwood, Grace, Burlington, and Joseph Bowker, Burlington 1746 May 15 

Garwood, Jane, Evesham, and John Prickett, Evesham 1750 July 12 

Garwood, Lydia, Burlington, and James Milton, Burlington 1761 Aug. 1 

Garwood, Martha, Burlington, and Jonathan Davis, Chester, Pa 1783 Mar. 17 

Garwood, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Jones, Burlington 1775 April 18 

Garwood, Mary, Burlington, and Barzillai Scott, Burlington 1776 May 7 

Garwood, Persilla, and John Wright, Burlington 1772 April 4 

Garwood. Rebecca, and Joseph Atkinson, Burlington 1780 Dec. 20 

Garwood, Rosemond, Burlington, and Samuel Heulings, Burlington. . 1763 June 22 

Garwood, Ruth, and Thomas Kemble, Burlington 1772 Mar. 5 

Garwood, Sarah, Burlington, and Richard Eayre, Burlington 1732 Dec. 1 

Garwood, Sarah, and Thomas Bishop, Burlington 1754 Mar. 5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. . 1 63 

Garwood, Susannah, Burlington, and Johu Brooks, Burlington 1781 

Garwood, Tabitha, Evesham, and Walter Reeves, Evesham 1763 

Gaskill, Abigail, and Joseph Richardson, Burlington 1788 

Gaskill, Amy, and David Loofbourrow, Burlington 1779 

Gaskill, Charity, Northampton, and William Garwood, Burlington . . 1766 

Gaskill, Beulab, and William Maun, Mount Holly 1784 

Gaskill, Hannah, Burliugtou, and Adam Forker, Burlington 1749 

Gaskill, Hauuah, and Isaac Thackray, Gloucester 1783 

Gaskill, Hope, Gloucester, and James Cattell, Gloucester 1763 

Gaskill, Hope, and John Wills, Burlington. ..... 1778 

Gaskill, Keziah, Springfield, an 1 Beriah Taylor, Springfield 1767 

Gaskill, Lavinah, and Stephen Gaskill, Burlington 1748 

Gaskill, Martha, Burlington, and Josiah Gaskill, Burlington 1760 

Gaskill, Martha, Burlington, and John Fort, Jr., Burlingtou. 1779 

Gaskill, Mary, and Joseph Carter, Burliugton r 1757 

Gaskill, Mary, New Hanover, and Z tchariah Cleviuger, New Hanover. 177S 

Gaskill, Provided, Burlingtou, and Samuel Shiuu, Burlington 1737 

Gaskill, Rachel, Burliugton, and Abraham Merrit, Burlington 1757 

Gaskill, Rhoda, Burlington, and Laban Bjwker, Burlingtou. . 1784 

Gaskill, Sarah, Burlingtou, and John Bennett, Burlington 1772 

Gaskill, Susannah, Burliugton, and Joseph Grant, Burlington 1770 

Gaskill, Theophilus, and James Rogers, Burlingt n . 1786 

Gaskin, Elizabeth, and Thomas Walker, Evesham 1783 

Gaston, Atheliah, and Ephraim Fithian, Cumberland 1780 

Gaston, Prosilla, Somerset, and Daniel McCain, Somerset 1771 

Gaston, Margaret. Somerset, and Thomas Moffat, Middlesex 1750 

Gathins, Catharine, Bucks, Pa., and James Baldwin, Bucks, Pa 1751 

Gaunt, Hannah, and James Gale, Little Egg Harbour 1784 

Gaunt, Jane, Philadelphia, and Henry Richards, Philadelphia 1762 

Gayard, Ann, Gloucester, and John Dilkes, Gloucester 1750 

Gayard, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Jones, Gloucester 1728 

Gayhudd, Deborah, Middletown, and George Thompson, Middletown. 1753 

Gearhart, Elizabeth, and Jacob Depuy, Huuterd m .1734 

Geddes, Abigail, Woodbridge, ami Robert Cirlile, Reading Town 1757 

Giukins, Hannah, Gloucester, aud James Ord, Cumberland 1754 

George, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and John Beasley, Philadelphia .... 1738 

George, Rebecca, and Samuel Griscom 1741 

Germain, Mary, Gloucester, aud John Dennis, Gloucester 1731 

Gerrard, Mary, Gloucester, aud Samuel Kaigu, Gloucester 1768 

Gerrard. Sarah, Gloucester, and Samuel Bain, Gloucester 1739 

Gerrard, Sirah, Gloucester, aud Michael Dawson, Sussex 1763 

Gerritson, Anne, and Dnl Van Wiucle, Essex 1751 

Gevison, Lydia, aud John Gevison, Burliugton 1759 

Gebbius, Margaret, Great Egg Harbour, and Peter Scull, Gt. Egg H'r.1762 

Gibbius, Sarah, Burliugton. and James Vaughn, Burlington 1765 

Gibbon, Anue, Salem, aud Edmoud Wetherby. . 1769 



Sept. 


7 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


15 


Nov. 


29 


May 


17 


Nov. 


3 


Aug. 


25 


Mar. 


11 


June 


27 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


12 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


9 


July 


5 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


9 


July 


4 


Sept. 


28 


Feb. 


24 


May 


30 


Dec. 


22 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


8 


Sept. 


4 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


8 


June 


24 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


30 


July 


29 


Aug. 


1 


Jan. 


15 


April 


26 


Oct. 


30 


Mar. 


24 


Feb. 


6 


Jan. 


7 


Jan. 


8 


Mav 


26 


June 


22 


June 


15 


Feb. 


3 


Nov. 


10 


June 


27 


Oct, 


3 



I 64 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Gibbon, Esther, and Benjamin Holms, Saleni 1778 

Gibbon, Hannah, and Aulay McCalla, Cumberland 1787 

Gibbons, Mary, Middlesex, and Henry White, Middlesex 17G2 

Gibbons, Eachael, and James Hulse, Burlington 1769 

Gibbons, Rebeckah, Monmouth, and James Vahan, Monmouth 1739 

Gibbs, Anna, Burlington, and John Foster, Burlington 1776 

Gibbs, Elizabeth, and Joseph Deveuport, Burlington . . 1757 

Gibbs, Hannah, Burlington, and Raworth Beck, Burlington 1743 

Gibbs, Mary, Burlington, and William Black, Burlington 17-54 

Gibbs, Mary, Burlington, and Elijah Field, Burlington 1771 

Gibbs, Mary, Burlington, and John Fohvell, Burlington 1771 

Gibbs, Sarah, Burlington, and John Hutchin, Burlington 1742 

Gibbs, Susannah, BurlingtoD, and John Henry, Burlington 1764 

Giberson, Hannah, Monmouth, and John Everingham, Monmouth .... 1761 

Giberson, Hannah, and Lewis Chapman, Burlington 1777 

(riberson, Jamima, Monmouth, and Fuller Horner, Monmouth 17ii2 

Giberson, Mary, and John Harrison, Monmouth 1759 

Giberson, Miribah, and Thomas Robins, Monmouth. 1758 

Gibeson, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and William Preston, Shrewsbury . .1767 

Gibeson, Lydia, and John George Boody, Gloucester ... 1773 

Gibison, Mary, Monmouth, and Zachariah Eobius, Monmouth 1769 

(iibson, Ann, and Thomas Ashbrook, Gloucester 1779 

Gibson, Elizabeth, and Robert Sparks, Gloucester 1783 

Gibson, Jernirny, Perth Amboy, and John Richardson, Perth Amboy. .1763 

Gibson, Mary, Gloucester, and James Hanesey, Gloucester 1754 

Gibson, Sarah, Burlington, and John Earick, Burlington 1756 

Giddeman, Christian, New Bmnswl, and Gideon DeCarnp, Middlesex. 1750 
Giddeman, Lena, New Brunswick, and Cornelius Teal, New Brunsw'k. 1750 

Giffer, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Leeds, Gloucester 1760 

Giffing, Margaret, and Joseph Price, Hunterdon 1756 

Gifforci, Anney, Monmouth, and Nathan Davis, Monmouth 1761 

Gifford, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Newbury, Monmouth. . . . 1748 

Gilford, Elizabeth, and John Tilton, Shrewsbury 1766 

Gilford, Esther, Monmouth, and Daniel Littleton Ket chain, Mi:nm'th..l760 

Gifford, Hannah, Monmouth, and Stephen Frazer, Monmouth 1765 

Gifford, Hanuab, and Joseph Bartlett, Monmouth 1766 

Gifford, Hester, Monmouth, and Thomas Matthews, Monmouth 1743 

Gifford, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Martin, Monmouth. ... .... 1760 

Gifford, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Thompson, Rhode Island 1743 

Gifford, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and Henry Dalley, Middlesex 1739 

Gifford, Zelpha, Monmouth, and Joseph Burdge, Monmouth , 1765 

Gifford, Zilpha, Monmouth, and William Lea, Monmouth 1763 

Gilbert, Edith, and Andrew Gilkisorj, Shamong, Pa 1776 

Gilbert, Hannah, and Samuel Ellis. Gloucester 1772 

Gilbert, Mary, Mansfield, and Joseph Everingham, Mansfield 1751 

Gilbert, Temperance, Perth Ambcy, and Jonathan Nisbett 1741 



Oct. 


28 


April 


9 


June 


12 


May 


13 


Feb. 


14 


May 


27 


Mav 


11 


April 


8 


Aug. 


14 


Jan. 


28 


Sept. 


13 


Nov. 


9 


Jan. 


6 


July 


11 


April 


16 


Jan. 


13 


Sept. 


21 


Oct. 


9 


April 


11 


Jan. 


4 


April 


20 


Feb. 


4 


Nov. 


24 


Oct. 


28 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


3 


Dec. 


19 


May 


12 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


20 


Oct. 


29 


July 


23 


July 


14 


May 


16 


April 


5 


Sept. 


6 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


26 


Nov. 


9 


Jan. 


21 


June 


1 


Nov. 


26 


Oct. 


31 


April 


19 


July 


9 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 1 6 = 

Gilcott, Esther, Gloucester, and John Gray, Gloucester 1739 

Gildersleeves, Hannah, Morris, and Johu Brees, Jr., Somerset 1769 

Gile, Hannah. Northampton, and Samuel Budd, Burlington 1766 

Gill, Cathrina, and Ptter Bilderbaek, Salem 1756 

Gill, Christantia. and Jechonias Wood, Pdesgrove 1772 

Gill, Elizabeth, and Jacob Burroughs, Gloucester 177") 

Gillam, Ann, and Joseph Iudicott, Burlington 1736 

Gillet, Sarah, Morris, ami William Throckmorton, Morris 1759 

Gillingham, Grace, and Moses Wright, Alloways Creek 1768 

Gillingham, Margaret, Alloways Creek, and James Suethen, CumbTd.1766 
Gilljohuson, Ann, Penns Neck, and Abraham Philpot, Penns Neck. . . 1761 

Gillman, Lettitia, Cumberland, and David Platts, Cumberland 1763 

Gillman, Kachell, Cumberland, and Job Shepherd, Cumberland 1765 

Gillum, Anne, Burlington, and Robert Hill, Burlington 1749 

Gillum, Grace, Springfield, and John Norton, Springfield 17-49 

Gilman, Sarah, and William Gilman 1713 

Oilman, Susannah, and Bargin Avers, Salem 1751 

Gilmer, Mary, Hunterdon, and Joseph Hunter, Burlington 1764 

Gilmore, Margaret, and David Guyout, Bristol, Pa 1779 

Giriee, Elisabeth, Gloucester, and David Trueman, Gloucester 1730 

Girty, Catherine, and Frederick Hartsough, Somerset 1779 

Given, Esther, Burlington, and Richard Bowker, Burlington 1750 

Gland, Ruth, Cumberland, and Thomas Galping, Cumberland 1749 

Glasby, Ann, Burlington, and Lot Bowker, Burlington 1777 

Glaspey, Rebecca, Cumberland, and Samuel Bowen, Cumberland 1771 

Glaspy, Mary, Staten Island, and Israil Hilton, Staten Island 1745 

Glass, Margaret, Burlington, and John Dyer, Burlington J 730 

Godden, Elizabeth, Newark, and John Johnson, New York ] 718 

Godfrey, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Peter Corson, Cape May 1763 

Godfrey, Mary, Burlington, and Henry Waterman, Burlington 1727 

Godfrey, Tabitha, and Elijah Garretson, Cape May 1777 

Godfrey, Prissillab, and Enoch Smith. Cape May 17S0 

Godown, Katharine, Amwell, and Albartus Ringo 1745 

Godown, Katharine, Amwell, and Daniel .Thatcher, Amwell 1771 

Godwin, Margaret, and Abraham Vanderbeck 1779 

Godwin, Mary, and Thomas Chappie 1779 

G jecheus, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Henry Zabriski, Bergen 1767 

Goetschius, Helena, and John Van Dalsem, Tappan 1784 

Goetschius, Hester, Hackensack, and Jacob Van Saan, Hackensack. . . . 1760 

Goff, Hannah, Cape May, and Israel Cresse, Cape May 1761 

Goff, Hannah, Cape May, and Thomas Shaw, Cape May 1770 

Goff, Presila, Cape May, and Daniel Hildreth, Cape May 1761 

Goff, Mary, Cumberland, and John Corson, Jr., Cape May 1761 

Goff, Rebeckah, and Hance Peterson, Cape May 1773 

Goff, Rhoda, Cape May, and Zebulon Cresse. Cape May 1764 

Gofogy, Jane, Burlington, and John Reid. Burlington 1764 



Feb. 


8 


Jan. 


30 


April 


14 


April 


15 


July 


4 


Mar. 


6 


May 


12 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


20 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


29 


Jan. 


4 


May 


18 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


29 


June 


14 


May 


28 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


19 


Mar. 


30 


Sept, 


26 


Jan. 


15 


May 


12 


Oct. 


30 


Jan. 


31 


July 


28 


Dec. 


2 


July 


20 


April 


12 


May 


6 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


19 


April 


27 


Aug. 


15 


June 


24 


Aug. 


20 


Sept. 


21 


Dec. 


9 


Nov. 


30 


July 


5 


May 


2 


Dec. 


19 


July 


21 


Sept. 


14 


April 


4 



1 66 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Goggin, Marey, aud Joseph Vauschuyver, Cumberland 1779 June 28 

Goheen, Mary, and George Hicks, Bucks, Pa 1763 Oct. 1 1 

Gold, Martha, Woodbridge, aud Euos Ayers, Woodbridge 1749 May 8 

Golden, Mary, and Noab Girritson, Cape May 1737 Nov. 1 

Golden, Mary, Middletown, and Harmon Snyder, Middletown 1767 Sept. 24 

Gjlden, Mary, and John Fnook, Hunterdon 1783 Feb. 5 

Golden, Sarah, Cape May, and Epbraim Kent, Cape May 1774 May 13 

Golden, Sarah, and William Jewell, Hunterdon 1782 Oct. 29 

Golder, Mary, Monmoutb, and Roelef Schenck, Monmouth 1749 June 21 

Goldin, Deborah, aud Ezekiel Hand, Cape May 1737 Dec. 12 

Goldin, Jane, and John Camp, Gloucester 1780 Oct. 31 

Goldin, Rebecca, and Seth Whildin, Maurice River ...... 1776 Nov. 4 

Goldin, Sarah, and James Garretson, Cape May 1760 April 28 

Golding, Mary, Cape May, aud Thomas Daniels, Cape May 1740 July 2 

Goldy, Elizabeth, and Samuel Parker, Burlington 1741 May 11 

Goldy, Margaret, and Hezekiah Morton, Burlington 1781 Feb. 4 

Goldy, Sarah, Burlington, and Jonathan Haines, Bnrlingtorj 1775 Nov. 17 

Gollachar, Jaue, Cape May, and John Elexander, Cape May 1768 Dec. 20 

Gombauld, Ann Frances, Monmouth, aud Leonard Cutting, New York. 1771 Sept. 21 

Gombould, Magdelon, Monmouth, and Joseph Leonard, Monmouth. .1766 Sept. 11 

Gomer, Margaret, and John McMurtry, Somerset 1781 Jan. 26 

Goodwin, Mary, and Thomas Haucock, Salem . 1775 Oct. 31 

Gorden, Mary, and Reuben Ruuyon, Hunterdon 1767 Dec. 24 

Gordon, Anu, and Ichabod Compton, Monmouth 1773 Aug. 20 

Gordon, Anne, Middlesex, and John Van Kirk, Middlesex 1750 Sept. 27 

Gordon,! Betsey, and Resolve Waldron, Bergen 1782 Jan. 27 

Gordon, Caitron, and James Stevenson, Middlesex 1779 April 24 

Gordon, Elizabeth, and Heury Shaw, Upper Freehold 1 768 Dec. 21 

Gordon, Epenetns, Perth Amboy. and John Sorier, Somerset 1753 Dec. 24 

Gordon, Lidia, Monmouth, and George Forman, Somerset 1753 Nov. 7 

Gordon, Lydia, Monmouth, and Timothy Loyd, Jr., Monmouth 1740 Aug. 6 

Gordon, Lydia, and David Mortmau, Middlesex 1770 J;m. 10 

Gordon, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Yatman, Monmouth 1744 Dec. 31 

Gordon, Mary, Middlesex, and John Brown, Burlington 1729 July 9 

Gordon, Patience, and Johu Walton, Crosswicks 1778 Sept. 5 

Gordon, Susannah, and William Collins, New Jersey 1778 May 21 

Gosling, Mary, Burlington, and John Indicott, Burlington 1728 Mar. 22 

Gosling, Sarah, Burlington, and Jacob Woolstou, Burlington 1759 Feb. 27 

Gottier, Mary, Philadelphia, and Henry Drinker, Philadelphia 1731 Nov. 26 

Gottier, Elizabeth, and John Tomkins, Chester, Pa 1733 April 11 

Gouger, Jean, and Jacob Plumly, Amwell ... 1780 Jan. 26 

G^uld, Hester, and Ebenezer Gaskill, Burliugton 1769 Jan. 14 

Gould, Mary, Freehold, and John Tice, Freehold 1758 Oct. 17 

Gouverneur, Gertrude, and Peter Kemble, Jr., Morris 1784 June 5 

Goveruour, Eleanor, Readingtown, and Jasper Smith, Amwell 1765 Oct. 25 

i Godwin. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. i 67 

Goverueur, Hauuah, Sussex, and Charles ( >gden, Sussex 1779 

Grace, Elnor, Maurice River, and Benjamin Parker, Maurice River. . . 1775 

Graff, Hannah, Amwell, and John Runkel, Lebanon 1775 

Grafton, Catherine, Salem, and William Miller, Salem 1761 

Graham, Anne, Somerset, and Daniel McEowen, Somerset 1744 

Graham, Mary, Monmouth, and James McCrea, Monmouth 1740 

Graisbury, Abigail, and John Branson, Gloucester 1788 

Graisbury, Mary, Gloucester, and John Franklin, Gloucester 1743 

Graudin, Mary, and Cornelius Clark, Monmouth 1769 

Graudiu, Mary, Hunterdon, and John Vought, Hunterdon 1772 

< rrandin, Sarah, Roxbury, and John Wurts, Tewkesbury 1773 

Grant, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and William Church, Philadelphia. . .1730 

Grant, Rachel, Monmouth, and Aaron Inmau, Monmouth ... 1747 

Grant, Rachel, Burlington, and Absalome Ewan, Burlington 1764 

Grant, Rachel, Burlington, and Joseph Gaskill, Burlington 1767 

Grant, Sarah, Monmouth, and Stephen Simons, Monmouth 1756 

Grapevine, Catherine, and John Crockett, Burlington 1779 

Cravat, Martha, Freehold, and Samuel Runyon, Freehold 1752 

Graves, Mary, Salem, and John Garrison, Salem 1768 

Graves, Prudence, Salem, and Daniel Long, Salem 1768 

Gray, Ann, Hunterdon, and William Pierson, Hunterdon . 1763 

Gray, Rachel, Woolwich, and John White, Woolwich 1781 

Grayer, Ann Olive, Pennsylvania, and John Farmer, Bristol, Pa 1732 

Greeley, Eunice, Cape May, and Job Sommers, Gloucester 1732 

Green, Ann, Salem, and Charles Hopkins, Salem 1736 

Green, Ann, Hunterdon, and Joshua Updike, Hunterdon 1738 

Green, Ann, and Simon Lamberson, Middlesex Co 1745 

Green, Charity, Shrewsbury, and Thomas White, Shrewsbury 1758 

Green, Elizabeth, and John Clark, Burlington 1747 

Green, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Asher Cook, Monmouth 1764 

Green, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and John Hillier, Burlington 1772 

Green, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jonathan Southwick, Burlington. . . 1772 

Green, Elizabeth, Evesham, and William Sharp, Evesham 1776 

Green, Elizabeth, Evesham, and Job Sharp, Evesham 1784 

Green, Eunice, Cape May, and Job Sommers, Gloucester 1732 

Green, Hester, and Thomas Hancock, Burlington , 1788 

Green, Jane, Burlington, and Joseph Sharp, Burlington 1774 

Green, Katherine, and Isaac Stelle, Middlesex 1780 

Green, Marah, Shrewsbury, and William Pearce, Shrewsbury 1755 

Green, Margaret, and Richard Gosling, Bucks, Pa 1777 

Green, Margaret, and Edmund Whetherby, Salem 1784 

Green, Martha, and Samuel Zilley, Northampton 1781 

Green, Mary, Evesham, and Isaac Sharp, Evesham 1766 

Green, Rachel, Shrewsbury, and Vincent White, Shrewsbury 1759 

Green, Rebecca, Monmouth, and Benjamin Jackson, Monmouth. ...1760 
Green, Rebecca. Northampton, and Heron Bryan, Burlington 1761 



July 


23 


Feb. 


4 


Dec. 


2 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


7 


April 


8 


Nov. 


18 


June 


22 


Jan. 


13 


Nov. 


21 


June 


8 


Mar. 


18 


June 


1 


July 


1 


Aug. 


4 


Dec. 


29 


Sept. 


20 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


22 


Oct. 


6 


Oct. 


1 


Sept. 


11 


Aug. 


29 


Jan. 


2 


June 


12 


July 


15 


Oct, 


14 


Dec. 


18 


Dec. 


22 


Mar. 


31 


Jan. 


9 


Aug. 


20 


May 


27 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


2 


April 


3 


Aug. 


8 


Jan. 


5 


July 


11 


Mar. 


29 


June 


12 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


23 


April 


4 


Dec. 


1 


Nov. 


28 



1 68 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Green, Sarah, Hunterdon, aud Benjamin Severns, Hunterdon 1730 

Green, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Cook, Monmouth 1748 

Green. Sarah, Hunterdon, and Thomas Smith, Hunterdon 1764 

Green, Sarah, and Henry Shellenbirg, Bucks, Pa 1778 

Green, Sarah, and Samuel Moore, Hunterdon .1781 

Greg, Catherine, Woodbridge, and John Chesnut, Pennsylvania 1748 

Gregg, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and Henry Dyer, Bucks, Pa 1761 

Gregg, Elinor, Burlington, and John Derbyshire, Burlington. ...... 1731 

Gregorey, Jane, Monmouth, aud Simeon Babcock, Monmouth 1757 

Gregory, Christiana, Burlington, and Robert Burr, Burlington 1770 

Gregory, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and William Burk, Bucks, Pa. .. .1730 

Gregory, Elizabeth, Silem, and William Barker, Salem 1739 

Gregory, Mary Ann, Gloucester, and Isaac Kay, Gloucester 1738 

Gregory, Bebecca, Hunterdon, aud Thomas Winder, Hunterdon 1731 

Gregory, Sarah, Middlesex, aud Joseph Richard-, Perth Amboy. . 1761 

Grey, Elizabeth, Bucks Co., Pa., and William Race, Bucks Cj., Pa. . .1764 

Griffin, Margaret, and Thomas Elton, Burlington 1769 

Griffin, Rebecca, Silem, and David Wiggins, Salem 1727 

Griffia, Sarah, Middlesex, and Johu Monday, Middlesex 1749 

Griffith, Martha, Gloucester, aud Hezekiah Hopkins, Gloucester 1789 

Griffith, Mary, Burlington, and George Back, Burlington 1750 

Griffith, Sarah, and Richard C jIHus, Burlington 1759 

Griffith, Sarah, Upper Penn's Neck, and Caleb Pedrick, Up. P'ns N'k 1764 

Griff}', Mathew, and Isaiah Hankins, Burlington 1771 

Griggs, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Thomas Burns, Perth Amboy. . .1773 

Griggs, Mary, Somerset, and Abram Van Middleswart, Somerset 1744 

Griggs, Martha, Somerset, and William Tillyer, Somerset 1714 

Grigs, Sarah, New Brunswick, and Joshua Cusau, New Bruusw'k 1752 

Grimes, Martha, Burlington, and John Clap, Burlington 1782 

Grimes, Marj T , and Thomas Thomas, Burlington 1783 

Grimes, Mary, Burlington, and John Clap, Burlington 1784 

Grimes, Rachel, and Job Shinn 1783 

Grimes, Sarah, Burlington, aud John Nilley, Burlington 1742 

Griscomb, Elizabeth, and Johu Ross, Philadelphia 1773 

Gromo, Sarah, New Jersey, and Thomas Lawler, Fauquier Co., Va. . . .1779 

Groom, Ann, Middlesex, and Richard Karn, Middlesex 1732 

Groom, Elizabeth, Chesterfield, andEd.vard Page, Chesterfield 1741 

Groom, Lena, aud William Horn, Middlesex 1781 

Groom, Mary, and Samuel Dauford, Burlington 1737 

Groom, Susannah, and John Morgan, Monmouth 1 771 

Grosse, Catharine, and Patrick Farney, Morris 1772 

Grover, Katherine, Monmouth, and David Hance, Monmouth 1743-4 

Grabb, Mary, and Seth Hill, Burlington 1785 

Gruber, Margaret, and Johu Weydeman, Bsrgen 1767 

Gruff, Sarah, Alloways Creek, and John Smith, Cumberland 1767 

Gualdo, Francis, and Gabriel W. Ford, Morris 1790 



May 


28 


Apri' 


29 


Jan. 


25 


Jan. 


27 


Sept. 


24 


May 


11 


Nov. 


11 


Aug. 


12 


Aug. 


20 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


1 


Jan. 


7 


April 


2 


April 


1 


Sept. 


4 


Aug. 


1 


July 


7 


Nov. 


23 


Oct. 


10 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


27 


Dec. 


27 


Sept, 


23 


Aug. 


31 


Nov. 


26 


June 


6 


Oct. 


21 


Dec. 


19 


Feb. 


20 


Oct. 


16 


July 


3 


Aug. 


19 


Nov. 


4 


Jan. 


12 


April 


22 


May 


11 


Sept, 


22 


Sept. 


12 


Nov. 


30 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


8 


May 


8 


Aug. 


1 


July 


23 


Jan. 


25 



Mauri ace licensed 169 

Gudjou, Mary, and A lam Thrasher, Philadelphia 1709 Mar. 27 

Guest, Aim, arid Abraham Beekman, Hunterdon 1745 June 14 

Guest, Mary, Gloucester, and James Avise, Gloucester 1773 May 18 

Guest, Sarah, New Brunswick, and William Nixson, Middlesex 1746 Jan. 27 

Guibisou, Rachel, and Joshua Homer, Jr., Monmouth 1759 Aug. 15 

Guild, Mary, aud John Howell, Trenton 1778 Feb. 14 

Guile, Easter, and John Walling, Jr., Hunterdon 1768 Feb. 3 

Guiles, Massey, and Jesse Christopher, Hunterdon 1779 Feb. 13 

Guilham, Anne, Burlington, and Matthew Willson, Burlington 1728 Sept. 12 

Guiun, Naomi, aud Joseph Stratton, Evesham 1765 Mar. 30 

Guinnall, Hanuah, Evesham, and John Wilkin?, Evesham 1761 May 19 

Guinuell, Hannah. Burliugton, and William Brooks, Burlington 1758 Sept. 26 

Gulick, Anne, aud Angleburt Hirtaugh, S )merset 1779 Mar. 6 

Gulick, Catalintie, and Jacobus Wyckoff, Long Island 1745 Mar. 25 

Gulick, Charity, and David Merrell, Hunterdon 1777 Aug. 2 

Gulick, Eleanor, aud Samuel Williamson, Middlesex 1782 Mir. 12 

Gulick, Gerrabratie, Somerset, and Cornelius Cornel, Middlesex 1751 June 12 

Gulick, Maritie, S )inerset, and Nicholas Johnson, Middlesex 1750 Aug. 3 

Gulick, Mary, Somerset, and Elbert Hogland, Long Island 1748 June 9 

Gurtjea, Mandliua, and Henry Michal, Salem 1759 Aug. 15 

Gurtou, Elizabeth, and Eichard Jones, Trenton . 1778 Sept. 12 

Gurtricho, Sarah, Bergen, and Hilbrunt Van Lazer, Bergen' 1760 Dec. 31 

Guthridge, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Joseph Holmes, Gloucester ...1762 Aug. 2 

Guyant, Margaret, and Charles Cappell, Bucks, Pa 1778 Feb. 3 

Gwiu, Mary, aud Jonathan Ireland, Gloucester 1777 Dec. 13 

Gwinn, Elizabeth, and Mathew McCarty, New Jersey 1760 July 30 

Gybertsou, Hester, Monmouth, aud David Vaughau, Monmouth 1748 April 26 

Gyge, Catharine, and Michael Tolyn, Gloucester 1774 Jan. 17 

MALES. H 

Hack, Philip, Burlington, aud Susauna Hurtsman. Burlington 1783 Jan. 6 

Hacket, David, Salem, aud Elizabeth Nickerson 177 J Mar. 2 

Hackney, Edmund, Burlington, and Bachel Ivins 1789 May 8 

Hackney, Thomas, Burliugton, and (?) Alberson 1748 Sept. 19 

Hackuey, Thomas, Burlingtou, aud Elizabeth Tomliuson 1788 April 16 

Hackuey, William, Burlington, aud Sarah Ingle, Burlington 1770 April 16 

Hadden, Thomas, Woodbridge, and Margaret Bloomfield, Woodbridge.1750 July 21 

Hadden, Thomas, Jr., Woodbridge, and Annab3l Crowell, Woodbridge. 1758 Nov. 15 

Haelderon, Andriec, aud C itrina Terp 1771 Sept. 14 

Hagamen, Aaron, Somerset, and Catharine Voorhies 1779 Feb. 20 

Hagamau, Adrian, Hunterdon, aud Ann Hall 1781 Oct. 15 

Hageamau, Roeleff, Somerset, and C Uherine Holmes 1780 Sept. 9 

Hagemau, Adriau, Jr., Somerset, and Sarah Wycott, Somerset 1744 May 14 

In the records of the Schraalenburgh Reformed (Dutch) Church, Bergen county, is the 
entry, under date <if Dec 27, 1761, of the marriage of Hillebrand Logier £Lozier]. widower, 
born and living at Schralenburg, and Sara Gurtrich, v. d.. born at Eakkensak. 



170 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hageinan, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Crese Van Brunt 1766 

Hageman, Denys, Hunterdon, and Prudence Vaudike 1773 

Hageman, James, Somerset, and Anne Skillman 1778 

Hagerman, Adrian, Hunterdon, and Margaret Van Vliet, Hunterdon. 1772 

Haight, John, Middlesex, and Mary Van Kirk 1773 

Haines, Aaron, Gloucester, and Priscilla Collins 1772 

Haines, Aaron, Burlington, and Ann 3 Eayres, Burlington 1776 

Haines, Abraham, Burlington, and Hannah 11 ikestraw 1772 

Haines, Edmund, Burlington, and Charlotte Leeds, Burlington 1782 

Haines, Enoch, Burlington, aud Priscilla Eiyre, Burlington 1767 

Haines, George, Burlington, and Margaret Lamb, Burlington 173 1 

Haines, Isaac, Burlington, and Keziah Woolmar 1788 

Haines, Jacob, Burlington, and Sirah Austin, Burlington 1770 

Haines, Jesse, Burlington, aud Mary Armstrong 1783 

Haines, John, Burlington, and Martin E ayre, Burlingtou 1766 

Haines, John, Burlington, and Ann Taylor 1781 

Haines, Jonathan, Burlington, aud Sarah Goldy, Burlington 1775 

Haines, Joseph, Burlington, aud Patience Prickett, Burlington 1740 

Haines, Joseph, Gloucester, and Anne Jones, Gloucester 1718 

Haines, Joseph, Burliugtou, and Hope Reeves, Burlington 1719 

H lines, J neph, Elizabeth Town, and Sarah Watkius, Elizabeth Town. 1751 

Hiines ; Joseph, Burlington, aud Mary Reeves, Burlington 1771 

Haines, Joseph, Gloucester, and Drusilla Middleton. 1777 

Haines, L^vi, Burlington, and Elizabeth Andrews, Burlington 1767 

Haines, Levi, Burlingtou, and Mary Jenkins, Burlington 1771 

Haines, Moses, Burlington, and Patience Antram 1717 

Haines, Nathan, Burlington, aud Rsbscca Billanger, Burlington.. ..1756 

Haines, Robert, Burlington, and Rachel Vinncomb, Burlington, 1766 

Haines, Simeon, B irliugton, aud Mary Stratton 1766 

Haiues, Solomon, Burlington, and Rebecca Sharp, Burlington 1749 

Haines Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Mulliu, Burliugton 1761 

Haines, Thomas, Chester, and Mary Cattell, Chester 1766 

Haines, Thomas, Burliugton, and Lucretia Pettit, Burlington 1767 

Haiues, Thomas, Burliugton, aud Sarah < ! onrow 1778 

Haines, William, Burlington, aud Mary Earley 1778 

Haiues, William, and Lydia VVetheriugton .... 1782 

Hains, George, Burliugton, and Elizabeth Sharp, Burlington 1771 

Haius, John, Gloucester, and Mary Leonard, Gloucester 1771 

Hair, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Randall 1768 

Haleubeck, Jacob, and Sinty Foord 1762 

Haley, Jacob, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Mauris 1786 

Haley, Johu, Burliugton, and Abigail Marice, Burlington ... 1782 

Hill, Abuer, Cumberland, and S irah Shepherd, Cumberland 1774 

Hall, Clement. Salem, and Margaret Morris, Salem 1745 

Hall, Daniel, Monmouth, aud Johaunah Hyer, Monmouth 1746 

Hall, Edward, Somerset, aud Catheriue Cock, Somerset 1744 



May 


3 


April 


22 


Aug. 


13 


Feb. 


28 


Jan. 


23 


Nov. 


24 


Jan. 


14 


Dec. 


28 


Dec. 


17 


Apri 


6 


June 


7 


Jan. 


15 


Apri! 


5 


Aug. 


2 


July 


29 


Oct. 


6 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


25 


Sept. 


29 


Nov. 


2 


Apri 


16 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


21 


Sept. 


7 


Jan. 


21 


Dec. 


11 


May 


21 


Ma' 


17 


May 


28- 


Oct. 


17 


Oct. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


8 


May 


24 


June 


4 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


16 


Mar. 


7 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


15 


Feb. 


10 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. \j\ 

Hall, Francis, Burlington, and Naomi Middleton, Burlington 1740 June 9 

H ill, George, Somerset, and Nelly Marlett, Middlesex 17-il June 13 

Hall, George, Cumberland, and Aun Elkinton, Burlington. 1775 June 20 

Hall, H^zekiah, Middlesex, aud Mary Stevenson, Middlesex 1771 Feb. 16 

Hall, Jamas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stockton 178-4 April 6 

Hall, John, Salem, and Ann Johnson, S dem 1741 June 11 

Hall, John, Somerset, and Catherine Bersherer, Somerset 1750 Jan. 12 

Hall, John, Burlington, and Rachel Cogall, Burlington 1764 Sept. 3 

Hall, Richard, Somerset, and Elizabeth Ten Eyck, Hunterdon 1741 Aug. 12 

Hall, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Anuis 1732 Jan. 31 

Hall, Samuel, Northampton, and Elizabeth Newbury, Northampton. . 1746 April 29 

Hall, Thomas, Mansfield, and Mable Shoemaker 1750 Dec. 17 

Hall, William, Salem, and Eliz ibsth Pyle, S ilem 16S4 May 2 1 

Hdl, William, Philadelphia, and Jaue Trencha.'d, Salem 1773 Nov. 1 

Halla 1 ay, James, Salem, and R lins C mdon, Salem . 1749 June 29 

H allsted, Thoma«, Salem, and Martha Lawrence, Salem. 1764 Jan. 3 

Halmes, H-uioe, Gloucester, and Mary Codds 1782 April 11 

Halstead, Daniel, Monmouth, and Sarah Nichols, Monmouth 1749 May 3 

Halstead, Josiah, Monmouth, and Zilpba West, Monmouth 1740 Jan. 27 

Halstead, Josiah, Monmouth, and Anna Throckmorton, Monmouth. . . 1755 May 30 

Halstead, Josiah, Monmouth, and Lkly Worthley, Monmouth ... 1766 Sept. 27 

Halsted, Timothy, Monmouth, and Elizabeth West, Monmouth 1746 Nov. 22 

H ilsy, Joseph, Jr., Essex, and Anne Willis, Essex 1768 June 15 

Halter, Peter, S dem, aud Dorcas Irelan, Cumbeiland 1770 Feb. 17 

Halyard, Jacob S ilem, and Susanna H >ffman. 1 767 Nov. 27 

Ham, Anthony, Middlesex, and Aun Drinkwater, Middlesex. 1747 July 8 

Himbleton, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Kester 1786 April 3 

Hamilton, Arthur, Pittsburg, Pa, and Hannah Adams, Philadelphia.. 1762 Sept. 15 

Hamilton, Arthur. Gloucester, aud Priscilla Flauingan, Gloucester.. . . 1769 Mar. 23 

Hamilton, Charles, Salem, and Aun Gallahaughn , 1767 Aug. 6 

Hamilton, Charles, Somerset, and Mary Davis 1779 June 17 

Hamilton, Gustavus, Philad'p'a, aud Margaret DonaldsoD, Darby, Pa.. 1760 Feb. 2 

Hamilton, James, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Peterson, Perth Amb'y. 1762 Nov. 20 

Hamilton, William, Somerset, and Elizabeth McCollough, Somerset. .. 1752 Feb. 11 

Hamilton, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Helms 1783 May 15 

Hammel, Felix, Burlington, and Elizabeth Langley 1770 April 26 

Hammell, James, Burlington, and Sarah Butler, Burlington 1742 Oct, 23 

Hammell, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Kelly 1778 Aug. 5 

Hammet, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Hilyer, Gloucester 1745 Dec. 12 

Hammett, George, Burlington, and Rhoda Packer, Burlington 1731 Feb. 21 

Hammett, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Hilyery, Gloucester 1745 Dec. 12 

Hammit, John, Burlington, and Rachel Eves, Burlington. 1774 Feb. 1 

Hammitt, Abraham, Gloucester, aud Mary Hillyard, Gloucester 1747 June 7 

Ham mitt, Elias, Burlington, and Anna Lippincott 1779 Jan. 6 

Hammitt, George, Gloucester, and Hannah Sharp, Burlington 1757 April 28 

Hampton, Edward, Gloucester, and Sarah Breach, Gloucester 1741 Aug. 8 



\J2 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hampton, John, Gloucester, and Ann Devall, Salem 1736 

Hampton, Johu, Monmouth, and Lidy Hankinson, Monmouth 17GI 

Hampton, John Thomas, Salem, and Marcy Harris, Salem 1775 

Hampton, John, Gloucester, .and Ann Hugg 1782 

Hampton, Jonathan, Richmond, and Elizabeth Bird, Essex 1740 

Hampton, William, Jr., Gloucester, and Alice Chew, Gloucester 1753 

Hampton, William, Salem, and Barbara Forrest, Salem 1764 

Hamton, William, Monmouth, and Gertrude Craige, Monmouth.. . 1747 
Hainton, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Bickham, Gloucester ... .1755 
Hance, Arthur, Monmouth, and Catherine Vandeveer, Monmouth.. .1755 
Hance, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Catherine Brannin, Monmouth. .. .1702 

Hance, David, Monmouth, and Katherine Grover, Monmouth 1743-4 

Hance, George, Middlesex, and Margaret Willson, Middlesex 1760 

Hancock, Arnall, Pennsylvania, and Susannah Phillips, Pennsylvania 1727 

Hancock, Daniel, Burlington, and Rhoda Lippincott, Burlington 1774 

Hancock, Edward, Burlington, and Sarah English, Burlington 1742 

Hancock, Edward, Salem, and Mary Allen 1757 

Hancock, Edward, Salem, and Rebecca Ward, Salem 1774 

Hancock, Edward, Salem, and Abigail Carpenter 1786 

Hancock, George, Burlington, and Hannah Perkins 1779 

Hancock, Godfrey, Burlington, and Aun Tuly, Burlington 1754 

Hancock, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary English 1782 

Hancock, Joseph, Burlington, and Patience Andrews, Burlington 1751 

Hancock, Joseph, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Butcher 1785 

Hancock, Pearson, Burlington, and Meriam Deacon 1779 

Hancock, Thomas, Salem, and Mary Goodwin 1775 

Hancock, Thomas, Burlington, and Hester Green 1788 

Hancock, Timothy, Burlington, and Rachell Sirman 1684 

Hancock, William, Burlington, and Hester Curtis, Burlington 1782 

Hancock, William, and Ellen Kimball 1735 

Hancock, William, Jr., Salem, and Mabel Chambless 1745 

Hancock, William, Salem, and Sarah Thompson, Salem 1765 

Hand, Aaron, Cumberland, and Ann Lowring 1777 

Hand, Abraham, Cape May, and Esther Eldredge, Cape May 1760 

Hand, Abraham, Middlesex, and Eve Bennet 1772 

Hand, Daniel, Cape May, and Esther Garrison 1774 

Hand, David, Cape May, and Mary Hand, Cape May 1764 

Hand, David, Cape May, and Martha Yeates, Cape May 1769 

Hand, Elias, Cape May, and Mary Page, Cape May 1762 

Hand, Elijah, Cape May, and Rachel Hand, Cape May 1758 

Hand, Elisha, Cape May, and Experience Smith, Cape May 1731 

Hand, Elisha, Cape May, and Lydia Eldridge, Cape May 1736 

Haud, Elisha, Cape May, and Lydia Matthews 1766 

Hand, Elisha, Cape May, and Ruth Taylor, Cape May 1774 

Hand, Ellis, Cape May, and Zilpah Eldridge 1777 

Hand, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Deborah Goldin 1737 



Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


9 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


15 


Feb. 


21 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


5 


Sept. 


30 


July 


3 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


6 


Mar. 


8 


July 


3 


July 


31 


Mar. 


1 


Jan. 


23 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


7 


Oct. 


12 


June 


25 


Feb. 


6 


May 


2 


April 


25 


Sept. 


8 


Oct. 


31 


April 


3 


Nov. 


6 


June 


5 


Oct. 


15 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


30 


May 


10 


Aug. 


18 


Aug. 


3 


Oct. 


8 


July 


2 


May 


16 


May 


3 


Jan. 


24 


Jan. 


22 


Aug. 


30 


Aug. 


16 


Jan. 


26 


July 


25 


Dec. 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 73 

Hand, Ezra, Cape May, ami Elizabeth Edwards, Cape May . . 1772 

Hand, Ezra, Cape May, and Mary Hand 1774 

Hand, George, Cape May, and Sarah Ingram, Cape May 1771 

Hand, George, Cape May, and Silvia Mills, Cape May 1773 

Hand, George, Cape May, and Naomi Smith 1774 

Hand, Henry, Cape May, and Elizabeth Page, Cape May 1759 

Hand, Isaac, Cape May, and Marsey Thomson, Cape May 1730 

Hand, Jacob, Cape May, and Experience Crowel, Cape May 1748 

Hand, Jacob, Cape May, and Patience Foreman. 1774 

Hand, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Deborah Hand 1734 

Hand, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Rachel Crawford, Cape May 1739 

Hand, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Martha Townsend 1763 

Hand, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Sarah Townsend, Cape May 1790 

Hand, Jesse, Cape May, and Mary Smith, Cape May ... 1759 

Hand, Jesse, Cape May, and Sarah Learning, Cape May 1763 

Hand, John, Cape May, and Elinor Peterson 1737 

Hand, John, Cape May, and Mary Buck, Cape May 1769 

Hand, John, Jr., Cape May, aud Sarah Newton, Cape May 1774 

Hand, John, Cape May, and Sarah Buck , 17 — 

Hand, Jonathan, Cape May, aud Rebecca Yates, Cape May 1776 

Hand, Josiah, Cape May, aud Zelika Furmau, Cape May 1787 

Hand, Levi, Cape May, aud Zebish Scull, Cape May 1772 

Hand, Levi, Cape May, and Esther Hewit 1774 

Hand, Ludlam, Cape May, aud Elizabeth Jenkins 1768 

Hand, Matthew, Cape May, and Elizabeth Hand, Cape May 1775 

Hand, Nathan, Caps May, and Hannah Eldrege, Cape May 1742 

Hand, Neri, Cape May, and Hannah Evans, Cape May 1775 

Hand, Recompence, Cape May, and Martha Church 1762 

Haud, Recompence, Cape May, aud Achsah Hand 1790 

Hand, Shamgar, Cape May, and Lydia Smith, Cape May 1761 

Haud, Shamgar, Cape May, and Priscilla Hildreth, Cape May 1772 

Haud, Silas, Cipe May, aud Patience Church, Cape May 1746 

Haud, Silas, Cape May, and Sarah Crowel!, Cape May 1751 

Hand, Thomas, Cape May, and Jerusha Johnson, Cape May.. 1773 

Hand, William, Cape May, and Catherine Mackey, Cape May 1731 

■ Hand, William, Cape May, aud Hauuah Garrison, Cumberland 1775 

Haudbey, Johu, Gloucester, and Susaunah Tompson, Gloucester 1735 

Handcock, John, Burlington, and Martha Richardson, Burliugton 1739 

Hauesey, James, Gloucester, and Mary Gibson, Gloucester 1754 

Hxnkerson, Robert, Moumouth, aud Sarah Taylor, Monmouth 1734 

Haukius, Daniel, Middlesex, and Constant Vauvrooine 1737 

Hankins, Isaiah, Burlington, aud Mathew Griffy 1771 

Hankins, John, Burlington, aud Hauuah Burden 1778 

Hankins, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Siguet, Burlington 1754 

Haukius, Thomas, Monmouth, and Mary Cleminger, Monmouth 1728 

Hankins, •William, Jr., Middlesex, and Jaue Ireland, Middlesex 1751 



Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


20 


June 


3 


May 


7 


Aug. 


1 


Dec. 


26 


April 


3 


June 


8 


Feb. 


22 


Mar. 


27 


Mar. 


17 


July 


12 


Jan. 


21 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


26 


Oct. 


29 


July 


28 


May 


5 


April 


17 


Mar. 


25 


June 


26 


May 


10 


Nov. 


8 


July 


5 


Jan. 


31 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


15 


Mar. 


1 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


27 


Mar. 


28 


April 


22 


May 


19 


Jan. 


28 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


8 


April 


27 


Sept. 


23 


Oct. 


23' 


Sept. 


3 


Sept. 


12 


Dec. 


2 



174 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hankinsou, Aaron, Hunterdon, and Mary Snyder, Hunterdon 1764 Feb. 9 

Haukinson, James, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Throckmorton, M'nni'h.1757 May 25 

Hankinson, James, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Lain, Monmouth 1761 July 11 

Hankinsou, Joseph, Jr., Hunterdon, and Hannah Atkinson 1770 April 3 

Hankinson, Richard, Somerset, and Sarah Veal 1769 Nov. 3 

Hankinson, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Hannah Concklin 1787 Feb. 27 

Haukinson, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Throckmorton 1748 Dec. 17 

Hankinson, Thomas, Jr., Monmouth, and Elizabeth Mackferrel, M'th 1761 April 13 

Hankinson, William, Monmouth, and Nelly Thompson, Monmouth . 176 1 Aug. 23 

Hanlon, Barnard, and Honor Thompson 1 777 Nov. 5 

Hannah, Preston, Cumberland, and Bathsheba Moore 1777 Sept. 6 

Hannah, Samuel, Cumberland, and Lydia Sayre, Cumberland 1768 Jan. 19 

Harberson, Robert, Salem, and Juliana Cursey 1785 Dec. 21 

Harbert, Edward. Gloucester, aud Priscila Wiley 1770 Mar. 17 

Harbert, Francis, Monmouth, and Catherine Craft, Monmouth 1752 Nov. 10 

Harbert, Isaac, Burlington, and Tabitha Bell, Burlington 1765 Aug. 15 

Harbert, Robert, Monmouth, and Johanna Parker, Monmouth 1759 April 19 

Harburt, Timothy, Monmouth, and Rachel Robins.. 1768 Aug. 18 

Harden, Joseph, and Mary Rowen 1775 Mar. 2 

Hardenburgh, Abraham, Ulster, N. Y , and Jane Varick 1784 Jan. 22 

Hardenburgh, Garradus, Ulster, N. Y., and Ann Ryerson, Readingtou. 1766 April 28 

Harding, Francis, Monmouth, aud Anne McCoy, Perth Amboy. .... 1750 June 25 

Harding, Ezekiel, and Susannah Clarke 1735 Nov. 1 

Harding, Richard, Sussex, and Mary Drum 1775 Dec. 8 

Hardiug, William, Burlington, and Bridget Killday 1784 June 14 

Hardwick, Johaunis, and Rachel Sobriske 1750 Aug. 25 

Hardy, James, Trenton, aud Ann Witcraft 1780 Feb. 24 

Hargrove, John, Burlington, and Catherine Miller, Burlington 1763 Sept, 10 

Hariug, Abraham, Bergen, aud Margaret Bogert 1787 Nov. 20 

Haiing, Hendrick, Bergen, and Annttie Banta, Bergen 1763 July 5 

Haring, John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Vanimburg 1763 Nov. 25 

Haring, Peter T, Orange, N. Y., and Regnsee Haring, Orange, N. Y..1774 June 11 

Harker, Abel, Burlington, and Damaras Zelley, Burlington. . . ...1782 Dec. 23 

Harker, Edmund, Monmouth, aud Rhoda Lippincott, Monmouth. 1763 Jan. 23 

Harker, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Marrow 1779 Nov. 29 

Harker, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rebecca Evis 1782 Nov. 27 

Harket, Walter, New Castle, Del , and Margaret Ross, New Castle, Del. 1730 June 4 

Harleubeck, Isaac, Bergen, and Erne Sloot 1763 April 8 

Harmer, Samuel, Waterford, Elizabeth Hedges, Waterford . 1735 July 28 

Harned, John, Middlesex, and Rachel Allward 1768 Sept. 20 

Harp, Michael, Salem, and Margaret Moyr, Salem 1717 April 3 

Havpeutine, Henry, Somerset, and Mary Coons, Somerset 1742 Jan. 12 

Harper, Henry, Philadelphia, and Mary Jackson, Monmouth ... 1771 May 28 

Harpin, James, and Sibella Clayton 1699 June 5 

Harrell, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Mary Lawrence, Monmouth. . . . 1743 Oct, 7 

Harrington, Edward, Hunterdon, and Jane Kenuey, Hunterdon 1750 July 16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



175 



Harris, Abel, Salem, ami Ruth Lewis, Salem 1746 June 21 

Harris, Daniel, Cumberland, and Martha Ogden, Cumberland 1770 Feb. 28 

Harris, Daniel, Cumberland, and Mary Worthington 1781 Nov. 9 

Harris, Edmund, Monmouth, and Eleanor Schanck, Monmouth.... 1765 Jan. 2 

Harris, Elijah, Piscataway, and Amy Kelly, Woodbridge 1757 June 15 

Harris, Francis, BurliDgtou, and Rejoice Burge 1774 Oct. 17 

Harris, George, Burlington, and Mary Burr, Burlington 1774 May 2 

Harris, Isaac, Salem, and Anne Moon, Cumberland 1772 Aug. 27 

Harris, Jacob, Cumberland, and Rachel Bacon. .. 1780 Feb. 29 

Harris, James, Middlesex, and Anne Van Buskirk, Middlesex 1748 June 21 

Harris, John, Gloucester, and Susanna Searle. . 1732 Feb. 1 

Harris, John, Burlington, and Sarah Eldridge, Burlington 1737 Mar. 24 

Harris, John, Burlington, and Jemima Ashton 1750 April 25 

Harris, Moses, Cumberland, and Phebe Brooks 1779 Nov. 26 

Harris, Noah, Cumberland, and Mary Aplen, Gloucester. . . . . : 1761 July 23 

Harris, Noah, Cumberland, and Sarah Carll 1781 April 18 

Harris, Samuel, Cumberland, aud Rachel Hood, Cumberland 1761 Aug. 25 

Harris, William, Burlington, and Sarah Atkinson, Burlington 1731 Jan. 5 

Harris, William, Cape May, and Elizabeth Iszard, Cumberland 1750 Oct. 27 

Harris, William, Burlington, and Jane liichardson 1772 Mar. 18 

Harris, -William, Burlington, and Hannah Wilson 1783 April 9 

Harrison, Henry, Monmouth, and Catherine Davies, Monmouth 1739 May 1 

Harrison, Henry, New Jersey, and Anne Winaus, Somerset 1742 May 17 

Harrison, John, Monmouth, aud Mary Giberson 1759 Sept. 21 

Harrison, Joseph, Gloucester, and Anne Clement, Gloucester 1749 Sept. 21 

Harrison, Joseph, Burlington, and Martha Walton, Burlington 1776 Feb. 7 

Harrison, Miles, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Sellers, Bucks, Pa. 1731 June 22 

Harrison, Oussa, Middlesex, and Mary Van Emburgh, Middlesex. . . . 1748 Oct. 8 

Harrison, Richard, Burlington, aud Rachel Everingham, Monmouth. . 1736 June 21 

Harrison, Richard, Monmouth, and Hannah Wheatcraft, Burlington. . 1763 Oct. 1 

Harrison, Richard, Burlington, and Edith Wright, Burlington.. ..... 1765 Aug. 14 

Harrison, Samuel, Gloucester, and Mary Preston, Philadelphia 1730 May. 30 

Harrison, Samuel, Jr., Gloucester, and Kezia Talman, Gloucester .. 1761 April 10 

Harrison, William, Gloucester, aud Abigail Thorne, Gloucester 1759 Mar. 6 

Harry, Aubrey, Chester, and Sarah Bonsell 1754 Jan. 14 

Hart, Andrew, Hunterdon, aud Elizabeth Ege, Hunterdon 1774 Nov. 19 

Hartwick, George, Middlesex, aud Eleanor Marshall, Middlesex 1748 Jau. 7 

Hart, Henry, Salem, and Elizabeth Russell, Salem 1767 Sept. 29 

Hart, Jesse, Hunterdon, and Martha Mattison 1770 Jan. 13 

Hut, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Frauky Phillips, Hunterdon 1764 Mar. 28 

Hart, Legg, Monmouth, and Catherine Applegate, Monmouth 1757 Dec. 9 

Hart, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Stout 1770 May 2 

Hart, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Abigail Scudder 1778 Nov. 14 

Hart, Noah, Hunterdon, and Rachel McKuight, Monmouth 1764 Aug. 17 

Hart, Phillip, Hunterdon, and Hannah Palmer. 1780 April 16 

Hart, Ralph, Hunterdon, and Penelope Anderson 1770 Sept. 5 



\j6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hart, Ralph, Trenton, and Hannah Carter 1780 

Hart, Timothy, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hart 1784 

Hart, Titus, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Scudder 1779 

Hartaugh, Angleburt, Somerset, and Anne Gulick 

Hartley, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Mary Bates, Gloucester 1762 

Hartley, Henry, 47th Regt. Foot, Mary Paxton 1773 

Hartley, Hugh, Burlingtou, and Mary Duckworth, Burlington 1740 

Hartman, John, Burlington, and Sarah Radford, Burlington 1 761 

Hartman, John, Burlington, and S ibillah Elkinton .... 1771 

Hartshorne, Esech, Moumoutb, and Elizabeth Salter, Burlington . . 1764 
Hartshorne, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Van Emburgh, Moum'th.1766 

Hartshorne, Robert, Monmouth, and Sarah Saltar, Monmouth 1743 

Hartshorne, Samuel W., Burlington, and Ann Mount, Burlington. .. 1779 

Hartshorne, Thomas, Monmouth, and Marah Smith, Monmouth 1754 

Hartshorne, William, Monmouth, and Mary Reid, Monmouth 1741 

Hartsough, Frederick, Somerset, and Catherine Girty 1779 

Harvey. Daniel, Burlington, and Sarah Folwell 1777 

Harvey, Edward, Salem, and Mary Aurey, Salem. 1749 

Harvey, Jacob, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth AUiu, Monmouth . 1767 

Harvey, John, Bucks, Pa., and Esther Brelsford, Middletown 1741 

Harvey, Peter, Burlington, and Mary Hancock, Burlington 1718 

Harvey, Peter, Monmouth, aud Sarah Coorson, Monmouth 1767 

Harve}', Robert, Monmouth, aud Hannah White, Monmouth 1764 

Harvey, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Rachel Merrill 1784 

Harvey, William, Salem, and Sarah Slape 1771 

Harvvood, Eatou, Salem, and Margaret vv'alker 1768 

Haswell, Edward, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Ball 1768 

Hatcher, William, Pennsylvania, and Anne Vansant, Pennsylvania. . . . 1727 

Hatfield, George, Philadelphia, and Mary Moses, Philadelphia 1739 

Hathevvay, Isaac, Morris, and Sarah Young, Morris 1769 

Hathorn, Hugh, Cape May, and Elizabeth Gandy, Cape May 1761 

Hatkinson, John, Philadelphia, acd Rachel Allen, Philadelphia 1750 

Hatton, Edward, Philadelphia, and Hannah Combien, Philadelphia .1731 

Haughawout, Lefferts, Middlesex, and Sarah Aikmon 1747 

Haughawout, Peter, Hunterdon, aud Leah Van Camp, Hunterdon . . ] 763 

Havens, Aaron, Monmouth, and Mary Devie, Monmouth 1762 

Havens, John, Monmoutb, and Anna Davis, Monmouth 1 715 

Havens, Joseph, Burlington, aud Susannah Vreelaucl.. . ... 1757 

Haveus, Stephen, Burlington, and Sarah Ellison, Burlington 1784 

Haviland, Banjamin, Monmouth, aud Catrine Right, Monmouth 1754 

Haviland, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Rebecca Stillwell, Moumouth .1764 
Haviland, Joseph, Perth Amboy, and Martha Crager, Woodbridge . . . 1752 
Haviland, Stephen, Monmouth, and Sarah Throckmorton, Monmouth. 1748 

Hawk, Jacob, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Clear 1780 

Hawk, Joseph, Burlington, and Margaret McKilley 1(80 

Hawkins, George, Gloucester, and Jemima Risley, Gloucester 1758 



Dec. 7 
Dec. 14 
Jan. 11 
6 
April 12 
Sept. 14 
Dec. 29 
April 6 
April 6 
Nov. 22 
Aug. 2 
Dec. 21 
May 8 
Jan. 22 
Dec. 21 
Mar. 30 
Aug. 11 
May 1 
Nov. 17 
May 11 
April 8 
Nov. 18 
Jan. 2 
April 10 
Dec. 12 
Feb. 17 
Mar. 31 
Nov. 13 
July 4 
Dec. 2 
Aug. 13 
June 27 
Sept. 4 
May 29 
Dec. 31 
Aug. 21 
Jan. 21 
Sept. 13 
June 1 
Dec. 4 
April 9 
Sept. 30 
April 30 
Nov. 28 
June 5 
July 31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 177 

Hawkins, rsaac, Philadelphia, and Susanna Marpole, Philadelphia 17-18 July 28 

Hawkins, William, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Corker, Bucks, Pa 1742 Aug. 14 

Hawley, Peter, and Charity Jacobus 1782 June 15 

I laws, Alpheus, and Sarah Bruen 1779 May 22 

Hawthorn, Isaac, Cumberland, and Hannah Smith 1786 May 18 

Hay, David, .Monmouth, and Margaret Newell. ... ." 1781 Jan. 10 

Hay. Morris, Burlington, and Eleanor Button 1758 Sept. 13 

Hay, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Thome, Burlington 1746 May 20 

Hay. William, Monmouth, and Valeriah Tilton, Monmouth 1761 Mar. 27 

Hay, William, Burlington, and Mary Curtin 1770 Aug. 3 

Hayburn, James, Philadelphia, and Mary Hopewell, Burlington 1781 Dec. 24 

Hayes, Jacob, Burlington, and Deborah Westervelfc, Burlington 1744 Nov. 1 

Hayes, James, Gloucester, and Margaret Magloughliu, Gloucester 1738 Aug. 2 

Hayes, Samuel, Monmouth, and Marah Williams, Monmouth 1754 Jan. 12 

Hayes, William, Burlington, and Lydia Meyer, Burlington 1740 Dec. 4 

Hayes, William, Sussex, and Hanna S. Rathstoue 1770 Nov. 17 

Hayle, Andrew, Burlington, and Pbeby Nichols 1783 June 25 

Haynes, John, Salem, and Rebecca Smith, Salem 1745 Nov. 4 

Hays, Daniel, Monmouth, and Jeney Van Cleve, Monmouth 176 5 Jan. 13 

Hays, John, Burlington, and Rhody Vaughn ... 1782 Nov. 19 

Hays, Joseph, Cape May, and Lydia Johuson, Cape May 1771 Dec. 16 

Hays, Michael, Elizabeth Town, and Mary Alston, Rahway 1758 May 18 

Hays, William, Burlington, and Rebecca Ring 1777 May 13 

Haywood, William, Monmoutb, and Sarah Fitz Randolph, Monm'th. .1761 Nov. 13 

HazeltoD, Abraham, Burlington, and Susannah Burroughs 1756 June 7 

Hazeltou, Henry, Pennsylvania, and Alice Jessop. . . 1779 April 13 

Hazleton, Jarvis, Perth Arnboy, and Anne Hay wood, Perth Amboy. .. 1740 Feb. 9 

Hazleton, William, Philadelphia, and Miriam Richison, Philadelphia. 1737 July 9 

Hazleton, William, Burlington, and Abigail Wright, Burlington 1775 April 22 

Hazlett, James, Sussex, and Catharine Commons, Sussex 1771 Nov. 21 

Hazlit, Samuel, Sussex, and Margaret Hazlet 1777 July 14 

Headley, Joshua, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Bidgood, Bucks, Pa 1748 Dec. 27 

Headley, Solomon, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Sulwaut, Pennsylvania. . 1761 May 22 

Heady, Thomas, New Jersey, and Rebecca Still well 1749 June 24 

Heard, Elisha, Gloucester, and Mary L'ikis, Gloucester 1767 Sept. 19 

Heard, John, Woodbridge, and Margaret Hadden, Woodbridge. 1757 Nov. 11 

Heard, Nathaniel, Woodbridge, and Mary Ford, Woodbridge 1752 Feb. 14 

Heard, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Rulins 1777 Feb. 25 

Hearthy, Roger, Pennsylvania, and Rebecca Parker, Burliugtou 1727 June 21 

Heath, John, Perth Amboy, and Anne Lewis 1746 Feb. 21 

Heatb, John, Someiset, and Neighomy Lee 1780 Jan. 5 

Heath, Thomas, Middlesex, and Sarah Eddy ■ 1768 Nov. 29 

Heaton, James, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Kidd, Bucks, Pa . .' 1776 June 5 

Heaton, John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Anderson, Bergen 1765 Oct. 30 

Heaton, Levi, Cumberland, and Phebe Cook, Cumberland. 1777 Nov. 19 

Heaton, Robert, Burlington, and Ann Horner 1795 Jan 8 

12 



I78 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Heaton, Samuel, Cumberland, and Rboda Terry 1783 

Heavens, Daniel, and Rebecca Waiuright, Burlington 1759 

Heaviland, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Johnston, Monmouth.. ..1763 

Hedden, Marcus, Momnouth, and Margaret Browne, Monmouth 1738 

Hedderj, Marcus, Monmouth, and Hester Frost, Monmouth 1779 

Hedger, John, Gloucester, and Ann Sparks, Gloucester 1769 

Hedges, Thomas, Cape May, and Mary Lupton 1762 

Hedrick, Christopher, Bergen, and Catherine Cooley 1777 

Hegbe, Edward, Gloucester, and Jemima Risley, Gloucester 1738 

Hegeman, Adrian, Somerset, and Francis Wickoff 1778 

Hegeman, Benjamin, Somerset, and Sarah Snydam 1773 

Height, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Rodgers 1778 

Height, Thomas, Middlesex, and Rachel "Wilson, Middlesex 1767 

Heister, Daniel, BnrliDgtou, and Mary Carman, Burlington 1779 

Hellson, Richard, Burlington, and Catharine Clayton, Burlington 1731 

Helm, Robert, Somerset, and Sarah Linn 1769 

Helmes, Israel, Salem, and Mary Peterson, Salem 1729 

Hemmety, Henry, Hunterdon, and Ann Lomason, Hunterdon 1763 

Henary, David, and Mary Rosebrook 1751 

Hendershot, William, Sussex, and Catherine Hunter, Sussex 1773 

Heuderson, John, Momnouth, and Jaue Laird, Monmouth 1761 

Henderson, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Vaudervoort, Sussex 1770 

Henderson, James, Somerset, and Sarah Kennedy 1768 

Henderson, Michael, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Reemer, Somerset ... 1764 

Henderson, Samuel, Monmouth, and Margaret Rhea, Monmouth 1767 

Hendricks, Abraham, Monmouth, and Mary Wyckoff, Monmouth 1754 

Hendricks, Coonradt, Monmouth, and Mercy Knott, Monmouth 1763 

Hendricks, John, Monmouth, and Phebe Smith, Monmouth 1759 

Hendrickson, Abraham, Kings, N. Y., and Anna Van Kirk, Monmouth. 1759 

Hendrickson, Albert, Monmouth, and Joanua Mills, Monmouth ]7"»5 

Hendrickson, Cocnradt, Monmouth, and Mary English, Monmouth.. .. 1759 

Hendrickson, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Mary Thorn ... 1767 

Hendrickson, Daniel, Middlesex, and Elleuor Vanmeter, Monmouth. . 1758 
Hendrickson, Daniel, Jr., Moumoirth, and Mary Schenck, Monmouth. 1767 
Hendrickson, Garret, Monmouth, and Catherine Denice, Monmouth. .1755 
Hendrickson, Hendrick, Middletown, and Sarah Thomson, Middlet'n..l751 
Hendrickson, Hendrick, Monmouth, and Ledy Covinoven, Monmouth. 1757 
Hendrickson, Jacob, Momnouth, and Elizabeth Mount, Monmouth. ..1771 

Hendrickson, Jolm, Burlington and Aune Cox 1763 

Hendrickson, Tobias, Monmouth, and Rebecca Coward 1762 

Hendrickson, William, New Jersey, and Charity Robinson, Monm'th. 1756 

Hendrickson, William, Monmouth, and Mary Duglass 1762 

Hendrickson, William, Momnouth, and Rachel Longstreet, Monmouth. 1768 

Hendrixson, John, Gloucester, and Mary Cole, Gloucester 1759 

Hendry, John, Burlington, and Sarah Lovett, Burlington 1764 

Hendry, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Auderson 1785 



May 


12 


Feb. 


1 


Aug. 


9 


July 


27 


Mar. 


31 


April 


25 


Feb. 


16 


A pril 


3 


May 


4 


May 


29 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


30 


Sept. 


23 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


16 


Dec. 


14 


Sept. 


9 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


29 


Mar. 


27 


Aug. 


17 


Jan. 


24 


April 


20 


Dec. 


17 


June 


17 


Oct. 


31 


Mav 


23 


Jan. 


3 


June 


18 


Jan. 


28 


Nov. 


14 


Sept. 


2 


Dec. 


8 


April 


3 


Mar. 


7 


May 


2 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


6 


Dec. 


21 


April 


22 


Feb. 


22 


April 


2 


Nov. 


24 


Mar. 


2 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



i/9 



Hendry, Thomas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Bowman, New Haven .... 1774 

Henery, William, Sussex, and Hannah Rose, Morris 1773 

Henuion, Cornelius, Bergen, and Adriana Veader 17*1 

Henry, John, Burlington, and Susanna Gibbs, Burlington 176-4 

Henry, John, Middlesex, and Phoebe Taylor, Monmouth 1768 

Hentou, George, Burlington, and Abigail Rodgers 1713 

Hepbourn, William, Hunterdon, and Sarah Carson 17 — 

Hepburn, John, Somerset, and Margaret Salton 1771 

Hepbume, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Montgomery. Monmouth.1738 
Hepherd, William, Gloucester, and Deborah Hinchman, Gloucester. . . 1735 

Heppard, Thomas, Gloucester, and Rhoda Zane. 1761 

Herbert, Daniel, Monmouth, ;.nd Amey Megee 1745 

Herbert, David, and Margaret Lyon, Monmouth . . 1744 

Herbert, Felix, Somerset, and Catherine Karr 1778 

Herbert, Isaac, Monmouth, and Freelove Woolley, Monmouth 1742-3 

Herbert, James, Middletown, and Margaret Mount, Middletown. . . 1739-40 
Herbert, James, Monmouth, and Mary Vandeventer, Monmouth. . . . 1767 

Herbert, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Smyth, Monmouth 1749 

Herbert, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Curbs, Monmouth 1769 

Herbert, Obadiah, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Warne, Middlesex 1765 

Herbert, Richard, Monmouth, and Martha Carman, Monmouth 1742 

Herbert, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Seabrook. . 1767 

Herbert, Samuel, Monmouth, and Rehaner Parigan, Pennsylvania... 1752 

Herbert, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Winter, Monmouth 1751 

Herbert, Walter, Monmouth, and Phebe Mount, Monmouth ... 1741 

Herd, Samuel, Burliugton, and Eliza Brayman.. 17 :8 

Herd, Thomas, Burlington, and Alice Smith, Burlington 1741 

Herder, Christopher, Somerset, and Anne Aumerman 1779 

Heritage, John, Burlington, and Aun Hugg, Gloucester. 1741 

Heritage, John, Jr., Gloucester, and Ruth Haius, Burlington 1746 

Heritage, John, Gloucester, and Mary Cattell, Gloucester 1760 

Heritage, John, Gloucester, and Susannah Marple, Gloucester 1768 

Heritage, William, Gloucester, and Susannah Demce 1771 

Herkins, John, Burlington, and Mary Whitaker 1765 

Herliky, Denis, Monmouth, and Lidy Kogers, Monmouth 1760 

Herriot, Alford, Woodbridge, and Christiana Wortmau, S unerset. . . . 1774 

Herriot, Ephraim, Bedmiuster, and Jane Allen, Bedminster. 1756 

Herriot, George, Woodbridge, and Mary Ayers, Woodbridge 1750 

Herriot, Samuel, Somerset, and Mary Kerr, Monmouth 1759 

Herriott, Asher, Somerset, and Catherine Leferty, Somerset 1755 

Herriott, Asher, Sussex, and Mary Lockheart, Somerset 1763 

Herriott, David, Jr., Woodbridge, and Sarah Alford, Woodbridge. . . . .1741 

Herritage, Joseph, Burlington, and S:irah Whiteall, Gloucester 173(1 

Heslip, David, Burlington, and Catharine Larkius 177s 

Hess, Abraham, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hammit, Gloucester. ... 1716 
Hettield, Abraham, Essex, and Eleanor Blackledge, Essex 1746 



Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


6 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


23 


Sept. 


11 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


Mar. 


1 


Feb. 


13 


Oct. 


2 


July 


2 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


7 


Mar. 


?4 


Oct. 


15 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


30 


Mar. 


24 


June 


2 


May 


19 


April 


2 


Oct, 


21 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


23 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


17 


Aug. 


22 


Oct. 


14 


Dec. 


20 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


13 


May 


3 


Mar. 


11 


Nov. 


26 


Dec. 


11 


Tec. 


24 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


6 


Oct. 


24 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


17 


June 


is 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


l 7 



l8o NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Heton, John, Bergen, and Mary Brower, Bergen 1785 

Heulings, Abraham, Burlington, and Sarah Perkins 1757 

Heulings, Israel, Burlington, and Ann Tantuin, Burlington 1740 

Heulings, Jacob, Burlington, and Elizabeth Eves, Burlington 1775 

Heulings, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Wood, Gloucester 1741 

Heulings, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hamraick, Gloucester.. . . 1756 
Henlings, Samuel, Burlington, and Roseinond Garwood, Burlington. . 1763 

Heustis, John, Burlington, and Mary Higbey, Burlington 1765 

Hewes, James, Salem, and Sarah Page, Salem ^ 1770 

Hewet, Azariah, Cape May, and Lidia Buck. 1775 

Hewins, Thomas, Salem, and Rachel Dickson, Salem 1745 

Hewit, Thomas, Jr., Cape May, and Hannah Hand, Cape May 1764 

Hewit, Shamgar, Cape May, and Elizabeth Smith 1778 

Hewitt, Caleb, Gloucester, and Mary Howton, Gloucester 1763 

Hewitt, Daniel, Cape May, and Mary Holden, Cape May 1764 

Hewitt, Elijah, Cape May, and Naomi Young, Cape May 1763 

Hewitt, Henry, Salem, and Rachel Summerell 1773 

Hewitt, Thomas, Monmouth, and Sarah West, Monmouth 1746 

Hewitt, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Smith, Gloucester 1768 

Hewitt, William, Gloucester, and Rachel Briant, Gloucester 1745 

Hewlings, Abraham, Burlington, and Anne Mary Hay. . . 1758 

Hewlings, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Burr, Burlington . . . 1774 

Hewlings, Isaac, Burlington, and Ann Ware, Burlington. 1763 

Hewlings William, and Mary Lovett 1695 

Hews, Henry, Perth Amboy, and Dorcas Hagewout, Perth Aniboy ... 1755 

Hews, William, Burlington, and Prudence Thomas 1757 

Hewson, John, Burlington, and Jane Erwin 1779 

Hewson, Joseph, Burlington, and Rachel Haines, Burlington 17 70 

Heyer, Peter, Monmouth, and Altse Yan Pelt, Monmouth 1739 

Hibbard, Aaron, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Ball, Philadelphia 1746 

Hibbits, James, Middlesex, and Isabella Van Schaick 1767 

Hibbs, Jacob, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Johnson, Pennsylvania.. . .1727 

Hickman, Francis, Burlington, and Jane Moon, Burlington 1742 

Hickman, John, Gloucester, and Esther Robertson, Gloucester 1745-6 

Hicks, Augustus, Philadelphia, and Mary Jones, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Hicks, George, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Gorheen 1763 

Hicks, Oliver, Monmouth, and Catherine Cook, Monmouth 1775 

Higbe, Edward, Gloucester, and Mary Smith 1782 

Higbee, Isaac, Gloucester, and Saviah Somers 1785 

Higbee, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Ester Smith 1773 

Higbee, John, Gloucester, and Mary Smith, Gloucester 1758 

Higbee, John. Middlesex, and Margaret Ellison 1780 

Higbee, Joseph, Jr., Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Ely, Hunterdon 1712 

Higbee, William, Burlington, and Ruth Middleton, Burlington 1756 

Higby, Absalom, Gloucester, and Rachel Scull.. 1784 

Higby, Edward, Gloucester, and Sarah Leeds 1781 



Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


18 


Oct. 


10 


Jan. 


16 


May 


12 


June 


14 


June 


22 


Jan. 


29 


July 


18 


June 


12 


Aug. 


13 


Dec. 


4 


April 


24 


May 


31 


Feb. 


1 


June 


14 


Feb. 


27 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


15 


Jan. 


15 


July 


29 


Sept. 


5 


Oct. 


19 


July 


23 


July 


9 


Oct. 


10 


May 


14 


April 


5 


Nov. 


30 


July 


18 


Feb. 


25 


June 


15 


Nov. 


3 


Feb. 


1 


Nov. 


5 


Oct. 


11 


Mar. 


10 


Jan. 


3 


Feb. 


28 


Oct. 


13 


May 


22 


June 


26 


Dec. 


24 


June 


21 


Jan. 


7 


May 


20 



MARRIAGE LICENSE.^. iSl 

Higgins, Azariah, Eunterdon, and Sarah Stout 1779 

Higgins, Bryan, Barlingtonj and Sarah Warrick, Burlington 1737 

Higgins, Bryont, Monmouth, and Micil Stillwil, Monmouth 1750 

Higgins, Edward, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Stockton, Middlesex. ....1763 

Higgins, Jedidiah, Hunterdon, and Mary Hill, Hunterdon 1774 

Higgins, Jodia, Burlington, and Alary Newbold, Burlington 1684 

Higgins, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Letts, Middlesex 1765 

Higgins, Michael, Somerset, and Anne Bryant, Somerset 1727 

Hight, Nicholas, Jr., Middlesex, and Bershaba Aastley 1774 

Hilborn, Robert, and Christian White 1761 

Hildrith, Daniel, Cape May, and Prisila Goff, Cape May. 1761 

Hildrith, David, Cape May, and Jane Edwards, ('ape May 1760 

Hildreth, Joseph, Cape May, and Zabiah Corson, Cape May 1748 

Hildreth, Joseph, Salem, and Lydia Street, Salem 1759 

Hildreth, Joseph, Cumberland, and Alice Shaw ] 777 

Hildreth, Joseph, Cape May, and Martha Stilwill 1789 

Hill, Alexander, Salem, and Elizabeth Dunlap 1756 

Hill, Edward, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Banks, Pennsylvania.. , ...1728 

Hill, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Mary Hunt 1781 

Hill, John, Salem, and Ma' garet Smith 1760 

Hill, John, Middlesex, and Ruth Stockton, Middlesex 1765 

Hill, John, Burlington, and Ann Hodgins 1770 

Hill, Joseph, Bucks, Pa. , and Aune Hull, Meudham 1783 

Hill, Moses, Salem, and Sarah Bilderback, Salem 1764 

Hill, Robert, Burlington, and Anne Gillum, Burlington.. 1749 

Hill, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Sarah Trout 1787 

Hill, Seth, Burlington, and Mary Grubb 1685 

Hill, Smith, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Nut 1780 

Hill, William, Monmouth, and Mary Harbour, Monmouth 1742 

Hill, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ashtou, Burlington 1749 

Hill, William, and Hester White, Hunterdon 1762 

Hiller, Edward, Burlington, and Sarah Haines 1733 

Hiller, Uriah, Burlington, and Sarah Eayres, Burlington 1746 

Hillegas, Samuel, and Mary Milnor 1778 

Hillier, Jacob, Burlington, and Martha Robinson, Burlington 1762 

Hillier, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Green, Pennsylvania 1772 

Hillmnu, Daniel, Gloucester, and Lydia Pratt 1774 

Hillman, James, Gloucester, and Mary Smallwood, Gloucester 1754 

Hillman, Joab, Gloucester, and Mary Mattlacke, Gloucester 1761 

Hillman, Joel, Gloucester, and Litisha Cheesemau 1748 

Hillman, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Olivers, Gloucester 1758 

Hillman, Joseph, Gloucester, and Drusilea Cheesman 1763 

Hillman, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rebecca Sparks 1784 

Hillman. Josiah, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Pancoast, Gloucester 1761 

Hillyer, John, Richmond, N. Y., and Mary Richoff. 1768 

Hillyer, Nicholas, New York, and Jane Biset, Stateu Island 1771 



Jan. 


20 


Aug. 


17 


Oct. 


29 


May 


14 


May 


17 


May- 


12 


May 


11 


Nov. 


8 


April 


5 


Aug. 


17 


May 


2 


April 


21 


Feb. 


16 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


12 


Jan. 


28 


Mar. 


16 


Aug. 


6 


Dec. 


3 


May 


30 


May 


21 


June 


2 


July 


19 


Nov. 




Nov. 


1 


June 


6 


May 


8 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


9 


June 


12 


Jan. 


21 


July 


21 


Nov. 


16 


April 


17 


Jan. 


9 


Jan. 


25 


Oct. 


8- 


April 


18 


Mar. 


7 


July 


22 


July 


18 


Nov. 


18 


April 


18 


Feb. 


2 


Aug. 


6 



IS: NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hillyer, William, New York, and Dinah Dey, Monmouth . . 1755 

HUman, Job, Salem, and Rachel Plummer, Salem 1778 

Hilton, Israel, Staten Island, and Mary Glaspey. Staten Island 1745 

Hettzheimer, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Theodoeia Imlay 1792 

Hinehman, Isaac, Gloucester, and Lettice Woolston, Gloucester 1753 

Hinehman, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Smith, Gloucester 1747 

Hinehman, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Weiley 1789 

Hinehman, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Eaign.. 1774 

Hinehman, William, Gloucester, and Jane Murphy 1783 

Hinds, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Mary Fitzhuge, Chester 1739 

Hinds, Richard, Monmouth, and Margaret Remine, Monmouth 1736 

Hines, Jeremiah, Salem, and Mary Hmu, Cumberland 1775 

Hines, Thomas, Burlington, and Elly Stuart 1784 

Hinshaw, Michael, Cape May, aud Elizabeth Barlow, Cape May 1769 

Hirby, William, Burlington, and Ann Taylor, Burlington 1735 

Hires, Walter, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Vanbelt 1752 

Hireton, Obediah, Burlington, and Mary King : Burlington 1728 

Hitchcock, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Aun Jackson, Philadelphia. . ..1734 

Hixon, Mathew, Hunterdon, and Phebe Everitt 1728 

Hixson, James, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Wombok 1779 

Hixson, Matthew, Hunterdon, and Catharine Hogg 1779 

Hixson, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Temperance Sixton, Hunterdon. .. 1775 

Hixson, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Barbara Akelar 1777 

Hoadley, John, Salem, and Deborah Hand 1779 

Hoaglaud, Abraham, Somerset, aud Mary Probosco 1781 

Hoagland, John, Somerset, and Phebe Baird 1780 

Hoagland, Peter, Middlesex, and Mary Van Cleef 1780 

Hobson, George, Burliugton, and Hannah Kiunison, Pennsylvania, . . . 1732 

Hodge, Bernard, Salem, and Elizabeth Prague, Salem 1688 

Hodge, Joseph, Salem, and Sarah Shaw, Salem. 1746 

Hodgson, Nathaniel, Middlesex, and Margaret Allen 1783 

Hodson, William, Monmouth, aud Esther Patterson, Monmouth 1743 

Hodson, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Taylor 1777 

Hoel, Isaac, Gloucester, and Mary Sharp, Gloucester 1727 

Hoff, Charles, Jr., and Hannah Tuttle 1778 

Hoff, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Laura Titus 1769 

Hoff, John, Monmouth, and Helen Stout, Monmouth 1758 

Hoff, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Jemima Baldwin 1781 

Hoffe, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Worley, Burlington 1741 

Hoffee, George, Burlington, and Margaret Braudenburg, Burlington. .1775 

Hoff man, Audrew, and Kesiah Adieu 1735 

Hoffman, Charles, Gloucester, and Mary Reeves, Gloucester 1761 

Hoffman, Isaac, Gloucester, and Catherine Bender, Gloucester 1765 

Hoffman, John, Gloucester, and Mary Fox, Gloucester 1 749 

Hoffman, John, Salem, and Sarah Wright, Salem 1769 

Hoffman, John, Hunterdon, and Ann More, Hunterdon 1776 



A pril 


21 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


30 


Nov. 


15 


Aug. 


12 


May 


29 


Jan. 


10 


April 


26 


July 


31 


Jan. 


30 


Apiil 


18 


Feb. 


24 


July 


29 


July 


27 


June 


3 


Dec. 


7 


Mar. 


8 


Feb. 


25 


April 


5 


April 


27 


Feb. 


22 


July 


15 


Dec. 


16 


Aug. 


8 


Jan. 


1 


April 


5 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


7 


Sept. 


2 


Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


19 


May 


>2 


Nov. 


21 


Mar. 


4 


Sept. 


21 


Dec. 


11 


July 


13 


Sept. 


14 


Nov. 


1 


July 


22 


Feb. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. " 183 

Hoffmer, Isaac, Monmouth, and Alice Stilwell, Monmouth. . . 1755 Aug. I 

Hoffmire, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Rogers, Monmouth .... 1710 Nov. 1 1 

Hoffiuire, "William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Vandyk, Monmouth.. . .1762 Jan. '.1 

Hogben, Nehemiah, Salem, and Hannah Bowin, Salem 1744 Dec. 6 

Hogbin, Amariah, Cumberland, and Mercy Simpkin 1757 Aug. 16 

Hogbin, Joseph, Salein, and Latitia Noblitt, Salem 17(57 April 14 

Hoge, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Feuton, Burlington 1763 Jan. 15 

Hogeland, Abraham, Middlesex, and H.iunah Stoothoff, S3merset . . . . 1741 May 9 

Hogeland, G uret, Somerset, and Jacomintie Hogeland, Somerset .... 1742 Aug. 30 

Hogelaud, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Else Slack 1779 June 26 

Hogeland, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Jane Jewell, Hunterdon 1771 Feb. 16 

Hogg, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Fitzwater, Philadelphia. .. 1734 Feb. 6 

Hoggins, Timothy, Burlington, and Katharine Hamilton, Burlington. .1745 Aug. 21 

Hogland, Elbert, Long Island, and Mary Gulick, Somerset 1748 June 9 

Hogland, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Susannah Skelton, Bucks, Pa 1772 Oct. 26 

Hoile, Nicholas, Burlington, and Priscilla Bell. 1777 Dec. 14 

Holcomb, Samuel, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Stevenson 1768 Oct. 26 

Holcomb, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Leah Deremer 1778 June 25 

Holcombe, Richard, Hunterdon, and H muah Emley, Hunterdon. ...1774 April 23 

Holcombe, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Mary Holcombe 1783 May 21 

H olden, Benjamin, Cape May, and Abigail Leonard , 1746 April 5 

Holder, Daniel, Cape May, and Sarah Iszard, Cape May 1754 Sept. 4 

H jlder, John, Burlington, and Joanna Tindall, Burlington 1736 Feb. 9 

Holder, Samuel, Burlington, and Tacey Jones, Burlington 1736 Nov. 1 

Holland, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Smith, Burlington 1739 Aug. 20 

Holland, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Veneball 1790 Mar. 31 

Hollden, Benjamin, Cape May, and Elizabeth Briggs, Cape May 1739 Dec. 18 

Holliday, James, Salem, and Elizabeth Smith 1780 Feb. 9 

Holliushead, Baujamiu, Burlington, and Jerusha Oliphant, Burlington. 1759 Nov. 27 

Hollinsheal, Daniel, Mmmouth, and Mary Buekalew 1762 Jan. 25 

Holliushead, Edward, Gloucester, and Susannah Shivers, Gloucester. . 1748 Nov. 23 

Hollinshead, Hugh, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Mulleu, Burlington 1782 Sept. 11 

Holliushead, Jacob, Salem, and Hannah Scoggiu, Salem 1766 Dec. 9 

Hollinshead, .Jacob, Cumberland, and S ivah Rice 1779 April 17 

Hollinshead, James, New Jersey, and Mary Ireland, 1765 April 22 

Holliushead, John, Burlington, and S irah Dobbins, Burlington 1767 Aug. 25 

Holliushead, John. Burlington, and Martha Boston 1782 Mar. 18 

Holliushead, John, Burlington, and Zelas Holliushead 1787 Dec. 5 

H jlliushead, Joseph, Barliugton, aud Jerusha Hollinshead 1759 Aug. 30 

Hjlliushead, Joseph, Burlington, and Miry Buttler 1787 Mar. 1 

Hollinshead, Morgan, Barliugton, and Rebecca Matlack, Burlington. .1775 Sept. 30 

Holliushead, Rynear, Cape May, and Jac< Eldredge, Cape May 1772 Jiyie 5 

H jllinshead, Samuel, Burlington, and Ann R »sell, Burlington 1736 July 9 

Hollinshead, Samuel-, Cumberland, and Mary Eldredge 1785 Sept. 13 

Hollinshead, William, Barliugton, and H innah Ruderon, Burlington.. 1727 April 1 

Hollinshead, William, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Marvey, Phila 1748 Feb. 26 



184 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Holloway, George, Burlington, and Mary Emley 1761 

Holloway, George, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Lawrie 1768 

Holloway. Isaac, Middlesex, and Sarah Pulliner 1 779 

Holloway, John, Trenton, and Mary Smith 1733 

Holloway, John, Burlington, and Constant Handcock 1758 

Holloway, Tobias, Gloucester, and Mary Ludd, Gloucester :1732 

Holloway, William, Burlington, and Ann Martin, Burlington 1756 

Holm, John, Gloucester, and Ester Fawsett, Gloucester 1732 

Holman, Aaron, Staten Island, and Anne Story. 1745 

Holmau, Robert, Monmouth, and Margaret Johnson, Somerset 1741 

Holman, William, Monmouth, and Uphamea Reynolds 1761 

Holme, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Hannah Roberts, Gloucester 1735-6 

Holme, Benjamin, and Jean Smith, Salem 1750 

Holme, Benjamin, Jr., and Hannah Holme, Salem 1750 

Holme, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Phebe Fluellin 1772 

Holme, John, Salem, and Dorcas Smith 1749 

Holmes, Daniel, Monmouth, and Lsah Bowerd 1752 

Holmes, Hugh, Cape May, and Mary Garretson 1789 

Holmes, James, New York, and Eleanor Lawrence, Monmouth 1765 

Holmes, James, Gloucester, and Leah Risley 1774 

Holmes, John, Gloucester, and Ester Carty, Gloucester 174S 

Holmes, John, Monmouth, and John Keehan, Monmouth 1753 

Holmes, John, Monmouth, and Catharine Brown, Monmouth 1764 

Holmes, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Leonard, Monmouth 1765 

Holmes, John, Gloucester, and Mary Cooper 1780 

Holmes, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Mott, Monmouth 1752 

Holmes, Joseph, Jr., Monmoutb, and Phebe Audrews 1758 

Holmes, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Elizabeth Gutteridge, Gloucester 1762 

Holmes, Obadiah, Monmouth, and Sarah Ogborn. Monmouth 1747 

Holmes, Samuel, Middletown, aud Mary Stout, Middletown 1749 

Holmes, Thomas, Monmouth, and Susannah Slocum, Monmouth 1739 

Holmes, William, Gloucester, and Rebecca Jones, Gloucester 1730 

Holmes, William, Burlington, and Mary Venable 1768 

Holms, Benjamin, Salem, and Esther Gibbon 1778 

Hololway, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Hoffmire, Monmouth 1758 

Holsaert, Matthias, Monmouth, and Auue Matthews, Monmouth.. ..1740 

Holsart, Peter, Monmouth, aud Williamkey Hains, Monmouth 1757 

Holson, John, Salem, and Martha Hughs 1777 

Holsten, Andrew, Salem, aud Elizabeth Royall 1736 

Holsten, John, Salem, and Susauna Scott, Salem 1770 

Holtey. Henry, Hunterdon, and Susan Laf ten 1773 

Holtoi*, John, Salem, aud Elizabeth Elweel, Salem 1745 

Holton, Thomas, Piscataway, and Rachel Fitz Randolph, Piscataway. . 1750 

Homau, Peter, Burlington, and Mercy Harding, Burlington 1739 

Homan, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Corkell, Gloucester 1745 

Hooman, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Van Reamar 1786 



July 


25 


June 


22 


Sept. 


29 


Mar. 


23 


Mar. 


28 


Mar. 


8 


April 


21 


July 


22 


July 


18 


June 


3 


Sept. 


14 


Mar. 


3 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


24 


June 


25 


Jan. 


11 


Feb. 


11 


Sept. 


7 


May 


30 


July 


5 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


20 


Aug. 


3 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


1 


June 


24 


Nov. 


4 


Aug. 


2 


Nov. 


2 


Jan. 


27 


Mar 


10 


Oct. 


2 


Feb. 


25 


Oct. 


28 


Feb. 


10 


Mar. 


7 


April 


11 


Mar. 


24 


Aug. 


21 


Feb. 


8 


Sept. 


24 


Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


25 


Oct. 


25 


Aug. 


24 


Sept. 


19 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 1 X ; 

Jl milium, William, Gloucester, and Bridget Holton 1756 

Honce, Cornelius, Monmouth, ami Mary Vankerk, Monmouth 1766 

Honge, David, Monmouth, and Anne Hendrickson, Monmouth. . . 17G1 

Houson, John, Jr., Monmouth, and Mary Amack, Monmouth 1754 

Hooek, Samuel, Trenton, and Hannah Mount, Burlington.. 17G4 

Hood, Jonathan, Pennsylvania, and Dorothy Hogsflesh, Pennsylvania. 1727 

Hooglaud, John, Somerset, and Sarah Bergen 1784 

Hooker, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Darets, Burlington 1744 

Hooks, William, Piscataway, and Mary Koyse, Piscataway 1749 

Hooper, Abram, Burlington, and Priscilla Southrick, Burlington 1767 

Hooper, Daniel, Gloucester, and Sarah Shin 1785 

Hooper, Robert L., Jr., Trenton, and Elizabeth Erskine 1781 

Hooper, Stephen, Middlesex, and Oatrine Clayton, Monmouth 1767 

Hooper, William, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Jones, Bucks, Pa 1739 

Hooper, William, Burlington, and Margaret French, Burlington 1744 

Hoopper, i William, Bergen, and Anne Kipp, Bergen 1767 

Hooten, Thomas, Burlington, and Jane Dorman 1778 

Hootteu, John, Burlington, and Sarah Kay, Burlington 1737 

Hope, Adam, Hunterdon, and Sarah Dunham, Hunterdon 1765 

Hopewell, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Becket, Burlington 1754 

Hopkins, Charles, Salem, and Ann Green, Salem 1736 

Hopkins, Edward, Monmouth, and Rebecca Martin 1772 

Hopkins, George, Monmouth, and Sarah Smith, Monmouth 1764 

Hopkins, Hadden, Gloucester, and Hannah Stokes, Gloucester 1766 

Hopkins, Hezekiah, Gloucester, and Martha Griffith 1789 

Hopkins, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Shippey, Burlington 1745 

Hoppe, Albert, Bergen, and Bachel Vrelaud, Bergen 1765 

Hoppe, Audries. Bergen, and Catharine Hoppe, Bergen 1773 

Hoppe, Garrit, Bergen, and Rachel Poulese, Bergen 1770 

Hoppe, Hendrick, Bergen, and Elizabeth Terhune, Bergen 1770 

Hoppe, John, Bergen, and Aaltie Hoppe, Bergen 1771 

Hopper, Andries, Bergen, and Rachel Romine, Bergen 1762 

Hopper, Garret, Bergen, and Margaret Hopper 1780 

Hopper, Gerret, Hackensack, and Eltie Earle, Hackensack 1748 

Hopper, John, Gloucester, and Ann Garwood, Burlington 1737 

Hopper, John, Bergen, and Fytie Doremus, Bergen 1766 

Hopper, John A. , Bergen, and Mary Kuyper 1779 

Hopper, John G., Bergen, and Esther Van DerLinde 1783 

Hopper, Joshua, Gloucester, and Rebecca Dobbins, Gloucester 1768 

Horder, Thomas, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Wallace 1773 

Hore, John, Burlington, and Lydia Hort, Burlington 1736 

Horn, Charles, Hunterdon, and Mary Stout 1787 

Horn, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Wooly 1761 

Horn, Simon, Middlesex, and Helen Sisby 1743 

i Hopper. 



Dec. 


16 


April 


9 


Dec. 


21 


Dec. 


10 


June 


23 


Oct. 


31 


April 


7 


Oct. 


10 


April 


25 


Sept. 


28 


May 


4 


Oct. 


31 


Mar. 


31 


Sept. 


17 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


1 


April 


23 


Oct, 


30 


July 


27 


June 


12 


Sept. 


3 


Mar. 


29 


Nov. 


21 


Oct. 


31 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


3 


Aug. 


19 


Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


5 


July 


20 


June 


17 


Mar. 


17 


Nov. 


18 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


6 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


29 


Feb. 


15 


June 


21 


Dec. 


27 


June 


1-2 


Nov. 


20 


May 


26 



1 86 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Horn, Stephen, New Jersey, and Rachel Clawson 1775 

Horn, William, Middlesex, and Lenah Groom 1781 

Horncastle, Richard, Perth Arnboy, and Elizabeth Manson, P'th A'b'y.1746 

Horner, Content, Monmouth, and Sarah Hutchin, Burlington 1738 

Horner, Fuller, Monmouth, and Jamima Giberson, Monmouth 1762 

Horner, Heath, Burlington, and Pleasaut Haigue, Burlington 1728 

Horner, Isaac, Burlington, aud Agnes Sesen, Burlington , . 1730 

Horner, Jacob, Gloucester, and Zubelte Wright, Gloucester 1740 

Horner, Jacob, Gloucester, and Hannah Cozens, Gloucester 1764 

Horner, Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Rebecca Morford 1761 

Horner, Joseph, East Div. N. J., and Margery Hallis 1748 

Horner, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Taylor, Burlington 1763 

Homer, Joshua, Jr., Monmouth, and Bachel Guiberson. 1759 

Horner, Nathan, Gloucester, and Ann Batten, Gloucester 1762 

Horner, Thigh, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Herbert.. 1773 

Hornor, Aser, Monmouth, and Anne Parker 1770 

Hornor, Elisha, Monmouth, and Valleriah Francis 1773 

Hornor, John, Burlington, and Mary Butler 1758 

Hornor, John, Monmouth, and Lidia Ashton 1773 

Hornor, Joseph, Monmouth, and Rachel Roberts 1768 

Horseman, Marmaduke, and Mary Fitzpatrick, Monmouth 1744 

Horseman, Samuel, Monmouth, and Rebecca Folke, Burlington 1727 

Horsfull, Richard, Monmouth, aud Sarah Jackson, Monmouth .1772 

Horwood, John, Salem, and Rachel Bacon 1774 

Hosier, Robert, Hunterdon, and Jane Naery 1767 

Hoshel, Adam, Cumberland, and Phebe Parviu, Cumberland 1763 

Hoshel, Michael, Cumberland, and Rachel Peck 1773 

Hosier, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Mary Surrell 1768 

Hough, Jonathan, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bryan, Burlington 1741 

Hough, Willhtin, Bucks, Pa., and Rachel Beans, Bucks, Pa 1775 

Houghton, Aaron, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Sexton 1780 

Hongland, Adrian, Somerset, and Catherine Hagewoudt, Somerset . . . 1740 

Houldiu, Joseph, Cape May, aud Hannah Jonson 1690 

House, Abraham, and Francis Baukins 1771 

Houshell, Peter, Hunterdon, and Mary Wilson, Hunterdon 1774 

Housler, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Ranier .... 1781 

How, John, Burlington, and Maryan Blanchard 1782 

How, Micajah, Hunterdon, and Sarah Field, Burlington 1770 

How, Thomas, Monmouth, and Margaret Moore, Monmouth 1737 

Howard, Alexander, and Elizabeth Miller 1768 

Howard, John, Philadelphia, and Sarah Bunting. Burlington 1749 

Howard, Michael, Burlington, aud Catherine Roche, Burlington 1731 

Howard, Michael, Burliugton, and Lydia Bittle, Burlington 1756 

Howard, Thomas, Middlesex, and Margaret Smith, Middlesex 1754 

Howell, Aaron, Gloucester, and Mercy Kille, Gloucester 1760 

Howell, Absalom, Trenton, and Elizabeth Commirger 1782 



Sept. 


16 


Sept. 


22 


Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


31 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


25 


Aug. 


4 


Feb. 


28 


Dec. 


29 


Sept. 


28 


Aug. 


29 


Jan. 


3 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


26 


April 


6 


July 


8 


Jan. 


20 


Sept. 


26 


Mar. 


16 


Feb. 


9 


Sept. 


14 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


1 


Oct. 


6 


May 


14 


Jan. 


20 


May 


30 


June 


22 


Feb. 


23 


May 


12 


Oct. 


11 


Mar. 


IS 


April 


18 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


16 


Jan. 


22 


May 


14 


Nov. 


23 


Oct. 


16 


July 


24 


Sept. 


9 


Dec. 


9 


Jan. 


8 


Dec. 


5 



M ARRtAGE LICENSES. 1 S~ 

Howell, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Debro Kose .1703 Aug. 10 

Howell, Ellet, Trenton, and Catharine Flick 1777 Deo. 27 

Howell, George, Philadelphia, and Lydia Patterson, Philadelphia. .. 1736 Aug. 21 

Howell, George, Monmouth, and Abigail Hodden, Monmouth 1765 July 1 

Howell, Henry. Morris, and Elizabeth Parrott, Morris 1769 May 20 

Howell, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Stout, Hunterdon 1772 June 5 

Howell, John, Trenton, and Mary Guild 1778 Feb. 14 

Howell, John, Hunterdon, and Deborah Carmine 1780 April 17 

Howell, Obadiah, Trenton, and Mary Jones 1779 June 8 

H well, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Sarah Cornell » 1782 Dec. 5 

Howey, William, Burlington, and Anne Hewit 1783 Aug. 4 

Howard, Peter, Burlington, and Elizabeth Middleton 1784 Nov. 3 

Howard, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Edith Newbold 1786 Dec. 13 

Howland, George, Monmouth, and Susannah Cook, Monmouth 1758 Jan. 21 

Hoy, John, Chesterfield, and Achsah Kindell, Chesterfield 1782 Mar. 31 

Hubbard, James, Monmouth, and Rebecca Swort, Monmouth 1765 Oct. 24 

Hubbell, Nathaniel, Essex, and Elizabeth Marsh, Essex 1750 Jan. 10 

Hubbell, Zachariah, Elizabeth Town, and Elizabeth Hamton. ... 1747 April 14 

Hubbert, James, Cape May, and Isabell Little 

Hubbord, James, Middletown, and Elizabeth Maddocks, Burlington. . . 1732 May 13 

Hubbs, Charles, Gloucester, and Mary Eastlack, Gloucester 1749 Dec. 15 

Hubbs, David, Perth Amboy. and Hannah Lette, Perth Amboy 1760 Jan. 26 

Huddleston, Williams, Pennsylvania, and Dorothy Welsh, Pennsyl'nia.1727 Nov. 14 

Hudley, Daniel, Salem, and Elizabeth Booth 1732 June 24 

Hudley, Daniel, Salem, and Agnes Haynes. 1771 Oct. 17 

Huddy, Daniel, Salem, and Grace Owen, Salem 1776 Sept. 23 

Huddy, Hugh, Burlington, and Martha Hunloke 1701 May 6 

Hude, Robert, Middlesex, and Mary Moores, Middlesex 1746 Aug. 6 

Hude, Robert, Middlesex, and Abiah Callender, Middlesex 1765 Feb. 13 

Hud nut, John, Hunterdon, and Anne Rosegrants l'769 Dec. 30 

Hudnut, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Catherine Andrewson, Hunterdon. . 1764 Feb. 4 

Hudnutt, Isaiah, Hunterdon, and Margaret Barber, Hunterdon 1774 Aug. 27 

Hudson, Abimelech, Burlington, and Priscilla Beswick 1690 Mar. 25 

Hudson, Andrew, Gloucester, and Ann Clement .... 1773 Nov. 17 

Hudson, Isaac, Salem, and Rachael Weaten, Salem 1733 June 11 

Hudson, Obed, Cumberland, and Phebe Miller 1786 May 23 

Hues, John, Salem, and Martha Buckley, Salem 1690 April 24 

Huestis, Joseph, Burlington, and Euphamia Jobs, Burlington 1776 Aug. 6 

Huestis, Moses, Burlington, and Ann Rogers, Burlington 1771 Dec. 17 

Huff, Isaac, Burlington, and Mercy Leeds, Burlington 1771 Dec. 2 

Huff, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Kettine Waldron 1783 Oct. 4 

Huff, Moses, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Haudly 1780 April 1 6 

Huffman, John, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Rounsavell, Hunterdon. ...1774 Aug. 6 

Hugan, Wdliam, Monmouth, and Mary Mottisou, Monmouth 1756 Feb. 6 

Hugg, Barzilla, Gloucester, and Mary Wood, Waterford 1771 Dec. 23 

Hugg, Gabriel, Gloucester, and Patience Erwin, Gloucester. . 1728 April 1U 



I 88 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hugg, Jacob, Gloucester, and Catherine Bright. 1773 

Hugg, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hughes 1779 

Hugg, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Smith, Gloucester 1761 

Hugg, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Thorne, Gloucester 1761 

Hugg, Samuel, Gloucester, and Mary Collins, Gloucester 1764 

Hugg, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Harrison, Gloucester 1737 

Hugg, William, Jr., Gloucester, and Ann Everly 1773 

Huggin, John, Burlington, and Hannah Martin, Burlington . 1736 

Huggin, John, Freehold, and Mary Fritson, Freehold 1716 

Hughes, Constantine, Cape May, and Elisheba Hand, Cape May 1769 

Hughes, Elisha, Cape May, and Judith Spicer, Cape May 1773 

Hughes, Ellis, Cape May, and Mary Willden, Cape May 1761 

Hughes, Ellis, Jr., Cape May, and Elenor Whilldin, Cape May 1768 

Hughes, Ellis, Cape May, and Judith Hudyer 1786 

Hughes, Hugh, Philadelphia, and Martha Brackenridge 1764 

Hughes, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Mary Warner 1764 

Hughes, James, Burlington, and Rachel Lord, Burlington 1737 

Hughes, James, Gloucester, and Hannah Brandsor c . . . .1768 

Hughes, Jesse, Cape May, and Mary Hughes, Cape May 1763 

Hughes, John, Cape May, and Martha Iszard, Cape May , 1760 

Hughes, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Lee, Perth Amboy ... 1763 

Hughes, Memucan, Cape May, and Martha Hughes 1761 

Hughes, Thomas, Cape May, and Lydia Page 1788 

Hughes, Uriah, Bucks, Pa., and Jennet Hartley 1733 

Hughes, William Evan, Burlington, and Sarah Antram, Burlington.. . . 1775 

Hughs, Elijah, Cape May, and Hanuah Stites, Cape May 1740 

Hughs, Jerret, and Elizabeth McCarty 1774 

Hughs, Thomas, Salem, and Mary Pedrick 1727 

Hughston, John, Gloucester, and Martha Austin, Burlington 1710 

Hulings, Samuel, and Priscilla Welch, Gloucester 1773 

Hulit, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mercy Allen, Monmouth 1750 

Hulit, Michael, Monmouth, and Margaret Tabert, Monmouth 1757 

Hulit, Thomas, Monmouth, aud Anna Lipiucott, Monmouth 1755 

Hull, Isaac, Somerset, and Anne Dunham, Essex 1751 

Hull, Mashek, Middlesex, aud Elizabeth Dunn, Middlesex 1764 

Hull, Ragan, Monmouth, aud Ann Smith, Monmouth 1764 

Hullfish, Matthias, Middlesex, and Jane Blue 1780 

Hullit, George, Monmouth, and Pnebe Price, Monmouth 1760 

Hulme, George, Burlington, and Anne Butler, Burlington 1774 

Hulme, George, Burlington, aud Tennel Neale 1781 

Huls, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Sarah Mash, Hunterdon 17C.4 

Hulse, James, Burlington, and Rachael Gibbins 1769 

Hulse, Thomas, Monmouth, and Deborah Johnston, Monmouth.. .. 1750 

Hulse, William, Monmouth, aud Margaret Sutfin, Monmouth 1763 

Hulsecart, Garret, Monmouth, and Hannah Clayton, Monmouth 1752 

Hulst, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Williams, Monmouth 1751 



Dec. 


8 


April 


27 


Mar. 


24 


April 


15 


July 


9 


May 


30 


May 


11 


Nov. 


30 


Nov. 


1 


Feb. 


1 


Oct. 


26 


Oct. 


2 


Sept. 


•21 


Dec. 


7 


July 


25 


Mar. 


13 


Mar. 


7 


Oct. 


16 


June 


14 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


6 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


3 


June 


14 


Oct. 


28 


Oct. 


28 


June 


29 


May 


11 


Nov. 


1 


April 


15 


Mar. 


7 


July 


19 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


25 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


29 


April 


22 


July 


21 


May 


31 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


11 


May 


13 


Dec. 


31 


June 


11 


Sept. 


18 


May 


'27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 89 

Humber, Billingham, and Ann Mariott, Backs, Pa 1759 

Humphreys, Johu, Burlington, and Surah Doughty 1758 

Humphreys, John, Hunterdon, and Actia Larison 1776 

Humphreys, William, Bucks, Pa., and Ann Salcker 1760 

Humphries, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Sarah Alburtis 1769 

Humphries, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Cooke, Monmouth ... 1750 

Hnnloke, Edward, and Mary Bassnett 1691 

Hunloke, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Bard, Burlington. 1771 

Hunu, Thomas, Monmouth, and Catharine Van Emburgh, Monmouth. 1763 

Huunywell, John, Sussex, and Rebecca Kelly. . 1768 

Hunsinger, George, Burlington, and Alice Jennet, Burlington 1764 

Huusinger, Peter, Gloucester, and Mary Tice 1780 

Hunt, Abram, Hunterdon, and Theodosia Pearson, Burlington 1764 

Hunt, Bartholomew, Cumberland, and Eleanor Whitenack 1782 

Hunt, Benjamin, Somerset, and Eleanor Palmer, Somerset 1748 

Hunt, Isaiah, Burlington, and Hester Stratton, Burlington 1766 

Hunt, Jesse, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hunt ... 1781 

Hunt, John, Salem, and Sarah Darkin, Salem 1713 

Hunt, John, Hunterdon, and Martha Horsfield 1768 

Hunt, John, Jr., Cape May, and Mary Swain 1773 

Hunt, John, Cumberland, and Anne Brewster, Cumberland 1779 

Hunt, John, Hunterdon, and Rhoda Reed 1784 

Hunt, Jonathan, Jr., Hunterdon, and Sarah Stout 1778 

Hunt, Mansfield, Hunterdon, and Mary King, Hunterdon 1736 

Hunt, Mansfield, and, Nelly Vandoren 1778 

Hunt, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Mary Phillips, Hunterdon 1763 

Hunt, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Hannah Jones 1769 

Hunt. Ralph, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Phillips, Hunterdon 1768 

Hunt, Richard, Hunterdon, and Hannah Phillips 1783 

Hunt, Robert, Burlington, and Abigail Wood, Gloucester 1733 

Hunt, Samuel, West Chester, N. Y., and Isabella Ashfield, Monmouth. 1 749 

Hunt, Samuel, Morris, and Nancy Ricky. . . 1777 

Hunt, Samuel, Morris, and Alice Crussie 1780 

Hunt, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Ruth Hunt 1787 

Hunt, Thomas, Sussex, and Tabitha Cook, Sussex 1770 

Hunt, William, Salem, and Ann Kent, Salem 1772 

Hunt, Wilson, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Ivins . . 1778 

Hunter, Andrew, Cumberland, and Ann Riddle, Cumberland 1775 

Hunter, Andrew, Somerset, and Elizabeth Barkley, Somerset 1779 

Hunter, Hugh, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Arason. . 1769 

Hunter, James, Maryland, and Rachel Murphy, Burlington 1775 

Hunter, John, Burlington, and Mary Stratton, Burlington 1773 

Hunter, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Gilmer, Hunterdon 1764 

Hunter Samuel, Salem, and Katherine Skeene, Salem 1695 

Hunter, William, Monmouth, and Christian Robiuson 1770 

Hurley, David, Monmouth, and Sarah Branson 1757 



May 


16 


May 


8 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


6 


Oct, 


23 


Nov. 


10 


April 


8 


May 


20 


Jan. 


26 


June 


4 


July 


25 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


5 


Jan. 


16 


May 


28 


June 


30 


Sept. 


6 


May 


18 


Feb. 


13 


May 


28 


Feb. 


16 


Dec. 


30 


Sept. 


25 


Dec. 


3 


Sept. 


26 


Feb. 


9 


May 


7 


May 


21 


Dec. 


19 


Nov. 


27 


May 


6 


Sept. 


30 


May 


12 


April 


13 


Jan. 


9 


June 


11 


Oct. 


2 


April 


18 


June 


3 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


31 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


8 



190 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hurley, Edward, Burlington, and Frauces Warwick, Monmouth 1729 

Hurley, John, Gloucester, and Jemima Evans 1784 

Hust, John, Gloucester, and Mary Wilson 1782 

Hutchinson, Kichard, Middlesex, and Mary Karson 1769 

Hutcheson, John, Gloucester, and Rachel Richmond 177-4 

Hutchin, Hugh, Burlington, and Elizabeth Baker, Burlington ...... 1730 

Hutchin, John, Burlington, and Sarah Gibbs, Burlington 1742 

Hutchin, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Tucker .' 1758 

Hutchings, Hugh, Salem, and Mary Adams, Salem 1686-7 

Hutchius, Amos, Burlington, and Hannah Fenimore, Burlington 1772 

Hutchins, George, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hall, Burlington 1746 

Hutchius, Hugh, Burlington, and Ann Nutt 1769 

Hutchius, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Olden, Middlesex 1748 

Hutchius, Joseph, Burlington, and Grace Richards, Burlington 1745 

Hutchius, Samuel, Elizabeth, and Margaret Davis, Elizabeth 1749 

Hutchiusou, Amos, Middlesex, and Phebe Clark, Hunterdon 1779 

Hutchinson, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Dinah Combs, Monmouth. . . .1771 

Hutchinson, Ezekiel, and Susannah Eldridge 1749 

Hutchinson, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Pearson, Burlington 1730 

Hutchinson, Jonathan, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Dusoswa, Monmouth. 1737 

Hutchinson, Jonathan, Middlesex, and Sarah Davis 1765 

Hutchinson, Jonatban, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hill. . . 1771 

Hutchinson, Robert, Burlington, aud Sarah Clutch 17(19 

Hutchinson, William, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Applegate 1767 

Hutchinson, William, Burlington, and Ann McCabe 1770 

Hutchinson, William, Middlesex, and Sarah Wilgus 1784 

Hutson, John, Burlington, and Mary Burton 1794 

Hutton, Samuel, Monmouth, and Lena Kipp, Monmouth 1754 

Hutton, William, Somerset, and Rebecca Craig, Somerset 1758 

Hutton, William, Gloucester, and Jane Chesom 1772 

Huysmen, James, Bergen, aud Letitia Terhuue 1 782 

Hyer, Abraham, Middlesex, and Mary Ouke, Middlesex 1748 

Hynds, Silvester, Burlington, and Catherine Kearns 1759 

Hyndshaw, James, Pennsylvania, and Maria Depue, Morris 1746 

Hyrlin, Peter, Burlington, aud Mary Smith, Burlington 1740 

FEMALES. "■ 

Hackett, Elizabeth, Salem, and Joseph Kidd, Salem 1769 

Hackley, Rebecca, and John Kay, Gloucester 17(12 

Hadden, Charity, Monmouth, and Richard Parker, Monmouth 1742 

Hadden, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Johu Heard, Woodbridge 1757 

Hadden, Mary, Woodbridge, aud Thomas Brown, Woodbridge 1754 

Hadley, Abigail, and Daniel Ruckhow, Bamegat 1762 

Hagerman, Ann, Middlesex, and James Dobbins, Somerset .1739 

Hageman, Charity, Middlesex, and John Funk, Middlesex. . . . 1748 

Hagerman, Catriuche, aud Gerrit Van Vliet, Readington 1772 



Nov. 


3 


Jan. 


30 


April 


1 


Mar. 


22 


June 


9 


July 


6 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


10 


Feb. 


3 


April 


4 


Oct. 


6 


Jan. 


23 


July 


22 


May 


1 


Mar. 


17 


Aug. 


2 


May 


30 


June 


5 


Mar. 


24 


Oct. 


7 


Oct. 


29 


Feb. 


25 


April 


3 


Jan. 


3 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


11 


Feb. 


4 


Oct, 


2 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


12 


May 


25 


Feb. 


8 


Aug. 


30 


Sept. 


29 


Jan. 


18 


April 


12 


July 


6 


Nov. 


11 


April 


4 


Oct. 


4 


Nov. 


28 


April 


15 


May 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 191 

Hagerman, Mary, Somerset, and Lewis Chamberlin, Hunterdon 1773 

Hagerman, Mary, and Andrias Whitenack, Somerset 1778 

Hagerwoudt, Catherine, Somerset, and Adrian Hougland, Somerset ..17-10 
Hagerwout, Dorcas, Perth Amboy, and Henry Hews, Perth Amboy. . .1755 

Haggerty, Elizabeth, Sussex, and Reuben Buckler, Sussex 1763 

Hagins, Mary, Middletown, and Benjamin Tilton, Middletown 1767 

Hagin, Pleasant, Burlington, and Heath Horner, Burlington 172S 

Haines, Achsah, Burlington, and Obadiah Eldridge, Burlington 1701 

Haines, Amey, Burlington, and Abraham Gar.wooil, Burlington 1770 

Haines, Anna, and William Foster, Burlington 1788 

Haines, Catherine, Burlington, and John Mullen, Burlington 1776 

Haines, Charity, Burlington, and Leonard Vandergrit't, Bucks, Pa. . . 1750 

Haines, Deborah, Burlington, and Amos Sharp, Burlington 1751 

Haines, Edith, Northampton, and Barzillai Kidgway, Springfield. ... 1775 

Haines, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jo!) Gaskill, Burlington 1758 

Haines, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Lippincott, Burlington. . .1707 

Haines, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Correy, Salem 1770 

Haines, Esther, and Amos Austin, Burlington 1736 

Haines, Hannah, and Thomas Bispham, Burlington 1781 

Haiues, Hester, Burlington, and John Garwood, Burlington 1701 

Haines, Laviua, Springfield, and James Shinu, Springfield 1768 

Haiues, Lucretia, and Thomas Moor, Burlington 1783 

Haiues, Margaret, and Noah Eldridge, Burlington 1779 

Haines, Mary, Burlington, and Richard Newman, Burlington 1740 

Haiues, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Brian, Burlington 1745 

Haines, Mary, and Thomas Enoch, Burlington 1759 

Haines, Mary, Elizabethtowu, and Thomas Thornton, Middlesex.. ... 1761 

Haiues, Mary, Burlington, and Job Collins, Burlington 1774 

Haines, Phebe, Burlington, and Job Sharp, Burlington 1780 

Haines, Rachel], Burlington, and Vespasian Kemble, Burlington .... 1746 

Haines, Rachel, Burlington, and Joseph Hewson, Burlington 1770 

Haines, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Pettit, Burlington 1716 

Haines, Rachel, and Thomas Lippincott, Burlington 1779 

Haines, Rebecca, Bucks, Pa., and William Wetherill, Bordentown ... 1748 

Haines, Sarah, and Edward Hiller, Burlington 1733 

Haines, Sarah, and Amos Wilkins, Burlington 1756 

Haines, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Cox. Burlington 1761 

Haines, Sarah, and Isaac Pine, Salem 1791 

Hains, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Samuel Nicholson, Gloucester 1770 

Haius, Ruth, Burlington, and John Heritage, Jr., Gloucester 1716 

Hains, Sarah, Greenwich, and Azariah Shinn, Gloucester 1760 

Eains, Williamkey, Monmouth, and Peter Holsart, Monmouth 1757 

Hair, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and William Stephens, Bucks, Pa 1775 

Haldau, Frances, and Thomas Smith, Northampton 1778 

Haldreu, Susannah, and Noah Ridgway. Northampton 1779 

Hale. Sarah, Salem, and Thomas Wetherill, Salem. 1748 



Jan. 


18 


Mar. 


19 


May 


12 


July 


9 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


19 


Feb. 


25 


Nov. 


28 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


25 


Oct. 


23 


May 


1 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


27 


Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


July 


29 


July 


31 


Mar. 


23 


July 


17 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


23 


Mar. 


17 


Aug. 


26 


Mar. 


15 


April 


5 


Sept. 


3 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


2 


Jan. 


21 


June 


17 


Aug. 


31 


April 


16 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


14 


Feb. 


13 


April 


11 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


4 


April 


8 


Jan. 


19 



192 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Halee, Hannah, and Hugh Brady 174.1 

Halenbeck, Tarnise, Bergen, and Hendrick Van Alen, Bergen 1761 

Hall, Abigail, Burlington, and Philip Marriott, Burlington 1716 

Hall, Anu, Alloways Creek, and Jonah Scoggin, Salem 1748 

Hall, Ann, and Adrian Hagaman, Hunterdon 1781 

Flail, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Jacobus Eltinge, New York. . 1742 

Hall, Elizabeth, Biuliugton, and George Hutchins, Burlington 1746 

Hall, Elizabetb, Monmouth, and Joseph Spaua, Middlesex 1765 

Hall, Esther, Burlington, and John Earl,. Burlington . . . 1761 

Hall, Hannah, and John Turner, Salem 17:33 

Hall, Jane, Monmouth, and Frederick Helmen, Monmouth 1762 

Hall, Jecou, and Samuel Scotteu, Deptford 1775 

Hall, Martha, Bordentown, and Benjamin French, Bordeutown. 1742 

Hall, Martha, Burlington, and Francis Gibbs, Burlington 1748 

Hall, Mary, and Robert Bishop, Burlington 1727 

Hall, Mary, Salem, and John White, Salem 1728 

Hall, Mary, Somerset, and Henry Cock, Somerset 1759 

Hall, Mary, and Joseph Smith, Maimiugton 1765 

Hall, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Scott, Burlington 1740 

Hall, Sarah, Cumberland, and John Jones, Cumberland 1777 

Haller, Susannah, and William Gurnal, Salem.. 1777 

Hallis, Margery, East Div. N. J'sey, and Joseph Horner, E. Div. N. J. 1748 

Halloway, Mary, and Samuel Taylor (minor), Burlington 1760 

Hallstead, Byer, Monmouth, and Isaac Mitchel, Monmouth. . 1764 

Halsted, Abigail, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Price, Shrewsbury ... 1762 

Halter, Cathrine, and George Treas, Salem. 1772 

Halton, Cathrine, Gloucester, and Joseph J avenport, Gloucester. . . . 1771 

Hambleton, Mary, and Stephen Morford, Somerset 1770 

Hambelton, Sarah, and Thomas Wood, Chesterfield. 1761 

Hambilton, Sarah, Gloucester, aud Samuel Ladd, Gloucester 1754 

Hameck, Elizabeth, and Phiueas Carll, Salem 1757 

Hamilton, Cathariue, Salem, and David Pentou, Salem 1740 

Hamilton, Elizabeth, Deptford, aud Hezekiah Wheeler, Deptford 1761 

Hamilton, Chester, and John Ashbrook, Gloucester 1732 

Hamilton, Judith, Salem, aud William Moore, Salem 1769 

Hamilton, Katherine, Burlingtcn, and Timothy Hoggins, Burlington 1745 

Hamilton, Sarah, Gloucester, and Peter Crim, Gloucester ... 1769 

Hamilton, Sarah, Salem, and William Moore, Salem 1770 

Hamilton, Sarah, and John Clark, Burlington 1778 

Hamock, Judith, aud Gilbert Hurrell 1691 

Hampton, Alice, and Samuel Davis, Philadelphia 1781 

Hampton, Margaret, Gloucester, and Daniel Barber, Gloucester 1738 

Hampton, Mary, Gloucester, and Ebenezer Zeues, Gloucester 1731 

Hampton, Ro.se, and Joseph Alberson, Gloucester 1737 

Hamson, Hannah, Monmouth, and William Craddock, Monmouth .... 1745 

Hamton, Elizabeth, and Zachariah Hubbell, Elizabeth Town 1747 April 14 



May 


28 


Jan. 


20 


July 


28 


Feb. 


25 


Oct. 


15 


June 


12 


Oct. 


6 


May 


11 


Nov. 


16 


Sept. 


1 


Aug. 


12 


Mar. 


20 


Jan. 


29 


Oct. 


22 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


4 


April 


12 


June 


14 


Dec. 


13 


Oct, 


28 


May 


6 


Aug. 


29 


Feb. 


6 


June 


14 


Nov. 


6 


Oct. 


30 


April 


17 


Mar. 


17 


May 


11 


Oct. 


2 


May 


18 


Nov. 


1 


April 


21 


July 


21 


May 


6 


Aug. 


21 


Aug. 


28 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


29 


Dec. 


30 


April 


23 


Dec. 


8 


Aug. 


26 


April 


16 


Nov. 


11 



.MARRIAGE LICENSES. I 93 

Hainton, EUes, Freehold, and Joseph Car, Jr., Freehold 1756 

Sainton, Mary, Monmouth, and Joseph Darby, Monmouth 1762 

Hummel, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel English, Burlington — 1761 
Hammel, Gaitree, BurlingtoD, and Hezekiah Garwood, Burlington — 1765 

Hammel, Hannah, and Jacob Adams, Burlington 1784 

Hammell, Deborah, and Abraham Kelley, Burlington 1786 

Hammell, Hannah, and Allison Ely, Middlesex 1771 

Hammell, Theodosia, and Daniel Ivins, Burlington 1777 

Hammell, Sarah, and Benjamin Bates, Burlington 1777 

Hammett, Mary, and William Whilton, Burlington 1738 

Hammick, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Joseph Heuliugs, Burlington 1756 

Hammit, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Abraham Hess. Gloucester 1746 

Hammit, Sybilla, and John Prickett, Northampton 1784 

Hammitt. Doshia, Gloucester, and Thomas Mannering, Gloucester 1761 

Hammock, Abigail, Gloucester, and Samuel McCleain, Gloucester 1773 

Hammock, Hannah, and Henry Dalton, Burlington 1777 

Hammoch, Susannah, Burlington, and James Simson, Burlington. 1774 

Hammond, Maritie, Bergen, and Stephen Bogart, Bergen 1761 

Hance, Catherine, Freehold, and William Voorhees, Freehold 1763 

Hance, Hannah, Monmouth, and James Lippicotte, Monmouth 1757 

Hance, Hannah, Burlington, and Isaac Jobs, Burlington 1775 

Hance, Jane, Freehold, and Tunis Vanderveer, Freehold 1759 

Hance, Joice, Monmouth, and William Burdg, Monmouth 1755 

Hance, Joice, Monmouth, and Luke Brannin, Monmouth 1762 

Hance, Margaret, and James Robinson, Middlesex 1731 

Hance, Tenty, Monmouth, and Thomas Tone, Somerset 1775 

Hancock, Ann, Burlington, and Samuel Swift, Burlington 1738 

Hancock, Anne, and Thomas Antram 1783 

Hancock, Esther, Salem, and John Stretch, Salem 1751 

Hancock, Hannah, Burlington, and Joseph Scott, Burlington, 1770 

Hancock, Jane, Burlington, and Henry Scott, Burlington 1728 

Hancock, Lydia, and Gershom Craft, Burlington 1 741 

Hancock, Mary, Burlington, and Ptter Harvey, Burlington 1748 

Hancock, Mary, and Joseph Edwards, Salem 1777 

Hancock, Mary, and George Shrevin, Burlington 1778 

Hancock, Melissa, and Aaron Daniels, Salem 1787 

Hancock, Rebecca, and Wessell Alricke, New Castle, Del 1751 

Hancock, Sarah, Alloways Creek, and Thomas Sinnickson, Salem 1769 

Hancock, Sarah, and Joseph Stout, Burlington 1771 

Hancock, Sarah, and Robert Lucas, Burlington ITS 2 

' Hancock, Susannah, Alloways Creek, and Edward Test, Salem 1765 

Hand, Abiah, Cape May, and James Townsend, Cape May 1710 Jan. 

Hand, Acksah, and Recompence Hand, Cape May 1790 

Hand, Amelia, Cape May, and Christopher Ludluin, Cape May 1770 Mar. 

Hand, Anna, Cape May, and Jonathan Foreman, Cape May 1771 June 

13 



Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


13 


Jan. 


11 


May 


22 


Mar. 


22 


Nov. 


9 


July 


25 


Oct. 


5 


Mar. 


27 


June 


14 


Jan. 


6 


Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


28 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


13 


June 


17 


July 


6 


July 


5 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


26 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


7 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


2 


May 


20 


Nov. 


25 


May 


7 


May 


30 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


25 


April 


. 8 


July 


7 


Feb. 


10 


Oct, 


9 


Mar. 


2 


July 


4 


Oct. 


28 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


7 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


26 


June 


i 15 



194 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hand, Deborah, and Jeremiah Hand, Cape May 1734 

Hand, Deborah, and Jonathan Jenkins, Cape May 1768 

Hand, Deborah, and John Hoadley, Salem. 1779 

Hand, Elisheba, Cape May, and Constantine Hughes, Cape May 1769 

Hand, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Matthew Hand, Cape May 1775 

Hand, Esther, Cape May, and James Willits, Cape May 1740 

Hand, Esther, and Rem Garritson, Cape May 1761 

Hand, Eunas, and Francis Irons, Cape May 1774 

Hand, Euuice, Cape May, and Nathaniel Norton, Cape May 1733 

Hand, Experience, Cape May, and Downes Edmunds, Cape May 1752 

Hand, Experience, Cape May, and John Robertson, Cape May 1756 

Hand, Hannah, and William Bennet, Cape May 1752 

Hand, Hannah, Cape May, and Thomas Hewit, Jr., Cape May 1764 

Hand, Haunah, and Dan Perry, Cumberland 1780 

Hand, Hannah, and John Newton, Cape May , 1789 

Hand, Jane, Cape May, and Nathaniel Ogden, Fairfield 1761 

Hand, Jane, and Miller Bancroft, Cape May 1787 

Hand, Jemimah, and Elijah Shaw, Cape May 1768 

Hand, Jerusha, Cape May, and William Shaw, Cape May 1762 

Hand, Joaunah, Cape May, and John Corey, Cape May 1762 

Hand, Judith, and Jonathan Learning, Cape May. . . . , 1766 

Hand, Judith, Cape May, and John Bateman, Cumberland 1771 

Hand, Lydia, and Christopher Foster, Cape May 1732 

Hand, Lydiah, and Asbury Smith, Cumberland 1757 

Hand, Lydia, Cape May, and Benoni Mills, Cumberland 1769 

Hand, Margaret, Cape May, and Levi Corson, Cape May 1766 

Hand, Martha, Cape May, and Amos Townsand, Cape May. 1745 

Hand, Martha, Cape May, and Abraham Vangelder, Cape May 1757 

Hand, Martha, Cape May, and Jonathan Love, Cumberland 1769 

Hand, Martha, Cumberland, and Jonadab Shepherd, Cumberland. ... 1770 

Hand, Mary, Cape May, and David Hand, Cape May 1764 

Hand, Mary, and Downes Edmunds, Cape May 1774 

Hand, Mary, and Isaac Matthews, Cape May 1774 

Hand, Mary, and Ezra Hand, Cape May 1774 

Hand, Mary, Cape May, and Thomas Ross, Cape May 1782 

Hand, Mary, and Smith Buweu, Cumberland 1786 

Hand, Naomi, Cape May, and Jonathan Cresse, Cape May 1763 

Hand, Rachel, Cape May, and Richard Smith, Cape May 1737 

Hand, Rachel, Cape May, and Elijah Haud, Cape May 1758 

Hand, Rachel, Cape May, and William Smith, Cape May 1762 

Hand, Rachel, Cape May, and James Watt, Cape May 1770 

Hand, Rhoda, and William.Billings, Cape May 1763 

Hand, Ruhannah, Cape May, and Henry Ludlam, Cape May 1772 

Hand, Ruth, Cape May, and John Cromwell, Cape May 1737 

Hand, Sarah, and Richard Still well, Cape May 1736 

Hand, Sarah, Cape May, and Benjamin Ingram, Cape May 1759 



Mar. 


27 


April 


13 


April 


27 


Feb. 


1 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


31 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


20 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


23 


Sept. 


8 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


6 


Aug. 


22 


April 


24 


Oct. 


1 


April 


12 


Mar. 


8 


June 


14 


Aug. 


14 


July 


27 


Jan. 


18 


Mar. 


8 


April 


10 


Dec. 


23 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


22 


Sept. 


5 


April 


16 


July 


2 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


17 


Dec. 


20 


Jan. 


14 


Jan. 


24 


July 


1 


Dec. 


1 


Jan. 


24 


Aug. 


2 


Oct. 


22 


Feb. 


20 


Jan. 


8 


April 


22 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 1 95 

Hand, Sarah, Cape May, and Ira Buck, Cape May 1760 

I [and, Sarah, and Constant Somers, Gt. Egg Harbour 1790 

Hand, Susanna, and James Whildiu, ('ape May 1766 

Haudby, Sarah, Gloucester, and Thomas Pedrick, Gloucester 1753 

Handcock, Constant, and John Holloway, Burlington 1758 

Handley, Sarah, and John Outgelt, New Jersey 1781 

Handly, Elizabeth, and Moses Huff, New Jersey 1780 

Hands, Rebecca, and John Swain, Cape May 1780 

Hands, Sarah, anil Benjamin Stiles, Jr., Cape May ... 1779 

Haues, Jane, and Robert Bishop, Burlington 1759 

Haner, Hannah, and "William Duffel, Gloucester 1781 

Hankins, Jannet, Middlesex, and Joshua Nichols, Hunterdon 1751 

Haukins, Jemima, and 1 >avid Rulon, Burlington 1781 

Hankins, Rachel, and Matthias Swaim, Jr., Middlesex 1760 

Hankins, Sarah, Burlington, and John Duckworth, Burlington. 1734 

Hankinson, Anne, Monmouth, and Joseph Taylor, Monmouth 1747-8 

Haukinson, Catherine, Freehold, and Daniel Cooper, Jr., Morris. ... 1751 

Hankinson, Elinor, and Gilbert Longstreet, Monmouth 1777 

Hankinson, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Lane, Monmouth 1763 

Hankinson, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Covenhoven, Monmouth. 1756 

Hankinson, Ledy, Monmouth, and John Hampton, Monmouth 1761 

Hankinson, Mary, Monmouth, and John Taylor, Monmouth 1750 

Hankison, Elizabeth, and John Reading, Amwell .... 1772 

Hann, Lenah, and Philip Wise, Morris ] 769 

Hann, Mary, Cumberland, and Jeremiah Hines, Salem 1775 

Hanna, Martha, and Philip Molesberry, Sussex 1768 

Hannah, Ruth, and Joseph Peck, Cumberland 1773 

Hanniou, Mary, Bergen, and Garret Post, Bergen 1759 

Harber, Hannah, and Thomas Grant, Burlington 1778 

Harbert, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Collins, Monmouth 1767 

Harbert, Lavinn, Monmouth, and Samuel Cnrlis, Monmouth 1758 

Harbert, Mary, Monmouth, and Amariah Gifford, Monmouth 1758 

Harbour, Esther, Monmouth, and John Youngs, Middletown 1741 

Harbour, Hester, Monmouth, and Andrew White, Monmouth 1743 

Harbour, Margaret, New Brunswick, and Matthew Rue, Middlesex. . . .1749 

Harbour, Mary, Monmouth, and William Hill, Monmouth 1742 

Harbour, Mary, and Jacob Starkey, Upper Freehold 1761 

Harbour, Sarah, Momnouth, and Edward Patterson Worth, Monm'th . 1742 

Harbur, Hope, and Solomon Reeves, Northampton 1784 

Harbut, Rebecca, and Benjamin Lawrence, East Jersey 1758 

Harden, Elizabeth, and John Abbott, Gloucester 1784 

Haider. Marica, Somerset, and Jacobus Amrnarman, Somerset 1746 

Hardiinan, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Robert Sutton, Burlington ...1729 
Hardin, Catharine, Monmouth, and Alexander Garvey, Monmouth. ..1759 

Hardin, Margaret, Monmouth, and David Boyer, Monmouth 1701 

Harding, Ann, Burlington, and David Collins, Burlington 1775 



Jan. 


14 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


28 


Feb. 


21 


April 


16 


June 


6 


Jan. 


It 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


2 


July 


7 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


26 


April 


13 


Nov. 


22 


Jan. 


24 


Feb. 


3 


Mar. 


9 


April 


3 


April 


7 


July 


17 


April 


26 


July 


23 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


15 


(Jet. 


24 


Nov. 


4 


May 


17 


Nov. 


13 


Nov. 


10 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


3 


Aug. 


29 


April 


17 


Aug. 


24 


Feb. 


11 


July 


8 


May 


7 


Mar. 


24 


July 


31 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


16 



196 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Harding, Elizabeth, Salem, and Michel Pedrick, Salem 1748 

Harding, Mary, Salem, and James Murphy, Salem 1765 

Harding, Mary, and Jacob Samson, Cumberland 1778 

Harding, Mercy, Burlington, and Peter Homau, Burlington 1739 

Harding, Sarah, Burlington, and Daniel Jones, Burlington 1754 

Hare, Jane, Bucks, Pa., and David Williams, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Haren, Mary, Bergen, and Hendrick Zabriscy, Bergen 1753 

Hariug, Beynsee, Uringe, N. Y., and Peter T. Haring, Orange, N. Y.1774 

Harison, Dameras, Newark, and Amos Prudden, Newark 1767 

Harker, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Edward Gaskill, Burlington 1766 

Harker, Bhoda, Springfield, and Joseph Gibbs, Springfield 1770 

Harker, Sara, and David Johnson, Chester, Pa 1785 

Harman, Mary, Philadelphia, and Samuel Gray, Philadelphia 1740 

Harmon, Ruth, and Henry Masking, Bucks, Pa 1778 

Harper, Hannah, and William Douglass, Gloucester 1773 

Harriman, Phebe, Morris, and Daniel Mead, Morris 1780 

Hairing, Charity, and William Van Dalsem, New York. . 1786 

Harring, Rachel, and David Taulman, Orange Co., N. Y .... 1781 

Harriot, Mary, Woodbridge, and James Pike, Woodbritlge 1747 

Harriot, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Pearson, Burlington 1736 

Harris, Agnes, Bristol, Pa., and Garret Vaudergrift, Philadelphia. . . 1767 

Harris, Amy, and John Louderback, Salem 1776 

Harris, Ann, Middlesex, and James Connet, Somerset 1761 

Harris, Anna, and Joseph Bishop, Cumbeiland. 1757 

Harris, Anne, and James Stratton, Cumberland 1779 

Harris, Hauna, and Jonathan Simpkins, Upper Penns Neck 1781 

Harris, Marcy, Salem, and John Thomas Hampton, Salem 1775 

Harris, Margaret, Burlington, and Henry Jenkin, Burlington 1728 

Harris, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Whisler, Gloucester 1770 

Harris, Mercilah, Burlington, and Aaron Killey, Burlington 1766 

Harris, Rachel, and John Bailey, Burlington 1759 

Harris, Rachel, Cumberland, and Elijah Bowen, Cumberland 1771 

Harris, Rachel, Hunterdon, and George Ewing, Cumberland 1778 

Harris, Sarah, and William Campbell, Somerset 1781 

Harris, Violetta, Fairfield, Thomas < >gden, Fairfield 1760 

Harrison, Edith, Hanover, and Joseph Roberts, Hanover 1770 

Harrison, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John McKinstry, Monmouth . . . 1739 

Harrison, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Isaac Kingsland, Jr., Bergen.- 1753 

Harrison, Gannitte, and James Neilson, New Brunswick. 1768 

Harrison, Hannah, Gloucester, and William Alherson, Gloucester. 1747 

Harrison, Hannah, Gloucester, and William Albertson, Gloucester 1747 

Harrison, Lydia, Newark, and Jonathan Say res, Newark 1761 

Harrison, Nancy, and Samuel Davis, Bergen 1750 

Harrison, Ruth, and Benjamin Wright, Burlington 1759 

Harrison, Sarah, Philadelphia, and W r illiam Price, Philadelphia 1731 

Harrison, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Hugg, Gloucester. 1737 



Aug. 


25 


Sept. 


2 


Sept. 


24 


Oct. 


25 


Oct. 


16 


Dec. 


6 


Aug. 


22 


June 


11 


May 


15 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


28 


June 


2 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


16 


Mar. 


11 


July 


20 


Sept. 


30 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


3 


Aug. 


14 


Jan. 


12 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


3 


July 


15 


Oct. 


25 


Jan. 


1 


Feb. 


26 


Mar. 


19 


Jan. 


28 


Aug. 


31 


Feb. 


18 


Aug. 


7 


Sept. 


29 


Aug. 


6 


Nov. 


13 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


19 


July 


19 


June 


9 


June 


15 


Jan. 


22 


July 


25 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


7 


May 


30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



197 



Harrison, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Isaac Brown, Philadelphia 1737 

Harry, Wilmeth, Pennsylvania, and Giles Lawrence, Pennsylvania.. . .1738 

Hart, Abigail, Hunterdon, and Moses Stout, Hunterdon 1773 

Hart, Eleanor, and John Robinson, Toms River 17G8 

Hart, Hannah, Hunterdon, and Lott Philips, Hunterdon 1770 

Hart, Louisa, Hopewell, and James Stout, Amwell 1775 

Hart, Mary, Falls Township, Pa., and Jasper Terry, Falls T'nship, Pa. 1735 

Hart, Mary, and John Vancleave, Hunterdon 1780 

Hart. Mary, and John Welling, Trenton 1786 

Hart, Sarah, and Timothy Hart, Hunterdon 1781 

Hartie, Lena, Orange, N. Y., and Jacobus Cornell, Bergen 1701 

Hartley, Jannet, and Uriah Hughes, Bucks 1733 

Hartshorn, Elizabeth 0., and James Bowne, Middletown 1713 

Hartshorne, Lena, Burlington, and Samuel Kirby, Burlington 1766 

Hartshorne, Mary, Monmouth, and Abraham Garrison, Monmouth . . 1714 
Hartshorne, Mary, Freehold, and Thomas Kearney, Middletown. . . . 1719 
Hartshorne, Bachel, Middletown, and Thomas Robinson, P'th Amboy. 1751 
Hartshorne, Rebecca, Middletown, and George Wright, Burlington. .. 1729 

Hartt, Jane, Salem, and Alex. Alexander, Philadelphia 1750 

Harvey, Catherine, Monmoutb, and Langhlin Mackintosh, Monmouth. 1757 

Harvey, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and William Hollingshead, Phila 1748 

Harvey, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Henry Armstrong, Monmouth . . . 1766 

Harvey, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Lone, Monmouth 1742 

Harvey, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Simcock, Bucks, Pa. 1711 

Harvey, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Bunting, Burlington 1755 

Harvey, Susannah, Pennsylvania, and Robert Edward, Pennsylvania. .1728 

Haselton, Ann, Burlington, and James Page, Burlington 1751 

Haselton, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Isaac Penrose, Philadelphia. . . 1768 

Hassam, Sarah, and Daniel Pahlman, Kensington, Pa 17S8 

Hastier, Kebecca, and Morris Earle, Bergen 1746-7 

Hatcher, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Stephen Sands, Bucks, Pa 1747 

Hatheway, Roday, Middletown, and James Pew, Middletown 1761 

Hatkinson, Mary, and Andrew Davis, Burlington 1781 

Hatton, Barbary, Salem, and Garret Vaneman, Salem 1773 

Hauseman, Mary, and Christian A. Zabriskie, Bergen 1789 

Havens, Abigail, Burlington, and Joseph Davis, Burlington 1756 

Havens, Anne, Monmouth, and William Newbury, Monmouth 1748 

Havens, Dorothy, and Thomas Van Norte 1771 

Havens, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Allgor, Monmouth 1763 

Havens, Phebe, Monmouth, and Joseph Bartlett, Monmouth 1737 

Havens, Phoebe, Monmouth, and Job Inman, Monmouth 1774 

Havins, Christin, Shrewsbury, and Jacob Shibely, Shrewsbury 1756 

Haw, Lydia, Bristol, Pa., and Henry Wilson, Bristol, Pa 1763 

Hawk, Charlotte, and Samuel Antram, Burlington 1781 

Hawke, Elizabeth, Haddonrield, and Samuel Packer, Haddontield 1748 

Hawthorn, Margaret, and David Taylor, Salem 1773 



Oct. 


22 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


17 


July 


26 


Jan. 


17 


April 


25 


July 


29 


Nov. 


20 


Oct. 


11 


Dec. 


14 


Mar. 


21 


June 


11 


Aug. 


17 


April 


19 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


30 


Nov. 


4 


Mar. 


17 


June 


16 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


26 


Sept. 


5 


May 


1 


Mar. 


5 


April 


17 


May 


11 


Oct, 


2 


Oct. 


22 


Feb. 


7 


Mar. 


7 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


9 


May 


1 


Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


23 


Sept. 


23 


April 


25 


Dec. 


10 


Jan. 


7 


Oct. 


12 


Dec. 


15 


Mar. 


15 


Aug. 


31 


Nov. 


10 


Dec. 


7 


Feb. 


2 



198 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hay, Agnes, Woodbridge, and James Brown 1743 

Hay, Amy, and John Davidson, Burlington 1772 

Hay, Anne, Burlington, and John Lyne, Burlington 1748 

Hay, Mary, Middlesex, and Nisbit Mount, Middlesex 1744 

Hay, Mary Anne, and Abraham Hewliugs, Burlington 1758 

Hay, Nelly, Middlesex, and Isaac Willson, Middlesex 1780 

Hayes, Mary, and Charles Smith, Bristol, Pa 1778 

Haynes, Agnes, and Daniel Huddy, Salem 1771 

Haynes, Rebecca, Cumberland, and John Barns, Cumberland 1759 

Hays, Amiryllis, Amwell, and Robert Mursin, Hunterdon 1740 

Hays, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Barzilla Ewans, Burlington 1764 

Hays, Hannah, and George Gilbert, Burlington. ... 1783 

Hays, Ruth, Monmouth, and Adam Woolley, Monmouth 1742 

Hays, Susanna, Penns Neck, and Amariah Reeves, Alloways Creek . . 1762 
Haywood, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Jarvis Hazleton, Perth Amboy. . .1740 
Haywood, Elizabeth, Piscataway, and Benjamin Randolph, Piscat'w'y.1750 

Haywood, Isabella, Stafford, and Hull Randolph, Stafford 1767 

Haywood, Martha, Mount Holly, and Thomas Paxson, Mount Holly.. 1764 

Haywood, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Randolph, Burlington 1761 

Haze, Abigail, and James Burns, Cumberland 1778 

Hazelton, Abigail, Burlington, and Joseph Kerlin, Burlington 1763 

Hazelton, Anne, Monmouth, and Liues Pangborn, Monmouth 1761 

Hazelton, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Baker, Burlington. 1749 

Hazlet, Margaret, and Samuel Hazlit, Sussex. 1777 

Headley, Rebecca, Bridgton, and Joseph Shelden, Bridgton 1747 

Heard, Ann, Middlesex, and Ephraim Terrill, Essex 1763 

Heard, Deliverance, Woodbridge, and Robert Stone, Woodbridge 1757 

Heard, Susauna, Middlesex, and Asa Morris, Middlesex 1764 

Heath, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Renew Donhain, Woodbridge 1757 

Heaton, Abigail, and Abraham Lake, Cumberland 1781 

Heavilon, Mary, Freehold, and Stephen Amack, Monmouth 1767 

Heaviland, Catharine, Monmouth, and Benjamin Cooper, Jr., Mou'th.1753 

Hedden, Abigal, Monmouth, and George Howell, Monmouth 1765 

Hedden, Elizabeth, and Aaron Robarts, Newark 1778 

Heddon, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Brown, Monmouth 1738 

Huddy, Elizabeth, and James Edwards, Monmouth 1763 

Heddy, Catura, Monmouth, and Benjamin Parker, Monmouth 1760 

Hedge, Rebecca, Salem, and Pile Smith, Salem 1745 

Hedge, Rebecca, Salem, and Thomas Thompson, Salem 1770 

Hedger, Anne, Gloucester, and Benjamin Collins, Gloucester 1735 

Hedger, Deborah, Gloucester, and Richard Cheesman, Gloucester . . 1763 

Hedger, Elizabeth, Burlington, and David Morphett, Burlington 1735 

Hedger, Elizabeth, and Michael Morgan, Gloucester 1791 

Hedger, Marabeth, Gloticester, aud Thomas Cheesman, Gloucester ... 1771 

Hedger, Martha, Gloucester, and Peter Cheesman, Gloucester 1760 

Hedges, Elizabeth, Waterford, and Samuel Harnier, Waterford 1735 



May 


25 


April 


23 


Jan. 


19 


Aug. 


9 


July 


29 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


21 


Oct. 


17 


Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


17 


Mar. 


2 


Sept. 


10 


Oct. 


13 


Oct. 


4 


Feb. 


9 


May 


26 


Oct. 


26 


May 


21 


Oct. 


10 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


5 


Oct. 


5 


July 


14 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


17 


Feb. 


17 


Jan. 


2 


Aug. 


1 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


7 


Oct, 


31 


July 


1 


Sept. 


1 


Feb. 


15 


May 


24 


July 


16 


Nov. 


4 


May 


30 


May 


17 


July 


18 


Aug. 


18 


Mar. 


23 


Mar, 


27 


Jan. 


30 


July 


28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



199 



Hedges, Mary, Cape May, and John Taylor, ( 'ape May 1777 Mar. 26 

Heed, Diana, and Richard Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1739 Dec. 13 

Height, Mary, and Rem Vanderbeck, Windsor 1773 Dec. 30 

Heins, Sua, and John White, Woolwich 17 — Oct. 4 

Heldreth, Lidy, Monmouth, and Zebulon Baird, Monmouth 1765 April 11 

Heldrege, Sarah, Monmouth, and Andrew Baird, Monmouth 1762 Oct. 27 

Helldreth, Susannah, Miildletowu, and William Wolley, Shrewsbury. . 1755 Aug. 15 

Hellene, Mary, and Robert McQuown, New Jersey 1745 June 28 

Hellens, Mary, and Jacob Sevens, Mauningtou . 1783 May 1 

Helling, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Jacob Winner, Bucks, Pa 1774 Sept. 29 

Helm, Cornelia, and John Frederick Bauta, Bergen 1769 April 12 

Helm, Magdalen, Up. Penns Neck, and George Somervell, Up. P. N'k. 1771 May 11 

Helm, Margrit, Bergen, aud Abraham Moorasje, Bergen 1760 April 1 

Helme, Sarah, and Edward Dunlap, Sussex 1768 Sept. 23 

Helms, Elizabeth, and William Hamilton, Salem 1783 May 15 

Helms, Margarett, and Archibald Stewart, Sussex 1772 Aug. 29 

Helson, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Ashton, Burlington 1770 June 19 

Hemones, Hidden, Monmouth, and Obadia Laton, Monmouth 1758 Mar. 22 

Henderson, Margaret, and Abraham Montague, Morris. ... 1779 Feb. 25 

Heudersou, Phebe, Monmouth, and John Cochran, Hunterdon 17G3 Sept. 1 

Henderson, Phillis, and Alexander McCrea, Hunterdon 1774 Jan. 8 

Hendricks, Mary, Burlington, and James Burnside, Burlington 1727 July 19 

Hendrickson, Anne, Monmouth, aud David Honge, Monmouth 1761 Dec. 21 

Heudricksou, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Manaring, Salem 1727 Mar. 14 

Hendrickson, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John VanderBilt, Sta'n Isl'd.1754 May 20 

Hendrickson, Hannah, and Robert Spratt, Perth Amboy 1772 April 8 

Hendrickson, Hannah, and John Reeder, Trenton 1783 May 19 

Hendrickson, Jannetie, Somerset, and Mical Vaubueren, Somerset . . 1750 Oct. 15 

Hendrickson, Kathariue, Monmouth, and Jacob Ramsen, Sr., N. York. 1749 Aug. 11 

Hendrickson, Mary, Monmouth, and Cornelius Covenhoven, Monm'th. 1767 July 12 

Hendrickson, Nelly, Middletown, and Jacob Vanmater, Middletown. . . 1756 June 19 

Hendrickson, Nelle, Monmouth, and Elias Golden, Monmouth 1761 July 30 

Hendrickson, Pamelo, aud Joseph Robinson, Gloucester 1782 April 25 

Hendrickson, Sarah, Bergen, and Egbird Vanzile, Paramus 1754 Aug. 30 

Hendrickson, Sarah, and Hezekiah Young, Trenton 1778 Dec. 19 

Henion, Brechie, and Frans Post, Essex 1750 June 1 

Hennyon, Antje, Bergen, and George Ryerson, Bergen 1760 June 21 

Hennion, Antje, Bergen, and Roelef Van Houten, Bergen 1772 Dec. 18 

Hennion, Antje, Bergen, and Cornelius Van Houten, Essex 1773 May 11 

Hennion, Effe, Bergen, aud William Norcross, Bergen 1778 Nov. 16 

Hennion, Jane, and Abraham T. Garrison, Bergen. 1788 June 19 

Henry, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Paul Le boyteulx, Middlesex. . , 1749 Nov. 9 

Henry, Elizabeth, and James Taylor, Trenton 1779 Mar. 10 

Henry, Mary, and Samuel Porch, Gloucester. 1785 Feb. 23 

Hensley, Mary, Bristol, Pa., and Thomas Watson, Bristol, Pa 1764 Jan. 2 

Hepburn, Sarah, and Francis Tautum, Windsor 1762 Mar. 19 



200 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Heppard, Mary, Gloucester, and Jacob Mills, Gloucester 1761 

Heppard, Sarah, Gloucester, and Jonathan Knight, Gloucester 1756 

Hepperd, Ann, Waterford, and Jacob Rowand, Gloucester 1771 

Herber, Rebecca, Burlington, and Dnniel Earling, Burlington 176S 

Herbert, Arney, Monmouth, and James Mott, Monmouth 1752 

Herbert, Anne, Burlington, and John Allen, Burlington 1774 

Herbert, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Cottrel, Middletown 1749 

Herbert, Elizabeth, Upper Freehold, and Abraham Stout, Shrewsbury. 1755 

Herbert, Elizabeth, and Thigh Horner, Monmouth. . 1773 

Herbert, Hannah, and James Whitlock, Monmouth. . . '. 1769 

Herbert, Lydia, and William Brewer, Monmouth 1742 

Herbert, Mary, Middletown, and George Pool, Middletown 1760 

Herbert, Mary, Northampton, and John Norcross, New Hanover 1776 

Herd, Alice, Burlington, and John Forsith, Burlington 1756 

Herd, Mary, Middlesex, and Cyrinius Van Mater, Middletown 1759 

Herdon, Rachel, Bergen, and Jacobus Van Norstraud, New Jersey .. 1747 

Heritage, S;irah, Burlington, and Jacob Carman, Burlington 1771 

Herriman, Hannah, and James Walker, Piscataway 1745 

Herring, Terissa, and Phillip Smith, Maidenhead 1786 

Herriot, Isabela, and Norris Thorp, Perth Amboy 1765 

Herriot, Jennet, and Gershom Vanderberck 1750 

Herriot, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Jonathan Sharp, New Brunswick 1772 
Herriot, Mary, Woodbridge, and Reuben Fitz Randolph, Piscataway. 1757 

Herriot, Jane, Woodbridge, and Thomas Berry, Somerset 1758 

Herritage, Martha, Deptford, and John Williams, Gloucester 1755 

Heruug, Margaret, and Isaac Britton, Hunterdon 1778 

Hervy, Elizabeth, and Valentine Bryant, Hunterdon 1784 

Heulings, Bathsheba, Burlington, and Edward Chapman, Burlington. 1741 

Heulings, Hester, Burlington, and John Newman, Philadelphia 1738 

Heulings, Hetty, Burlington, and James Smith, Burlington 1772 

Hewes, Elizabeth, and Jeremiah Foster, Gloucester .... 1783 

Hewes, Jemimah, Penus Neck, and Benjamin Thomson, Piles Grove. .1764 

Hewes, Patience, and Robert Johnson, Gloucester 1775 

Hewet, Jemimy, and Jeremiah String, Gloucester 1782 

Hewet, Judith, and Stephen Buck, Cape May 1780 

Hewet, Rachel, Cape May, and Francis Taylor, Cape May 1770 

Hewett, Rebecca, and Azariah Orin 1776 

Hewit, Ann, Gloucester, and Laban Longstaff, Gloucester 1744 

Hewit, Anne, and William Howey, Burlington 1783 

Hewit, Esther, and Levi Hand, Cape May 1774 

Hewit, Susannah, Gloucester, and John Richards, Greenwich 1770 

Hewitt, Abigail, and Benjamin Southward, Cumberland 1773 

Hewitt, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Robert Stretchbury, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Hewlett, Rachel, Middlesex, and Joseph Shreve, Monmouth 1771 

Hewlings, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Isaac Merritt, Burlington 1782 

Hewlings, Esther, Burlington, and Seth Lucas, Burlington 1700 



Nov. 


14 


May 


4 


May 


22 


Feb. 


23 


May 


8 


April 


13 


April 


10 


Sept. 


27 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


11 


May 


19 


April 


10 


Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


31 


Dec. 


19 


Aug. 


8 


Oct. 


5 


Dec. 


21 


Oct. 


10 


April 


9 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


8 


Feb. 


8 


Feb. 


8 


May 


25 


April 


25 


April 


17 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


12 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


1 


Sept. 


3 


July 


20 


Mar. 


20 


July 


4 


June 


1 


April 


17 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


4 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


7 


April 


21 


Oct. 


16 


Sept. 


14 


Mar. 


21 


Nov. 


24 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 201 

Hewliugs, Hannah, and Benjamin Lippincott, Burlington 1783 

llewling-, Mary, Burlington, and Moses Lippincott, Burlington 1778 

Hewlings, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Moore, Burlington 1783 

Hewliugs, , Burlington, and Jonathan Crispin, Burlington 1770 

Hews, Elizabeth, and William Freeman, Burlington 1758 

Hews, Louisa, and James Mackafferty, Gloucester 1785 

Hewstice, Hannah, Evesham, and Samuel Reeves, Burlington 1747 

Heyer, Anne, Middletown, and Honnes Vanpelt, Middletown 1755 

Heyer, Sarah, Morris, and Garret Eoff, Morris 1778 

Hibbard, Elizabeth, and Thomas Smith 1701 

Hibbard, Martha 1730 

Hibbard, Rachel, Blockley, Pa., and John Pearson, Darby, Pa 1735 

Hibbs, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and Ralph Smith, Bucks, Pa 1761 

Hibbs, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and Charles Watts, Pennsylvania 1735 

Hibbs, Elizabeth, and Patrick Kelly 1742 

Hibbs, Elizabeth, and William Brooks, Bucks, Pa 1782 

Hickbee, Sarah, Egg Harbor, and John Smith, Gt. Egg Harbor. . . . 1758 
Hickles, Susannah, New B'nsw'k, and William Williamson, Middlesex 1739 

Hickman, Mary, and Henry Jeanes, Salem 1778 

Hickman, Ruth, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Samuel Scull, Gloucester 1745 

Hickman, Theodosia, Burlington, and Peter Kester, Burlington 1773 

Hicks, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Augustin Willett, Bucks, Fa 1770 

Higbee, Alice, and Thomas Land, Burlington 1763 

Higbee, Mary, Hunterdon, and Robert Fearson, Burlington 1764 

Higbee, Sarah, Burlington, and Daniel Bates, Gloucester 1746 

Higbey, Mary, Burlington, and John Heustis, Burlington 1765 

Higby, Alice, and Thomas Somers, New Jersey , . . . 1780 

Higginbottom, Dorothy, Burlington, and Benjamin Furnes, B'lington..l745 

Higgins, Anne, Middlesex, and Robert Davidson, Monmouth 1742 

Biggins, Bridget, Burlington, and John Rhodes, Burlington 1733 

Higgins, Mary, Middlesex, and Isaac Lyons, Charles Co., Md 1757 

Higgins, Sofiah, Essex, and David Oliver, Essex 1760 

Higgs, Anne, and Joseph Brown, Burlington. ... 1750 

Higings, Mary, and Daniel Oilman, Burlington 1762 

Hilderbrand, Elinor, Salem, and Erasmus Kent, Salem 1770 

Hildreth, Phoebe, Cape May, and Matthew Whildiu, Cape May 1771 

Hildreth, Priscella, Cape May, and Shamgar Hand, Cape May 1772 

Hildreth, Prissilla, and Benjamin Southard, Cape May 1789 

Hile, Rebecca, Salem, and Joseph Zane, Salem 1750 

Hill, Ann, Chesterfield, and Samuel Wheatcraft, Chesterfield 177:! 

Hill, Catherine, and Leonard Cam, Morris 1778 

Hill, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Hutchinson, Burlington j 77 1 

Hill, Mary, and George Willhouse, Burlington 1685 

Hill, Mary, and Samuel Reeves 1735 

Hill, Mary, Monmouth, and Joseph Roberts, Monmouth 1764 

Hill, Mary, Hunterdon, and Jedediah Higgins, Hunterdon 1774 



Aug. 


lu 


Oct. 


3 


May 


12 


May 


14 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


13 


Nov. 


20 


June 


17 


Mar. 


19 


July 


9 


Dec. 


10 


June 


5 


Feb. 


14 


Oct. 


3 


Oct. 


7 


Jan. 


■22 


Feb. 


3 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


4 


Oct, 


2 


Nov. 


28 


April 


12 


April 


4 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


3 


Aug. 


23 


Jan. 


25 


( >ct. 


16 


Dec. 


6 


April 


19 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


18 


April 


23 


April 


22 


Feb. 


27 


May 


22 


Dec. 


17 


May 


26 


Oct. 


17 


Feb. 


25 


Nov. 


9 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


3 


May 


17 



2C2 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hill, Rebecca, Salem, and Joseph Zaines, Salem 1750 

Hill, Sarah, and Joshua Thompson, Salem , .. . 1733 

Hill, Sarah, Amwell, and Benjamin Thompson, Amwell 1774 

Hillard, Catherine, Richm'd, N. Y., and Thomas Totten, R'nvd, N. Y. .1760 

Hillegas, Mary, and John Jennings, Philadelphia 1754 

Hilliar, Hannah, and Hugh Costill, Burlington 1787 

Hilliard, Rachel, Burlington, and Levi Sharp, Burlington 1777 

Hillier, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Prise, Evesham 1770 

Hillmau, Amy, and Joseph Crawford, Gloucester 1777 

Hillmau, Elizabeth, and Levi Ellis, Gloucester. 1783 

Hillmau, Laetitia, and John Bates, Gloucester ... 1783 

Hillmau, Margaret, and John Eastlack, Gloucester 1735 

Hillmau, Mary, and James Kobeen, Gloucester 1779 

Hillmau, Sarah, and Isaac Ellis, Gloucester .... 1785 

Hillyard, Mary, Gloucester, aud Abraham Hammitt, Gloucester 1747 

Hillyer, Mary, Burlington, and Jouathan Atkinson, Burlington 1767 

Hilmau, Susanna, and Frederick King, Salem 1751 

Hilyery, Sarah, Gloucester, aud Jobn Hammet, Gloucester 1745 

Hinchman, Abigail, and John Kaighiu, Gloucester 1732 

Hiucbmau, Ann, Evesham, and Israel Small, Evesham 1763 

Hinchman, Ann. and John Scull, Waterford 1773 

Hinchman, Deborah, Gloucester, and William Hepherd, Goucester. . . 1735 

Hinchman, Hannah, Gloucester, and James Gill, Gloucester :1747 

Hinchman, Liticia, Gloucester, and Thomas Thome, New York 1727 

Hinchman, Mary, Gloucester, and Joseph Ellis, Gloucester 1760 

Hinchman, Sarah, Gloucester, and Thomas Bispham, Burlington 1754 

Hinds, Mary, and Patrick Mellon, Bucks Co., Pa 1778 

Hinds, Priscilla, Morris, and Robert Willson, Morristown 1780 

Hingerson, Hannah, Salem, aud Thomas Rowse, Salem 1746 

Hisher, Mary, Chester, and John Worinton, Cb ester 1772 

Hisson, Sarah, and Johu Scott, Shrewsbury 1779 

Hivenor, Margaret, Hopewell, and Philip Snook, Amwell 1773 

Hixson, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Rose, Hunterdon 1779 

Hixson, Sarah, and George Reed, Hunterdon 1781 

Hoar, Catharine, and John Land, Burlington 1778 

Hockley, Mary, Philadelphia, and John Shnbart, Philadelphia 1733 

Hodge, Anne, Salem, and Nicholas Gibbin, Salem 1731 

Hodge, Phoebe, Salem, and Joseph Vanneman, Salem 1769 

Hodges, Jane, Gloucester, and James Dubury, Gloucester 1727 

Hodgins, Anne, and John Hill, Burlington 1770 

Hodgkinson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Smith, Burlington 1780 

Hodson, Aune, Burlington, and James Kemings, Burlington 1727 

Hoff, Abigail, Monmouth, and Beujamin Britten, Middlesex 1762 

Hoff, Ann, aud Leigh Amos, Hunterdon 1782 

Hoff, Charity, and Henry Bowne, Hunterdon 1784 

Hoff, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Andrew Main, Monmouth 1759 



Dec. 


17 


April 


13 


Nov. 


15 


Nov. 


22 


Sept. 


3 


April 


2 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


6 


Julv 


23 


Mar. 


13 


Mar. 


29 


Nov. 


8 


April 


9 


July 


14 


June 


9 


Dec 


7 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


12 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


13 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


1 


May 


28 


July 


29 


Jan. 


1 


Feb. 


18 


April 


3 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 


17 


April 


11 


May 


22 


April 


1 


Jan. 


8 


Jan. 


29 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


24 


Mar. 


16 


Oct. 


4 


June 


19 


June 


2 


Sept. 


28 


July 


21 


July 


15 


Oct. 


23 


June 


30 


Mar. 


20 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 203 

Hoff, Elizabeth, and Noab Reed, Hunterdon 1780 Dec. 9 

Hoff, Frances, and Stacy Taylor, Backs, Pa 1785 Jan. 1 

1 [off, Eannah, Sussex, and Abraham Vanhorn, Sussex. . . 1763 Dec. 9 

Hoff, Lititia, Burlington, ami William Budd, Jr., Burlington 1767 July 18 

Hoff, Mary, Monmouth, and Alexander Clark, Monmouth 1703 Nov. 7 

Hoff, Patience, and Timothy Titus, Hunterdon 1779 Feb. 6 

Hoff, Rebecca, and Peter Brokaw, New Jersey 1783 Dec. 12 

Hoff, Sarah, Trenton, and Thomas Pearson, Burlington 1739 Jan. 29 

Hoff, Theodosia, Kiugwood, and Joseph Stout, Hunterdon. . . 1765 Dec. 11 

Hoffener, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Hannes Jacob Redecker, Shrewsb'y 1751 Dec. 10 

Hoff ham, Margaret, Salem, and Andreas Walty, Salem 17-15-6 Mar. 10 

Hoffman, Elianor, and Richard Ratten, Gloucester 1763 Dec. 15 

Hoffman, Mary, Hunterdon, and Abraham Lane, Hunterdon 1773 Feb. 1 

Hoffman, Mary, and Daniel Keen, Salem 1784 Nov. 7 

Hoffman, Rebecca, and William Bittle, Salem 1781 April 1 1 

Hoffman, Sarah, and Philip Prost, Hunterdon 1778 Feb. 24 

Hoffman, Susanna, and Jacob Halyard, Salem 1767 Nov. 27 

Hoffman, Susannah, Gloucester, and Isaac Shute, Gloucester 1763 Aug. 3 

Hoffmire, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Bower, Hallafax 1767 Feb. 25 

Hoffmire, Lidy, Monmouth, and Lewis Morris, Monmouth 1763 May 30 

Hoffmire, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Holoway, Monmouth 1758 Feb. 10 

Hoffmire, Mener, Middletown, and Benjamin Thorpe, Middletown 1761 Sept. 30 

Hoffmire, Rebecca, Monmouth, and James Rice, Monmouth 1736 Nov. 22 

Heifman, Deborah, Salem, and Francis Batten, Gloucester 1763 Dec. 22 

Hofmire, Mary, Middletown, and Martin Vandyk, Shrewsbury 1759 Mar. 14 

Hogben, Elizabeth, and Jeremiah Sneathen, Alloways Creek 1717 June 13 

Hogeland, Agues, Amwell, and Aaron Warford, Kiugwood 1773 Nov. 29 

Hogeland, Jacomintie, Somerset, and Garret Hogeland, Somerset .... 1742 Aug. 30 

Hogeland, Magdelin, Somerset, and Denis Stryker, Somerset 1746 Dec. 1 

Hogg, Catharine, and Matthew Hixson, Hunterdon 1779 Mar. 8 

Hogg, Mary, Philadelphia, and James Wharton, Philadelphia 1754 Nov. 2 

Hogland, Rebekah, Alexandria, and John Tomson, John. 1784 Mar. 23 

Hogland, Auue, Amwell, and Roleff Sehanck, Amwell 1764 June 14 

Hoglen, Lytie, Somerset, and Richard Compton, Somerset 1749 July 11 

Hogling, Leah, Amwell, and John Pettinger, Amwell 1774 Oct. 10 

Hogsflesh, Dorothy, Pennsylvania, and Jonathan Hood. Pennsylvania. 1727 Oct. 31 

Holbard, Mercy, Burlington, and Ezekial Wright, Burlington 1739 Nov. 1 

Holcomb, Sarah, and Isaac Leech, Pennsylvania 1781 Feb. 6 

Holcombe, Mary, and Thomas Holcombe, Hunterdon .... 17*3 May 21 

Holden, Hannah, Cape May, and Benjamin Taylor, Cape May 1768 Oct. 3 

Holden, Mary, Cape May, and Daniel Hewitt, Cape May 1764 Feb. 1 

Holder, Tacey, Burlington, and William Davidson, Burlington 1716 Oct. I 

Holding, Mary, and Josiah Cresse, Cape May 1737 Sept. 26 

Holeman, Grace, and Philip Colon 1739 Dec. 1 

Holley, Sarah, and Nicholas Simkius, Great Egg Harbour 1775 April 29 

Holliushead, Sarah, and Jonathan Fithian, Salem 1786 Nov. 28 



204 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hollinsett, Nelly, ami Michael Blue 

Hollinshead, Agnes, Burlington, and Samuel Treat, Burlington 1774 

Hollinshead, Eleanor, Salem, and Francis Palmer, Philadelphia 1742 

Hollinshead, Hannah, and Thomas? Gill, Burliugton 1743-4 

Hollinshead, Hannah, Chester, and Peter Ward, Chester 1745 

Hollinshead, Jerusha, and Joseph Hollinshead, Burlington 1759 

Hollinshead, Martha, and Aaron Peterson, Cumberland 1779 

Hollinshead, Sarah, and Samuel Barnes, Salem 1738 

Hollinshead, Zilas, and John Hollinshead, Burlington 1787 

Holloway, Ann, Chesterfield, and Robert Rogers, Middlesex 17G3 

Holloway, Margaret, Gloucester, and Samuel Boggs, Gloucester 1762 

I [i Jit, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and George West, Shrewsbury 1759 

Holm, Phebe, Gloucester, and Aaron Ward, Gloucester 1732 

Holmau, Catherine, and Peter Sunderland, Somerset 1778 

Holmau, Elizabeth, and John Cox, Monmouth 1768 

Holman, Jane, and Henry Vautilbury, Kingston 1778 

Holme, Hannah, Salem, and Benjamin Holme, Jr., Salem 1750 

Holme, Martha, Gloucester, and Jonathan Borden, Gloucester 1754 

Holme, Ruth, Bucks, Pa., and William Shallcross, Bucks, Pa 1733 

Holmes, Agnes, Gloucester, and John Avise, Gloucester 1765 

Holmes, Alice, Freehold, and John Vanbrakle, Freehold 1749 

Holmes, Alice, and Daniel Ketcham, Monmouth 1771 

Holmes, Anna, Cumberland, and Daniel Clark, Cumberland 1761 

Holmes, Catherine, Freehold, and Hendrick Schenck, Freehold 1749 

Holmes, Catharine, and Roeleff Hageatnan, Somerset 1780 

Holmes, Deliverance, Middletown, and William Owen, Middletown. . .1759 

Holmes, Eleanor, and William Terry, Bucks, Pa 1756 

Holmes, Hannah, Shrewsbury, and David Vanschaick, Freehold 1757 

Holmes, Mary, Monmouth, and Peter Imlay, Monmouth 1 7 < > 2 

Holmes, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Ellison, Middlesex . 1762 

Holmes, Rebecca, and Asher Cox, Monmouth 1768 

Holmes, Rebeckah, Middletown, and Gisbert Tice, Freehold 1756 

Holmes, Rhode, Middletown, and John Schanck, Middletown 1772 

Holmes, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Throckmorton, Monmouth 17;i9 

Holmes, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Saltar, Monmouth 1756 

Holmes, Susanna, Middlesex, and John Tillyer, New Jersey : . . 1715 

Holmes, Alice, and Richard Perry, Northampton 1757 

Bolstead, Easter, Shrewsbury, and Layton Romine, Shrewsbury 17(12 

Holstead, Saray, Monmouth, and Jonathan Emons, Monmouth 1767 

Hoisted, Rebeckah, Shrewsbury, and Thomas Wainright, Shrewsbury. 1762 

Hoisted, Abigail, Monmouth, and James Russell, Monmouth 1741 

Holston, Margarett, Pilesgrove, and Robert Plnmmer, Pilesgrove 1769 

Holt, Dorcas, Philadelphia, and Arthur Buchanan, Lancaster, Pa 173S 

Holt, Elinor, and Joseph Chew, Philadelphia 1742 

Holt, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Isaac Walton, Philadelphia 1737 

Holton, Bridget, and William Homman, Gloucester 1756 



Oct. 


13 


Feb. 


10 


Jan. 


9 


Feb. 


28 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


25 


Ma t 


20 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


28 


April 


21 


May 


15 


July 


22 


May 


25 


Jan. 


1 


July 


14 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


25 


April 


11 


April 


8 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


27 


Aug. 


11 


Feb. 


28 


Sept, 


9 


April 


6 


May 


26 


May 


23 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


9 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


25 


Dec. 


24 


April 


3 


April 


18 


Sept. 


14 


Dec. 


4 


Sept. 


9 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


5 


Oct. 


24 


July 


22 


Dec. 


13 


Aug. 


25 


Dec. 


16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 205 

Holwey, Mary, Middlesex, and Henry Lake, Middlesex .1740 

Soman, Mary, Gloucester, audJeremiah Adams Gloucester 1738 

Homer, Peggy, and Nicholas Lundbek 1783 

Horice, Allet, Freehold, and William Adudell, Freehold - 1767 

Honce, Phebe, Freehold, and Joseph Wood, Freehold 1766 

Hood, Deborah, Philadelphia, and John Johnson, Philadelphia 1732 

Hood, Mary, Chester, Pa., and Henry Clarke, Chester, Pa 1731 

Hood, Rachel, Cumberland, and Samuel .Harris, Cumberland 17(!1 

Hooff, Henrietta, and Benjamin Ford, Chester, Pa 1784 

Hooghland, Mary, and Peter Montfort, Somerset 1783 

Hoogland, Abigail, Hunterdon, and Isaac Deuiott, Hunterdon.. 1770 

Hoogland, Jenny, S »merset, and Cornelius Nevius, Somerset 1783 

Hoogland, Mary, and John Fisher, Hunterdon 1778 

Hoogland, Phebe, Sussex, and Vincent Dey, Middlesex 1775 

Hoogland, Phcebe, and John Simonson, Somerset 1781 

Hooper, Anne, Middlesex, and Isaac Cubberly, Burlington 1749 

Hooper, Anne, and Henry Perine, Middlesex . . 1769 

Hooper, Isabella, and John Johnston, Perth Amboy 1708 

Hooper, Lueretia, Northampton, and John Pippit, Northampton 1784 

Hooper, Mary, and Robert Thompson 1779 

Hooper, Rachel, Burlington, and Samuel Murrell, Burlington 1749 

Hooper, Sarah, Kingsbury, and William Pidgeon. Trenton 1758 

Hoper, (?), and Abraham- Ackerman, Bergen . . 1704 

Hopewell, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Benjamin Cooper, Gloucester. . .1759 

Hopewell, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Cox, Burlington 1775 

Hopewell, Martha, and Aaron Bryan, Burlington 1783 

Hopewell, Mary, Burlington, and Jabez Eldredge, Burlington 1776 

Hopewell, Mary, Burlington, and James Hayburn, Philadelphia 1781 

Hopewell, Sarah, Gloucester, and Jeremiah Jones, Gloucester 1759 

Hopkins, Martha, Salem, and John McKoan, Salem 1701 

Hopkison, Margaret, Burlington, and Thomas Wright, Burlington . . 1729 

Hoppe, Aaltie, Bergen, and John Hoppe, Bergen 1771 

Hoppe, Catharine, Bergen, and Audries Hoppie, Bergen 1773 

Hopper, Abigail, Bergen, and Andrew Christie, Bergen 1768 

Hopper, Adriange, and Jacobus Beam, Bergen 1790 

Hopper, Ann, and John Van Nortwick, Somerset 1783 

Hopper, Charity, and Garret A. Ackerman, Bergen.. 1790 

Hopper, Gesche, and Jacob Demarest, Bergen 1788 

Hopper, Hester, and Jacob Banta, Bergen 1789 

Hopper, Margaret, and Garret Hopper, Bergen 1780 

Hopper, Maritie, Hackensack, and Isaac Vangieson, Hackensack 1744 

Hopper, Mary, and Thomas Chappie, Bergen 17*7 

Hopper, Polly, Bergen, and Joost Zabriskie, Bergen. 1772 

Hopper, Sarah, Deptford, and Charles West, Deptford . 1772 

Hopper, Sarah, and Richard Borden, Gloucester 17** 

Hoppman, Elizabeth, Salem, and Elijah Barber, Gloucester 1772 April 13 



Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


5 


Nov. 


13 


Aug. 


29 


July 


24 


July 


21 


Nov. 


18 


Aug. 


25 


May 


6 


May 


9 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


12 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


7 


April 


19 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


17 


Mar. 


29 


Oct. 


6 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


2 


Dec. 


26 


Dec. 


30 


Dec. 


24 


May 


3 


Jan. 


13 


Sept. 


18 


July 


20 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


20 


Oct. 


16 


Aug. 


•_> 


June 


23 


Dec. 


16 


April 


17 


Mar. 


17 


Aug. 


2 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


19 


Jnue 


16 


Dec. 


1 



206 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hoppock, Catharine, Hunterdon, and Jacob Fulper, Hunterdon 1774 

Horn, Elizabeth, and John Cavanagb, Hunterdon 1779 

Horn, Ellinnor, Upper Freehold, and Legget Smith, Upper Freehold 1762 
Horn, Hannah, Raritan Landing, and Joseph French, New Jersey. . . . 1749 

Horn, Hesther, Monmouth, and Martin Mirs, Monmouth 1762 

Horn, Jane, Monmouth, and John Perkins, Monmouth 1738 

Horn, Judah, and George Peterson, Gloucester 1781 

Home, Joan, Burlington, and Robert Ingall, Burlington ] 684 

Horner, Ann, and Robert Heaton, Burlington 1795 

Horner, Anna, and Thomas Scott, Woolwich 1771 

Horner, Deliverance, and George Clevinger. Burlington 1737 

Homer, Hannah, Burlington, and James Garwood, Burlington. ...... 1756 

Homer, Mary, Burlington, and Isaac Walker, Burlington 1728 

Horner, Mary, and John Clevenger, Monmouth 1760 

Horner, Mary, and John Miller, Monmouth 1761 

Horner, Rachel, and Charles Taylor, Burlington 1736 

Horner, Rebecca, Burlington, and Jonathan Borden, Jr.. Burlington .1743 

Horner, Sarah, and Moses Lambert, Monmouth 1737 

Homes, Hope, Gloucester, and John Small, Deptford 1767 

Hornet, Phebe, Middlesex, and Ephraim Jones, Middlesex 1773 

Hornor, Charity, and Jacob Grigling, Monmouth 1759 

Horseneld, Mary, Monmouth, and Emir Jackson, Monmouth 1739 

Horseman, Hannah, Monmouth, and Richard Bartley, Moninouth 1744 

Horsfield, Martha, and John Hunt, Hunterdon 1768 

Horsfield, Mary, Long Island, N. Y., and John Middagh, L. I., N. Y. . 1760 

Horsley, Mary, Salem, and William Pope, Salem 17U2 

Horsman, Mary, Monmouth, and James Jackson, Monmouth 1749 

Hort, Elizabeth, Burlington, and S domon Eldridge, Burlington 1744 

Hort, Lydia, Burlington, and John Hore, Burlington 1736 

Hort, Mary, and Gabriel Puneo. 1749 

Hortmaun, Christian, and William Golden, 'Hunterdon. . 1777 

Hortmau, Martha, Gloucester, and James Blight, Gloucester 1729 

Horton, Esther, and William Bush, S >merset , 1777 

Hosea, Marey, and James Stephenson, Cumberland 1778 

Hosel, Sarah, Salem, and William Lock, Gloucester. 1772 

Hosher, Barshabe, and Cumlass String, Great Egg Harbour 1762 

Hoskins, Rachel, Burlington, and Richard Milliken, Burlington 1759 

Hotchson, Sarah, and John Biggerlee, Bucks, Pa 1755 

Houghf, Martha, and David Bunting, Bucks, Pa 1757 

Houghton, Alee, and Abraham Stout, Hunterdon 1774 

Houghton, Eve, and John Schenck, Middlesex ... 1768 

Houghton, Mary, and Arthur Sutphen, Somerset 1779 

Houll, Jane, Freehold, and James Van Kirk, Freehold 1767 

Hoult, Sarah, and Edward Eglington, Byllingsport 1685 

House, Mary, Mount Holly, and Patrick Quigg, Mount Holly. 1772 

Housel, Agnis, and James Saltar, Amwell 1785 



May 


7 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


29 


Jan. 


3 


Oct. 


4 


June 


5 


Sept. 


29 


July 


4 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


12 


July 


19 


May 


22 


Dec. 


4 


Mar. 


9 


July 


21 


June 


15 


Sept. 


M 


Sept. 


12 


June 


11 


July 


19 


May 


5 


Oct. 


19 


July 


13 


May 


18 


July 


9 


Nov. 


2 


May 


26 


Dec. 


31 


Dec. 


27 


Sept. 


14 


June 


28 


July 


23 


June 


18 


May 


10 


Sept. 


24 


Dec. 


6 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


16 


Feb. 


24 


Jan. 


19 


April 


2 


Oct. 


14 


Sept, 


19 


May 


11 


May 


28 


Jan. 


is 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 207 

Houseman, Christian, Springfield, and Peter Slim, Burlington 1759 April 12 

Houseman, Mariche, and Michael B. Terhune, Bergen 1790 July 24 

Houysman, Mary, Bergen, and Cornelius Taleman T Bergen 1760 April 7 

How, Martha, Burlington, and Abell Scull, Gloucester 17-19 April 1(1 

Howard, Mary, and Richard Watson, Burlington 1750 Aug. 13 

Howard, Rebecca, and .Joseph Soper, New Jersey 1779 Feb. 2 

Howe, Martha, Trenton, and William Lowrey, Hunterdon 1779 Dec. 31 

Howel, Raphe), and James Gardenner, Gloucester 1781 Feb. 16 

Howell, Abigail, and John Guild, Hunterdon 1780 Dec. 29 

Howell, Auue, Burlington, and Walter Reeve, Burlington 1G82 Nov. 11 

Howell, Aune, Woodbridge, and William Walker, Woodbridge 1741-42 Mar. 23 

Howell, Mary, and George Pasco, Jamaica, "West Indies 1773 July 5 

Howell, Pheebe, and John Scudder, Trenton 1733 Feb. 2 

Howell, Pheebe, Hunterdon, and Job Phillips, Hunterdon 1764 April 13 

Howell, Rachel, Salem, and James Cahalin, Salem 1761 Sept. 9 

Howell, Ruth, and John Caunaday 1 780 Nov. 28 

Howell, Sarah, and John Sparks, Deptford 1773 Jan. 28 

Howell, Sarah, and John Dowdney, Cumberland 1773 Nov. 20 

Howell, Tamon, and Richard Bond, Cumberland .1781 Dec. 28 

Howgen, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and Philip Fall, Perth Amboy 1757 Nov. 9 

Howlan, Ruth, Monmouth, and John Allen, Monmouth 1755 Feb. 26 

Howie, Mary, Burlington, and Ihomas Wood, Burlington 1685 Nov. 3 

Howton, Mary, Gloucester, and Caleb Hewitt, Gloucester 1763 May 31 

Hoyle, Michael, Philadelphia, and John Read, Philadelphia 1737 July 30 

Hubbell, Elizabeth, Elizabethtown, and Thomas Skinner, Perth Amb'y. 1750 Feb. 2 

Hubbs, Mary, and John Bishop, Gloucester 1778 Nov. 31 

Huber, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Reeves, Burlington 1770 Sept. 29 

Huckings, Mary, Salem, and John Alen, Salem 1686 Aug. 10 

Huckings, Susanna, Salem, and Seger Garrison, Salem 1738 May 30 

Hude, Ann, and Ravaud Kearney, Middlesex 1766 Dec. 31 

Hudger, Judith, and Ellis Hughes, Cape May 1786 Dec. 7 

Hudges, Judith, and Nathaniel Foster, Cape May 1787 Oct. 5 

Hudleson, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and George Walker, Bucks, Pa. . . . 1761 Dec. 2 

Hudnot, Rachal, and James Larasou 1783 Oct, 11 

Hudson, Ann, Salem, and Samuel Woodhouse, Salem 1699 Jan. 22 

Hudson, Hannah, Philadelphia, and Abel Preston, Philadelphia 1731 Sept. 29 

Hudson, Hannah, Salem, and Thomas Dickeson, Salem 1773 Oct. 19 

Hudson, Sarah, Philadelphia, and John Langdale, Philadelphia 1737 Dee. Hi) 

Hues, Ann, and William Shute, Gloucester 1750 April 21 

Hueston, Agnes, and Patrick Story, Sussex 1777 Dec. 6 

Huff, Ann, and Matthew Colsher, Somerset 1768 Nov. 14 

Huff, Rachel, and Abraham Prall, Amwell 1772 Sept. 9 

Huffmire, Catharine, Middletown, and Samuel Romine, Shrewsbury. . 1762 Dec. 9 

Hugg, Ann, Gloucester, and John Heritage, Burlington. . 1741 Aug. 22 

Hugg, Ann, and John Hampton, Gloucester 1782 Oct. 15 

Hugg, Hannah, Burlington, and William Ashburu, Burlington 1750 July 1 



208 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hugg, Hannah, Northampton, and Lawrence Webster, Evesham 1764 

Hugg, Hannah, Gloucester, and Thomas Ashton, Gloucester 1771 

Hugg, Lizy, New Jersey, and Robert F. Price, New Jersey 1766 

Hugg, Patience, Gloucester, and John Estlack, Gloucester 1741 

Hugg, Priscilla, Gloucester, and John Chattin, Gloucester 1740 

Hugg, Sarah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Bates, Gloucester 1766 

Hugh, Mary, Chester, Pa., and Jeremiah Ellis, Chester, Pa 1734 

Hughes, Dorcas, Gloucester, and Abraham Chattin, Gloucester 1752 

Hughes, Elizabeth, and William Peterson, Salem 1746 

Hughes, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Andrew Kind, Gloucester 1768 

Hughes, Elizabeth, and Timothy Brandreth, Cape May 1776 

Hughes, Elizabeth, and John Hugg, Gloucester 1779 

Hughes, Esther, and Thomas Anderson, Sussex 1781 

Hughes, Experience, Cape May, and John Crowell, Cape May 1770 

Hughes, Hannah, and William Fenton, Burlington 1773 

Hughes, Judith, Cape May, and Jacob Spicer, Cape May 1738 

Hughes, Judith, and Richard Matthews, Cape May 1772 

Hughes, Martha, and Memucam Hughes, Cape May 1761 

Hughes, Martha, Cape May, and Beuben Swain, Cape May 1766 

Hughes, Martha, and John Holson, Salem 1777 

Hughes, Mary, < 'ape May, and Jesse Hughes, Cape May 1763 

Hughes, Mercy, and Asbury Smith, Cape May 1789 

Hughes, Rachel, and John Lippincott, Burlington 1779 

Hughes, Sarah, and John Stotesbury, Sussex 1783 

Hughes, Susannah, Cape May, and Elisha Bancroft, Cape May 1773 

Hughes, Zeruiah, Cape May, and David Bowen, Cumberland 1775 

Hughs, Dorothy, Gloucester, and John Allaways, Burlington 1740 

Hugins, Barbary, Salem, and Samuel Barber, Salem 1761 

Hulet, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Daniel Applegate, Monmouth. . . . 1745 

Hulet, Hannah, Monmouth, and Elias King, Monmouth 1757 

Hulet, Margaret, Monmouth, aud Samuel Edwards, Monmouth 1749 

Hulett, Mary, Monmouth, and Christopher Jones, Monmouth 1745 

Hulit, Johannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Morris, Monmouth 1755 

Hulit, Rachel, Monmouth, and Jeremiah Brown, Monmouth 1755 

Hull, Anne, Middlesex, and William Jewell, Middlesex 1745 

Hull, Anne, Mendham, and Joseph Hill, Bucks, Pa 1783 

Hull, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Dayton, Essex 1746 

Hull, Esther, Middlesex, aud John Story, Middlesex 1741 

Hull, Hannah, Piscataway, and Thomas Aspinwall, Piscataway 1743 

Hull, Keziah, Middlesex, and Nathaniel Atchley, Middlesex 1764 

Hull, Lydia, Middlesex Co., and Awry Lougstreet, Middlesex 1754 

Hull, Mary, Middlesex, and John Predmore, Burlington 1767 

Hull, Rhoda, Middlesex, and John Martin, Middlesex. 1752 

Hulse, Ann, Monmouth, and John Brewer, Monmouth 1764 

Hulse, Phebe, Monmouth, and William A'annest, Monmouth 1740 

Hummer, Catharine, and John Pox, Hunterdon . 1778 



Mar. 


22 


June 


19 


Aug. 


6 


Aug. 


1 


May 


15 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


7 


April 


28 


June 


12 


April 


18 


Dec. 


11 


April 


27 


Nov. 


13 


Feb. 


13 


July 


29 


June 


10 


July 


10 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


3 


Mar. 


24 


June 


14 


Nov. 


9 


Sept. 


20 


July 


12 


April 


7 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


1 


May 


16 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


27 


Oct. 


2 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


2 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


7 


July 


19 


April 


5 


Aug. 


1 


July 


28 


July 


2 


May 


6 


Jan. 


20 


Apiil 


22 


Mar. 


1 


Sept. 


22 


May 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 209 

Humphreys, EiRchel, and William Fenirnore, Burlington 1742 

Humphries, Anna, Burlington, and Thomas Ellis, Gloucester 17(35 

II unloke, Martha, and Hugh Muddy 1701 

Hnnloke, Mary, and Nelin Randall, Burlington 1734 

llunn, Judith, Monmouth, and Uriah Carl, Monmouth * 1755 

Hunt, Abigail, Monmouth, and Hendrick Brewer, Monmouth 1763 

Hunt, Ann, Salem, and Mark Reeve, Salem 1686 

Hunt, Catherine, and John Marsh, Middlesex 1767 

Hunt, Catherine, aud Jacob Anderson, Hunterdon 1785 

Hunt, Charity, and John Forman, Hunterdon 1770 

Hunt, Charily, and Gidion De Camp. Hunterdon 1773 

Huut, Charity, aud Johu Drake, Hunterdon 1779 

Hunt, Deborah, and Daniel Christopher, Hunterdon 1785 

Hunt, Elizabeth, and Euoch Northrop 1769 

Hunt, Elizabeth, and James Johnston. Cumberland. 1778 

Huut, Hannah, and William Bainbridge, Hunterdon 1777 

Huut, Hannah, Maidenhead, aud Joseph Smith, Trenton 1778 

Hunt, Jemimah, aud William Ely, Trenton 1731 

Hunt, Keziah, Hunterdon, and Stephen Biles, Hunterdon 1737 

Huut, Margaret, aud James Wilson, Amwell 1779 

Huut. Mary, and Isaac Hill, Hunterdon 1781 

Huut, Merry, aud George Jones, Essex 1768 

Hunt, Penelope, aud John Leahy, Hunterdon ... 1784 

Huut, Phebe, and John Furman, Hunterdon 1779 

Hunt Ruth, aud Stephen Hunt, Hunterdon 1787 

Huut, Sarah, and John Bell, Hunterdon 1769 

Hunt, Sarah, aud Jesse Hunt, Hunterdon 1781 

Hunt, Susannah, and Pallmer Phillips, Hunterdon 1783 

Hunter, Auu, Salem, and James Dunlap, Salem 1746 

Hunter, Catherine, Sussex, and William Hendershot, Sussex 1773 

Hurff, Ursulla, Gloucester, and David Roe, Gloucester 1767 

Hurley, Susannah, and Joseph Perry, Gloucester 1785 

Hurst, Elizabeth, and John Githens, Gloucester 1774 

Hurst, Elenor, and Wilmon Whildin, Cape May 1764 

Hurtsman, Susanna, Burlington, and Philip Hack, Burlington 1783 

Husbands, Catherine. Monmouth, and Benjamin Woolley, Jr., Mou'th. 1750 
Hiisbands, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Daniel Jefferies, Moumouth 1743-4 
Husbands, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and Silas Woolley, Shrewsbury . . . 1752 

Hussey, Rebecca, aud Oweus Lemuer, Staten Island 1745 

Husted, Elizabeth, aud Richard Whitecar, Cumberland 1756 

Huston, Elenor, and William Smith, Trenton 1778 

Hutch, Elizabeth, Mansfield, aud Joseph Shreve, Mansfield 1750 

Hutchasou, Mary, aud William Ely, Middlesex 1767 

Hutchen, Sarah, and John Eick, Huuterdou 1782 

Hutchin, Mary, Burlington, and Benjamin Fennimore, Burlington . . . 1774 

Hutchin, Sarah, Burliugton, and Content Homer, Monmouth 1738 

14 



Sept. 


18 


April 


9 


May 


6 


July 


18 


July 


9 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


3 


April 


22 


Feb. 


25 


Juue 


10 


Sept. 


11 


Feb. 


20 


Sept. 


18 


Oct. 


9 


Sept. 


23 


May 


24 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


25 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


25 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


7 


Mar. 


30 


May 


12 


May 


5 


June 


30 


May 


21 


Jan. 


24 


Dec. 


24 


July 


24 


Feb. 


24 


Oct. 


31 


Aug. 


8 


Jan. 


6 


April 


2 


Feb. 


1 


April 


27 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


7 


May 


31 


Aug. 


28 


Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


4 


Oct, 


31 



2IO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hutchins, Margery, Burlington, and Thomas Ellis, Burlington 1740 

Hutchins, Rebecca, and James Clayton, Burlington 1771 

Hutcbinsou, Abigail, and Daniel Dye, Middlesex 1773 

Hutchinson, Anne, and William Updike, Middlesex 1761 

Hutchinson, Anne, and Joseph Wood, Upper Freehold 1768 

Hutchinson, Catharine, and Morris Cox, Monmouth 1773 

Hutchinson, Elizabeth, and William Stout, Burlington 1780 

Hutchinson, Margaret, and Andrew Sim 1700-1 

Hutchinson, Mary, Greenwich, and John Orin, Greenwich 1747 

Hutchinson, Mary, Alloways Creek, and Philip Penton, Alloways Cr'k. 1749 

Hutchinson, Mary, and John Robins, Upper Freehold 1768 

Hutchinson, Rachel, and John Rinnan, Monmouth 1770 

Hutchinson, Rebecca, and Timothy Merrick, Bristol, Pa 1783 

Hutchinson, Susannah, and Joseph Collins, Gloucester 1784 

Huron, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Benjamin Laughton, Cape May. 1739-40 

Huttotn, Ruth, Gloucester, and Thomas Clark, Gloucester 1746 

Hutton, Eleanor, and Morris Hay, Burlington 1758 

Hutson, Rachel, Cumberland, and Enoch Moore, Cumberland 1762 

Huysman, Agnes, Bergen, and Hendrick Vangieson, Hackensack. ... 1768 

Hyde, Martha, and Josiah Smith, Hunterdon 1782 

Hyer, Johanuah, Monmouth, and Daniel Hall, Monmouth 1746 

MALES. * 

Ichmormeau, John, Hunterdon, and Rachel Lenuord 1780 

Ickle, Jacob, Gloucester, and Sarah Coffey, Gloucester 1763 

Imlay, Isaac, Monmouth, and Mary Lawrence 1781 

Imlay, John, Hunterdon, and Jane King, Hunterdon 1764 

Imlay, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth De Bow 1773 

Imlay, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Ann English 1771 

Imlay, Peter, Monmouth, and Mary Holmes, Monmouth 1762 

Imlay, Peter, Monmouth, and Euphemia Reading 1772 

Imlay, Robert, Monmouth, and Margaret Starkey, Monmouth 1741 

Indicott, John, Burlington, and Mary Gosling, Burlington 1728 

Indicott, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Gillam 1736 

Ingall, Robert, Burlington, and Joan Home, Burlington 1684 

Ingersol, Daniel, Gloucester, and Hannah Dole 1773 

Ingersol. Ebenezer, Cape May, and Mary Scull 1761 

Ingersoll, Joseph, Gloucester, and M iry Risley, Gloucester 1743 

Ingersol, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Townsend 1766 

Ingerson, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Hannah Dole, Gloucester 1728 

Iugerson, Benjamin, Gloucester, aud Susannah Steelman 1738 

Ingerson, Isaac, Gloucester, and Jemima Read 1775 

Ingledew, Blackston, Philadelphia, and Mary Mickle, Gloucester. 1736 

Ingliedue, Blackstone, Bucks, Pa., and Anne Rue 1761 

Inglis, Thomas, Perth Amboy. and Elizabeth Louf berry, Perth Amboy. 1740 
Inglish, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Wetherill 1741 



July 12 

Aug. 8 

Mar. 24 

Nov. 10 

Nov. 30 

June 21 

Dec. 27 

Jan. 21 

May 2 

Jan. 16 

Aug. 23 

Feb. 28 

April 5 

May 4 

Feb. 23 

Aug. 20 

Sept. 13 

Nov. 22 

May 19 

Dec. 8 

Dec. 3 



Aug. 15 
Mar. 28 
Oct. 10 
Oct. 24 
Feb. 24 
April 5 
Jan. 25 
April 13 
Jan. 26 
Mar. 22 
May 12 
July 4 
Dec. 27 
April 24 
June 13 
Feb. 15 
Jan. 28 
June 23 
April 12 
Dec. 9 
May 20 
Dec. 10 
May 10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



21 I 



Ingram, Benjamin, Cape May, and Sarah Hand, Cape May 

Ingram, John, Capo May, and Hannah Woodruff 

Iuk, Peter, Bucks, Pa., and Zihyah Wilkinson, Bucks, Pa. 

Innman, Stephen, Monmouth, and Charity Spragg 

Iutnau, Aaron, Monmouth, and Rachel Grant, Monmouth 

Iuiuan, Abel, Burlington, and Sarah Connarro, Burlington 

Iuman, Benjamin, Burlington, and Jemima Brundidge, Burlington.., 

Inman, Job, Monmouth, and Pheebe Havens, Monmouth 

Inskeep, Abraham, Gloucester, and Sarah Ward, Gloucester 

Iuskeep, Johu, Burlington, and Elizabeth Buchanan 

Inskeep, James, Gloucester, and Mary Pattison, Evesham 

Inskeep, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Matlack, Burlington 

Inskeep, Joseph, Salem, and Hannah McCulloch, Salem 

Inslee, Elisha, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Gach, AVoodbridge 

Inslee, Jonathan, Jr., Woodbridge, and Grace Moore, Woodbridge. . . . 

Inslee, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Liscomb 

Irelan, Joseph. Cumberland, and Judith Johnson, Cumberland 

Irelan, Micajah, Cumberland, and Prudence Bacon, Cumberland 

Ireland, Amos, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Cordwry 

Ireland, Daniel, Gloucester, aud Phebe Steelman 

Ireland, Hezekiab, Gt. Egg Harbour and Mary Dickson, Gt. Egg H'r 

Ireland, John. Gloucester, and Elizabeth Price 

Ireland, Jonathan, Gloucester, aud Mary Gwin. ... 

Ireland, Joseph, Gloucester, and Ruth Coderry, Gloucester 

Ireland, Joseph, Cumberland, aud Phebe Ireland, Cumberland 

Ireland, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Townsend 

Ireland, Reuben, Gloucester, and Deborah Gaudy, Gloucester.. . . 

Ireton, Bedkar, Hunterdon, and Abigail Stockton, Hunterdon 

Ireton, Johu, Burlington, and Hannah Stockton, Burlington 

Ireton, Obadiah, Burlington, and Vashtie Fenton. . . 

Ireton, Samuel, Burlington, and Achsah King 

Ireton, William, Burlington, and Anne Reynolds, Burlington , 

Irick, John, Burlington, and Mary Sailor, Burlington 

Irick, John, Burlington, and Mary Shinu 

Irons, Francis, Cape May, and Eunas Hand 

Irons, James, Jr., Monmouth, and Nelle Longstreet, Monmouth. . . . 

Irviu, Edward, Gloucester, and Sarah Woodath, Gloucester 

Irwin, Arthur, 29th Reg. of Foot, Sarah Simmons 

Irwin, James, Gloucester, and Sarah Chambers, Burlington 

Irwin, Thomas, Princeton, and Francis Paterson, Princeton 

Islestine, Jacob, Perth Amboy, aud Phebe Cawood, Woodbridge 

Iselstine, Matthias, Jr., Perth Ambsy, and Aun Wilson, Perth Amboy, 

Iselstine, Robert, aud Hannah Loofbourrow, Woodbridge 

Iselstine, Samuel, Middlesex, and Martha Nevill, Middlesex 

Islow, Isaac, Northampton, and Anne Shinn, Northampton 

Iszard, John, Cape May, and Mary Smith 



1759 


Oct. 


25 


1780 


Dec. 


26 


1769 


Nov. 


28 


1782 


April 


8 


1747 


June 


1 


1750 


July 


23 


1739 


Sept. 


11 


177-1 


Dec. 


15 


1740 


Dec. 


10 


1758 


June 


26 


1747 


Sept. 


22 


1728 


1 ec. 


19 


1756 


Oct. 


5 


1744 


Aug. 


18 


1742 


Nov. 


23 


1779 


Feb. 


4 


1776 


April 


24 


1776 


May 


1 


1781 


July 


2 


1771 


July 


15 


.1758 


July 


24 


1778 


Dec. 


3 


1777 


Dec. 


13 


1727 


Sept. 


18 


1762 


Nov. 


9 


1767 


April 


21 


1744 


Dec. 


15 


1765 


Mar. 


29 


1762 


May 


23 


1754 


Jan. 


21 


1779 


April 


3 


1764 


Oct. 


1 


1761 


Feb. 


28 


1781 


Feb. 


26 


1774 


Oct. 


5 


.1752 


May 


23 


1727 


Nov. 


23 


1770 


Nov. 


9 


1744 


Nov. 


1 


,1768 


Aug. 


30 


1719 


May 


23 


,1759 


Sept. 


25 


1 756 


April 


27 


1763 


July 


23 


1781 


Sept. 


15 


1770 


Dec. 


11 



212 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Iszard, Eeeves, Cape May, and Marcy Cressey, ('ape May 1761 

Iszard, Simeon, Cape May, and Margaret Tompson 1774 

Ital, John George, Monmouth, and Mary Williams, Monmouth 1761 

Ivins, Aaron, Burlington, and Aun Cheshire, Burlington 1764 

Ivins, Barzillia, Burlington, and Margaret Trendwell, Burlington . . . 1767 

Ivins, Daniel, Burlington, and Theodosia Hammell 1777 

Ivins, David, Burlington, and Deleh Conover 1783 

Ivins, Isaac, Burlington, and Sarah Johnson 1711 

Ivins, John, Burlington, and Mary Lovett, Burlington 1776 

Ivins, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Everingham 1741 

Ivins, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Piatt ... 1766 

Ivins, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Applegate 1779 

Ivins, Solomon, Burlington, and Elizabeth Everingham, Burlington. . 1742 

Ivins, Solomon, Burlington, and Susannah Bockhill, Burlington 3 770 

Ivins, William, Burlington, and Priscilla Page, Burlington 1767 

Ivins, William, Burlington, and Mary French . ... 1773 

Izburn, John, and Ann Smallwood 1767 

FEMALES. ■*• 

Imlay, Alice, and Moses Bunnel, Monmouth 1749 

Imlay, Margaret, Monmouth, and Peter Tilton, Monmouth 1745 

Imlay, Margaret, and Abraham Chapman, Burlington 1767 

Imlay, Mary, Monmouth, and Ebenezer Applegate, Monmouth 1743 

Imlay, Theodocia, and Thomas Hittzheimer, Philadelphia 1792 

Imley, Lucy, and William Taylor, Upper Freehold 1768 

Imley, Parthena, and Jacob Cowgill, Burlington 1777 

Ingersall, Rachel, Burlington, and Uriah French. Burlington 1771 

Ingersol, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Joseph Edwards, Cape May 1752 

Ingersol, Hannah, Gloucester, and Andrew Steelman, Gt. Egg Harb'r.1747 

Ingersoll, Elender, Gloucester, and John Camp, Gloucester 1740 

Ingerson, Mary, and Jonathan Addoms, Gloucester 1774 

Iugerson, Mary, and Andrew Lake, Gloucester 1777 

Ingerson, Susanna, and Joseph Edwards, Cape May 1776 

Ingerson, Suzanah, and Elijah Townsend, Great Egg Harbour 1 774 

Ingle, Hannah, Evesham, and Josiah Sharp, Evesham 1770 

Ingle, Sarah, Burlington., and William Hackney, Burlington 1770 

Ingler, Elizabeth, and Moses Adams, Mansfield 1772 

Inglis, Abigail, Perth Amboy, and Robert Eastburn, Charlestown, S. C.1768 

Inglis, Anna, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Noe, Perth Amboy 1761 

Inglish, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Moses Laird, Monmouth 1765 

Ingliss, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and John Smith, Perth Amboy 1742 

Iugosol, Jean, Gloucester, and Nicholas Soey, Gloucester 1743 

Ingursoll, Elisabeth, and Ruddack Townsend, Gloucester 1765 

Ingram, Sarah, Cape May, and George Hand, Cape May 1771 

Ingnum, Charity, Cape May, and William Billings, Cape May 1736 

Inmau, Phebe, and John Sanders Stratton, Evesham 1779 



Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


12 


May 


7 


Oct, 


8 


July 


25 


Jan. 


8 


April 


26 


Mar. 


26 


Oct, 


22 


Dec. 


20 


Jan. 


11 


Nov. 


22 


May 


25 


Aug. 


1 


April 


7 


Nov. 


9 


Dec. 


12 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


1 


July 


9 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


3 


Nov. 


15 


June 


29 


Aug. 


1 


June 


3 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


21 


Dec. 


11 


Dec. 


9 


Oct, 


24 


Aug. 


16 


Apri' 


16 


Sept 


12 


May 


6 


Oct. 


3 


Sept 


4 


July 


29 


Nov. 


9 


July 


25 


June 


3 


Feb. 


19 


June 


14 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Insby, Jane, 1 Essex, aud Denis Dwyer, Woodbridge 1758 

Inskeep, Anne, Burlington, and John English, Jr., Gloucester. 1749 

Inskeep, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Tonkin, Burlington 1765 

Inskeep, Hope, and Samuel Jaggard, Gloucester 1785 

Inskeep, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Wright, Burlington 1747 

Inskeep, Mary, and George Sparks, Gloucester 1779 

Inskeep, Priscilla, and Benjamin Pine, Gloucester 1773 

Inskeep, Sarah, Gloucester, and John McColloch, Gloucester 1749 

Inskeep, Sarah, and Jacob Lamb, Burlington 1777 

Inskip, Agnes, and Aquila Lippincott, Burliugton 1784 

Inskoop, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Wright, Burlington 1747 

Iuslee, Sarah, and Jacob Phillips, Burlington 1778 

Indicott, Aud, Burlington, aud Lucas Gillham, Burlington 1740 

Iudicott, Mary, Burlington, and William Bishop, Burlington 1729 

Indicott, Mary, Burlington, aud Jonathan Matlock, Burlington 1754 

Iradell, Hannah, Burlington, aud Joseph Allen, Burlington 1768 

Iredall, Elizabeth, and Joab Uobbius, Burliugton 1777 

Irelan, Dorcas, Cumberland, aud Peter Halter, Salem 1770 

Irelan, Lydia, Deerfieid, and James White, Pittsgrove 1773 

Irelan, Phebe, Cumberland, and John Miller, Cumberland 1777 

Ireland, Ann, Cumberland, and Jacob Duffel, Cumberland 1773 

Ireland, Debourah, and Nehemiah Nicholson, Great Egg Harbour . . . 1737 

Ireland, Deborah, and Owen Shepherd, Cumberland 1778 

Ireland, Jane, Middlesex, and William Hankins, Jr., Middlesex 1751 

Ireland, Jemima, and Steven Morress, Gloucester 1774 

Ireland, Mary, Gloucester, and John Smith, Gloucester 1732 

Ireland, Mary, Cumberland, and Aaron Butcher, Cumberland 1762 

Ireland, Mary, and James Holliushead, New Jersey 1765 

Ireland, Mary, aud Joshua Smith, Cape May 1777 

Ireland, Phebe, Cumberland, and Joseph Ireland, Cumberland 1762 

Ireland, Kebeccah, and Richard Addams, Gloucester 1784 

Ireland, Ruth, Gloucester, and Henry Woodward, Gloucester 1746 

Ireland, Ruth, aud Daniel Edwards, Salem 177 L 

Irelaud, Sarah, Great Egg Harbour, and Elias Smith, Gt. Egg Harb'r.1760 

Ireland, Sarah. Cumberland, and Wittock Paulin, Cumberland .1778 

Ireton, Elizabeth, Springfield, and David Stockton, Springfield 176L 

Ireton, Hanuah, and James Ellison, Burliugton 1778 

Ireton, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Wright, Burlington 1754 

Ireton, Susanna, Burlington, aud Robert Chapman, Jr., Burlington. . .1728 

Iron, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Grant, Monmouth 1750 

Irons, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Jeffery, Monmouth 1758 

Irons, Ellinnar, Shrewsbury, and Benjamin Smith, Shrewsbury 1767 

Irons, Deborah, Shrewsbury, aud Thomas Whie, Shrewsbury 1762 

Irons, Joyce, Monmouth, aud John Burnett, Monmouth. 1763 



213 

Mar. 1 1 

Sept. 30 

May 10 

Aug. 4 

June 15 

April 13 

Nov. 10 

May 24 

April 28 

Jan. 15 

June 15 

Sept. 1 

Feb. 10 

Nov. 13 

July 25 

Jan. 6 

Aug. 4 

Feb. 17 

Nov. 3 

July 31 

Dec. 16 

Sept. 3 

Nov. 25 

Dec. 2 

Oct. 13 

July 28 

July 23 

April 22 

Mar. 5 

Nov. 9 

Jtme 26 

— 22 

Nov. 4 

Aug. 11 

Dec. 4 

Mar. 7 

April 19 

Mar. 18 

Jan. 14 

Nov. 3 

Aug. 7 

Oct. 20 

Sept. 4 

July 26 



i Query: Insley. 



214 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Irviue, Prudence, and Enoch Eldridge, Gloucester 1785 

Irwin, Hannah, Burlington, and John Page, Burlington 1741 

Isdall, Sarah, Burlington, and John Brown, Pennsylvania , . 1775 

Iselstine, Mary, Perth Arnboy, and Lawrence Wessells, New York 1747 

Islestiue, Catherine, Perth Arnboy, and James Willson, Perth Amboy..l750 
Islestine, Deborah, Perth Arnboy, and William Fundrau, Perth Amboy. 1752 

Iszard, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and William Harris, Cape May 1750 

Iszard, Jane, Cape May, and James Whildin, Cape May 1761 

Iszard, Martha, Cape May, and John Hughes, Cape May 17G0 

Iszard, Sarah, Cape May, and Daniel Holden, Cape May 1754 

Iszard, Sarah, Cape May, and William Yates, Cape May 1762 

Ivins, Acshah, Chester, and John Sharp, Chester 1781 

Ivius, Anna, Springfield, and William Shreve, Springfield 1756 

Ivins, Anne, Mansfield, and Levy Nutt, Burlington 1748 

Ivins, Elizabeth, and Wilson Hunt, Monmouth 1778 

Ivins, Sarah, Burlington, aud Richard Kelly, Burlington 1776 

Ivins, Lydia, aud Silas Applegate, Burlington 1777 

Ivins, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Scattergood, Burlington 1766 

Ivins, Rachel, aud Edmund Hackney, Burlington 1789 

Ivins, Sarah, Burlington, and Moses Pippit, Burlington 1775 

Ivins, Sarah, Burlington, and Samuel Wardelle, Burlington 1777 

Ivins, Susannah, and John Sutton, Mansfield 1784 

Izard, Priscilla, and Daniel Peterson, Fairfield 1760 

Izard, Rhoda, Cumberland, aud John Lanning, Cumberland 1773 

Izzard, Jane, Cape May, and Henry Stevens, Cape May. . 1764 

MALES. J 

Jackson, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Rebecca Green, Monmouth. .. .1760 

Jackson, Emir, Monmouth, aud Mary Horsefield, Monmouth 1739 

Jackson, Emer, Monmouth, aud Jane English 1772 

Jackson, Hugh, Monmouth, and Mary Wolcott, Monmouth 1745 

Jackson, James, Monmouth, and Mary Horsman, Monmouth. ....... 1749 

Jackson, John, Chester, aud Mary Moreton, Chester 1748 

Jackson, Joseph, Pennsylvania, aud Margaret Burgess, Pennsylvania. . 1728 

Jackson, Joseph, Burlington, and Margaret Mooue 1734 

Jackson, Joseph, Pennsylvania, aud Mary Robinson .... 1737 

Jackson, Stephen, Morris, aud Mary Burnett, Morris 1768 

JacksoD, Thomas, aud Mary Ann Cheesman „ . ... 1 780 

Jackson, Timothy, Burlington, and Ann Chambers 17 7 8 

Jackson, William, Monmouth, and Athaliah Slocom ! . . . . 1751 

Jackson, William, Jr., Monmouth, and Hannah Bills. Monmouth 1757 

Jackson, William, Burlington, and Aune Kennedy, Burlington 1773 

Jacobus, Peter, Essex, and Leah Van Riper, Essex 1753 

Jacobs, Hugh, Burlington, aud Catharine Decker, alias Dilks 1781 

Jacobs, Jacob, Monmouth, aud Hanuah Johnson 1761 

Jacobs, John, Burlington, and Catherine Decker, Burlington 1774 



Jan. 2 
April 6 
June 19 
Dec. 26 
April 18 
Dec. 18 
Oct. 27 
July 20 
Dec. 20 
Sept. 4 
Aug. 24 
Mar. 19 
May 8 
Sept. 19 
June 1 1 
Feb. 28 
Sept. 18 
Feb. 10 
May 8 
Mar. 8 
Jan. 27 
Mar. 27 
June 30 
May 20 
Aug. 8 



Dec. 1 

Oct. 19 

Dec. 17 

Nov. 7 

May 26 

Jan. 10 

Sept. 9 

Oct. 29 

May 10 

Dec. 19 

Mar. 7 

Mar. 12 

Nov. 23 

May 19 

June 12 

Mar. 13 

Jan. 29 

Jan. 14 

Mar. 26 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 2 I 5 

Jacobson, > Adrian, Essex, ami Mary Paulison, Essex 17G1 

Jagard, James, Gloucester, ami Aim Flaniugham, Gloucester 17G0 

Jagard, Thomas, Gloucester, and Anne Lodge, (rloucester 1743-4 

Jaggard, Samuel, ( rloucester, ami Hope Inskeep 1785 

James, David, Cumberland, and Philathea Watson 1784 

James, John, Burlington, aud Priscilla Dutton .... 1778 

James, John, New Jersey, aud Sarah Watley 17 — 

James, Joseph, Cumberland, and Margaret Butler 1748 

James, Joseph; Gloucester, aud Elizabeth Lawrence 1764 

James, Thomas, Monmouth, and Mary Fitz Randell, Monmouth 1701 

Januey, Samuel, Gloucester, and Dcbora Paul 1785 

Janvier, Richard, Cape May, and Elizabeth Stiles, Cape May 1761 

Jaquess, John, Woodbridge, aud Dorothy Bloomfield, Woodbridge ... 1751 

Jaquett, John, Pennsylvania, aud Mary Peirsou . . 1782 

Jeanes, Henry, Salem, and Mary Hickman 1778 

Jefferey, Thomas, Monmouth, and Mercy Alleu, Momuouth 1750 

Jefferies, Benjamin, Philadelphia, and Jane Deacon 1785 

Jefferies, Dauiel, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Husbands, Moumouth. .1743-4 

Jefferis, Asa, Salem, aud Elizabeth Stretch 1788 

Jefferis, John, Gloucester, aud Letitia Wood, Gloucester 1736 

Jeffery, Francis, Monmouth, ami Mary Longstreet, Monmouth 1757 

Jeffery, Johu, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Alleu, Monmouth 1751 

Jeffery, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Irons, Monmouth 1758 

Jeffery, Lewis, Monmouth, and Lidy Jeffery, Monmouth 1765 

Jeffery, Richard, Monmouth, and Rebecca Wall, Monmouth 1761 

Jelf, William, Morris, aud Jane Ross, Essex 1771 

Jelf, William, Morris, and Catherine Fitz Randolph 1776 

Jeuiugs, Peter, Burlington, and Anne Nott, Burlington 1683-4 

Jenkin, Henry, Burlington, and Margaret Harris, Burlington 1728 

Jenkins, Isaac, Cumberland, and Phebe Brooks 1780 

Jenkins, Johu, Essex, and Elizabeth Wilson, Essex 1761 

Jenkins, Jouathau, Cape May, and Deborah Hand 1768 

Jenkins, Nathaniel, Salem, aud Ruth Siyre, Salem 1743 

Jenkins, Nathaniel, Cape May, and Esther Stiles, Cape May 1755 

Jenkins, Nathaniel, Cape May, and Willeramiua Stiles, Cape May... 1765 

Jenuey, Abel, Maiden Head, and Elizabeth Biles, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Jennings, John, Philadelphia, aud Mary Hilleyar 1754 

Jennings, Levy, Gloucester, aud Sarah Robeson 1759 

Jennings, Richard, Salem, and Ann Atkinson 1734 

Jerrard, John, Sussex, and Mary Parke 1785 

Jervis, Francis, Philadelphia, and Mary Castle, Philadelphia 1735 

Jervis, Francis, Philadelphia, and Catharine King, Burlington 1737 

Jess, James, aud Kesia Leeds 1782 

Jewel, Robert, Philadelphia, and Sarah Parker, Philadelphia 1735 

i Adrian Jacobussen. 



Sept. 


8 


Feb. 


2 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


4 


Dec. 


6 


Dec. 


22 


July 


28 


Feb. 


1 


Jan. 


26 


June 


6 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


10 


Feb. 


3 


April 


30 


May 


23 


Feb. 


1 


May 




Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


12 


Ajjril 


25 


Aug. 


7 


Oct. 


12 


Jan. 


17 


Dec. 


21 


April 


6 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


26 


April 


4 


Aug 


27 


April 


13 


April 


21 


May 


15 


Aug. 


15 


June 


5 


Sept. 


3 


Feb. 


26 


April 


18 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


5 


Dec. 


28 


May 


8 


Nov. 


8 



2i6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Jewell, John, Jr., Huuterdou, and Sarah Warford 1769 

Jewell, Joseph, Newton, and Margaret Jones 1772 

Jewell, William, Amboy, and Anne Hull, New Brunswick 1745 

Jewell, William, Burlington, and Rachel Baker, Burlington 1763 

Jewell, William, Hunterdon, aud Sarah Golden 17*2 

Jiler, Henry, Salem, and Ann Waling, Salem 1766 

Job, George, Monmouth, and Elizabeth James, Monmouth 1744 

Jobes, Ezekiel, Burlington, and Rebecca Smith 1779 

Jobs, Adam, Somerset, aud Katherine Gowenhoven 1782 

Jobs, George, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Johnston 1759 

Jobs, Isaac, Burlington, and Hannah Hance, Burlington 1775 

Jobs, James, Monmouth, and Barsheba Dey, Monmouth . . 1702 

Jobs, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Darnsell, Middlesex 1764 

Johnes, Daniel, Middlesex, and Alice Runion 1773 

Johnsen, John, Monmouth, aud Williamtie Kipp, Monmouth 1739 

Johnson, Abraham, Woodbridge, and Deborah Barnes, Woodbridge. .1765 

Johnson, Abraham, Monmouth, and Mary Zutphin, Monmouth 1767 

Johnson, Andrew, Reading Town, aud Jane Berger, Reading Town. . .1755 

Johnson, Benjamin, Essex, and Elizabeth Troup, Morris 1767 

Johnson, Claws, Bucks, Pa., ami Rebecca Bankson, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Johnson, Daniel, Egg Harbor, and Dinah Cramer 1747 

Johnson, Daniel, Cape May. an 1 Temperance Billiugs, Cape May. . . 1763 

Johnson, Daniel, Monmouth, and Phebe Rewlong 1765 

Johnson, David, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Creaton, Bucks, Pa 1775 

Johnson, David, Sussex, and Mary Fitzgerald, Sussex 1778 

Johnson, David, Chester, Pa., aud Sara Harker 1785 

Johnson, Ezekiel, Burlington, and Hester Scott, Burlington 17^2 

Johnson, George, Perth Amboy, and Mary Buckalew, Perth Amboy. . . 1759 

Johnson, Harnian, Monmouth, aud Phebe Rose, Monmouth 1767 

Johnson, Isaac, Hunterdon, aud Phebe Severns, Huuterdou 1771 

Johnson, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Perkins 1777 

Johnson, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Lawrence 1783 

Johnson, Isiah, Cumberland, and Lettitia Miller 1781 

Johnson, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Fenton, Burlington 1733 

Johnson, James, Essex, and Sarah Van Tilburgh 1746 

Johuson, James, Monmouth, aud Anney Brewer, Monmouth 1761 

Johnson, James, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Farril, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Johnson, Jeremiah, Cumberland, and Rhoda Townsend 1789 

Johnson, Jesse, Bucks, Pa., and Catharine Yauzandt 1785 

Johnson, John, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Jolly, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Johnson, John, Philadelphia, aud Deborah Hood, Philadelphia 1732 

Johnson, John, aud Mary Rodman 1737 

Johnson, John, New York, aud Elizabeth Godden, Newark 1748 

Johnson, John, Middletown, and Ida Wilson, New Brunswick 1749 

Johnson, John, Monmouth, and Hosannah Worden, Monmouth. .... 1760 
Johnson, John, Middlesex, and Dorithy Jaquas, Middlesex 1760 



.Nov. 
Jan. 


i 

11 


Feb. 


7 


Dec. 


12 


Oct. 


29 


Mar. 


6 


May 


26 


May 


18 


April 


1 


Aug. . 


20 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


16 


Jan. 


13 


June 


21 


Sept, 


28 


April 


3 


Jan. 


2 


May 


10 


Dec. 


12 


Mar. 


30 


May 


11 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


11 


Aug. 


5 


April 


2 


June 


2 


April 


1 


July 


4 


Feb. 


3 


Aug. 


13 


April 


12 


Dec. 


27 


Oct. 


1 


July 


19 


Dec. 


31 


Mar. 


24 


Sept, 


13 


June 


2 


Mar. 


25 


May 


27 


July 


21 


July 


17 


Dec. 


2 


July 


5 


June 


4 


Dec. 


23 



MARRIAGE LICENSE^. 

Johnsou, John, Middlesex, and .lane Ried, Middlesex 1765 

Johnson, John, Burlington, and Hannah Fenton 1779 

Johnson, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary McOollum 1779 

Johnsou, Joseph, Burlington, and Gertrude Lykens, Burlington 174") 

l ihnson, Joseph, Burlington, and Letitia Ewan, Burlington 1775 

Johnson, Lambert, Monmouth, and Itcha McCleas 1745 

Johnson, Lawn nee, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Bunting, Bucks; Pa 1751 

Johnson, Lawrence, Hunterdon, and Fanny Crane 1778 

Johnson, Martin, Hunterdon, and Anna Trout 1779 

Johnson, Mat, Middlesex, and Mary Wetherill, Middlesex 1742 

Johnson, Mathew, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Burgis, Pennsylvania .. 1766 

Johnson, Matthias, Middlesex, and Neiltie Lake, Middlesex 1739 

Johnson, Mathlayas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Wainans 1740 

Johnson, Mathias, Staten Island, and Sarah Johnson, Staten Island . 1743 

Johnson, Mathias, Middlesex, and Mary Jolly 1768 

Johnson, Mathias, Burlington, and Dorothy Parker 1779 

Johnson, Nicholas, Middlesex, and Maritie Gulick, Somerset. 1750 

Johnson, Nicholas, Middletown, and Elizabeth White, Perth Ainboy.. 1752 

Johnson, Peter, Monmouth, and Elie Vanderbilt. . . 1772 

Johnson, Peter, Middlesex, and Catherine Fonk 1781 

Johnson, Phillip, Burlington, and Bhoda Estill 1776 

Johnson, Richard, Bucks, Pa., and Diana Heed, late Huelings 1739 

Johnson, Robert, and Hannah Clifton 1735 

Johnson, Robert, Gloucester, and Patience Hewes 1775 

Johnson, Skelton, Middlesex, and Judith Gompton, Middletown. . . . 1752 

Johnson, Thomas, Cape May, and Rebecca Church, Cape May 1741 

Johnson, Thomas, Perth Ainboy, and Damaris Noe, Middlesex 1747 

Johnson, Thomas, and Catherine Loofbourrow, Middletown 1752 

Johnsou, Thomas, Salem, and Elizabeth Condon, Salem 1766 

Johnson, Thomas, Salem, and Mary Flannagan 1776 

Johnson, Thomas, Somerset, and Elizabeth Skillman 1778 

Johnson, Thomas, Morris, and Eunice Rainer 1779 

Johnson, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Shemely 1783 

Johnson, Tunis, Hunterdon, and Jemima Foster, Hunterdon 1752 

Johnson, William, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Perine, Perth Ainboy. ..1775 

Johnston, Ames, Monmouth, and Mary Clayton 1762 

Johnston, David, Hunterdon, and Margaret Nixon, Hunterdon 1772 

Johnston, Elisha, Monmouth, and Amy Davis, Monmouth 1755 

Johnston, Elisha, Monmouth, and Catherine Mitchel, Monmouth. . . .1759 

Johnston, George, Salem, and Catherine Richmond, S alem 1774 

Johnston, Gideon, Cape May, and Lydda Shaw 17 67 

Johnston, Henry, Middlesex, and Hannah Applegate, Middlesex.. .. L760 

Johnsto \ James, Monmouth, and Lucy Saltar, Monmouth 1739 

Johnston, James, Middlesex, and Anna Anderson, Monmouth 1756 

Johnston, James, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Hunt 1778 

Johnston, James, Jr., Burlington, and Elizabeth Lukemire 1785 



- T 

Mar. 27 
Nov. 9 
May 29 

July 25 
Nov. 27 
July 22 
Mar. 25 
June 8 
S.-pt. 18 
Dec. 8 
May 22 . 
June 9 
Mar. 23 
Dec. 26 
May 2 
Feb. 18 
Aug. 3 
May 9 
Nov. 21 
April 9 
Aug. 10 
Dec. 13 
Nov. 4 
July 20 
July 3 
Dec. 30 
Feb. 24 
Nov. 23 
Oct. 2 
Mar. 14 
Sept, 17 
April 26 
June 14 
Aug. 18 
Aug. 5 
Feb. 13 
Feb. 24 
Oct. 28 
Nov. 20 
July 17 
April 24 
June 12 
Aug. 14 
May 3 
Sept. 23 
Dec. 2 



2l8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Johnston, John, Perth Amboy, and Euphaearn Johnston, Perth Amb'y. 1746 

JohnstOD, John, Jr., Middlesex, and Susannah Barberie 1767 

Johnston, John, Perth Arnboy, and Isabella Hooper 1768 

Johnston, Joseph, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Zutphin, Monmouth 1756 

Johnston, Joseph, Gloucester, and Hannah Johnston, Monmouth. . . . 1763 
Johnston, Lawrence, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Bunting, Bucks, Pa. . . 1751 

Johnston, Matthias, Egg Harbour, and Elizabeth Brookfield 1716 

Johnston, Michael, Chester, Pa., and Eupheam Watson, Monmouth. . 1750 

Johnston, Philip, Huuterdon, and Rachel Martin 1767 

Johnston, William, Monmouth, and Jane Polhemos 1782 

Jolley, John, Jr., Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Bisset, Middlesex 1756 

Jolly, Archibald, Gloucester, and Deborah Cheesmau, Gloucester 1737 

Jolly, John, Bucks, Pa., and Dinah Quest, Burlington 1746 

Jolly, John, Hunterdon, and Hannah Tytus 1786 

Jolly, William, South Amboy, and Hannah Abraham, Perth Amboy. . . 1759 

Jones, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bolton, Burlington 1773 

Jones, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth Butler 1759 

Jones, Christopher, Monmouth, and Mary Hulett, Monmouth .,. ... 1745 

Jones, Daniel, Monmouth, and Audrey Chambers, Monmouth 1740-1 

Jones, Daniel, Burlington, and Sarah H irding, Burlington 1754 

Jones, Daniel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Sharp, Burlington 1781 

Jones, David, Monmouth, and Ann Stillwell, Monmouth 1762 

Jones, Ephraim, Middlesex, and Phebe Hornet, Middlesex 1773 

Jones, Francis, Burlington, and Jane Wallis, Burlington 1729 

Jones, George, Essex, and Mercy Hunt 1768 

Jones, Henry, Gloucester, and Naomi Cheeseman, Gloucester 1728 

Jones, Isaac, Gloucester, and Tamar Cheesman, Gloucester 1767 

Jones, Jacob, Burlington, and Dinah Steinson, Burlington 1763 

Jones, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Sarah Hopewell, Gloucester 1759 

Jones, Job, Burlington, and Sarah Cam; ion 1775 

Jones, Johu, Gloucester, and Sarah Gayard, Gloucester 1728 

Jones, John, Monmouth, and Susannah Preston, Monmouth 1739 

Jones, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Prosser, Gloucester 1763 

Jones, John, Somerset, and Patience Drake, Middlesex 1763 

Jones, John, Jr., Burlington, and Martha Staples, Burlington 1763 

Jones, John, Bergen, and Mary Ackerman, Bergen 1764 

Jones, Johu, Cumberland, and Sarah Hall, Cumberland 1777 

Jones, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Shinu, Burlington 1764 

Jones, Joseph, Trenton, and Jemima Jones. 1782 

Jones, Joseph, Gloucester, and Hannah Rambon 17«5 

Jones, Josiah, Burlington, and Mary Lewis, Burlington 1757 

Jones, Obadiah, Burlington, and Rebecca Price, Burlington 1780 

Jones, Patrick, Burlington, and Martha Chambers, Burlington 1741 

Jones, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Price, Burlington. 

Jones, Richard, Trenton, and Elizabeth Gurton 1778 

Jones, Roger, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Melvin 1735 



May 


5 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


30 


June 


22 


April 


30 


Mar. 


25 


Dec. 


8 


May 


16 


April 


13 


June 


5 


April 


27 


April 


7 


Aug. 


28 


Oct. 


28 


May 


12 


Aug. 


31 


Jan. 


16 


Dec. 


7 


Mar. 


18 


Oct, 


16 


Jan. 


29 


Feb. 


15 


July 


19 


Nov. 


27 


Mar. 


17 


April 


6 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


28 


Ma j 


3 


Nov. 


23 


July 


29 


Dec. 


17 


June 


11 


Dec. 


12 


Dec. 


28 


April 


12 


Oct. 


28 


Aug. 


3 


Oct. 


15 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


17 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


16 


Sept. 


12 


Dec. 


19 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Jones, Samuel, Burlington, and Abigail Rogers, Burlington 1750 

Joues, Samuel, Essex, and Elizabeth Jones, Essex 1761 

Jones, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Garwood, Burlington 1775 

Jones, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Ann Cannon L780 

Jones, Stephen, Somerset, and Grace Fitzraudolph, Somerset 1728 

Jones, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Catherine Vanmater 1783 

Joues, Thomas, Salem, and Hannah Prior, Salem 1087 

Joues, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Page, Burlington 1738 

Jones, William, Burlington, and Mary Birdsell, Burlington 1749 

Jones, William, Somerset, and Martha Drake, Middlesex 1751 

Jonson, William, Cape May, and Abigail Foster, Cape May 1742 

Joralaman, John, Somerset, and Lydia Thomas .1(82 

Joralemau, James, and Mary Kingsland . 1779 

Jorelemon, John, Essex and Elizabeth Ryason, Bergen 1749 

Jordau, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Mary Letts, Perth Amboy 1752 

Journey, James, Monmouth, and Martha Osborn, Monmouth 1764 

Juley, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Mollison . . 1780 

Jusman, Abel, Burlington, aud Sarah Ponarro, Burlington 1750 

Justasou, Isaac, Gloucester, and Zilah Slide, Gloucester 1770 

Justice, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Martha Stabalier 1786 

Justice, Peter, Salem, and Ann Bickham, Salem .... 1764 

FEMALES. J 

Jack, Isabel, Burlington, and Michael Burrows, Burlington 1784 

Jackson, Ann, Philadelphia, and Joseph Hitchcock, Philadelphia. ...1734 

Jackson, Ann, Perth Amboy, ar_d Robert Ayers, Perth Amboy 1763 

Jackson, Bridget, Philadelphia, and Robert Bibby, Philadelphia 1730 

Jackson, Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Jacob Parker, Shrewsbury 1764 

Jackson, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and James Taylor, Shrewsbury 1759 

Jackson, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Ezekiel Smith, Monmouth 1765 

Jackson, Hannab, and Matthias Keen, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Jackson, Mary, aud Daniel Sutton, Burlington 1732 

Jackson, Mary, Jr., Bucks, Pa., aud John Green, Bucks, Pa 1758 

Jackson, Mary, Shrewsbury, and John White, Shrewsbury 1761 

Jack-on, Mary, Monmouth, and Henry Harper, Philadelphia 1771 

Jackson, Massey, and Thomas Borden, Monmouth 1751 

Jackson, Rebecka, Fairfield, and Gibbens Shepherd, Fairfield 1778 

Jackson, Sarah, Philadelphia, and William Cannon, Philadelphia 1738 

Jackson, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Allen, Monmouth 1740 

Jackson, Sarah, Woodbridge, aud John Ross, Middlesex 1759 

Jackson, Sarah, Cumberland, and James Gorrell, Cumberland .. .. 1768 

Jackson, Sarah, Monmouth, and Richard Horsfull, Monmouth 1772 

Jackson, Susannah, Bucks, Pa., and Jonathan Bourne, Bucks, Pa. . . .1734 
Jacobs, Ellenor, Pennsylvania, and Thomas Wcems, Pennsylvania . . . 1728 

Jacobs, Mary, Monmouth, and Philip Westcoat, Monmouth 1739 

Jacobs, Mary, Monmouth, and John Cooper, Monmouth 1743 



219 

J uue 1 

Mar. 18 

April 18 

Mar. 30 

June 22 

Oct. 2 

Ap.il 12 

April 17 

Aug. 10 

Aug. 13 

April 19 

June 3 

Oct. 18 

Oct. 30 

Sept. 27 

Mar. 16 

Dec. 30 

July 23 

Aug. 21 

Jan. 19 

Feb. 13 



May 28 

July 27 

Dec. 31 

June 11 

Aug. 11 

June 23 

Nov. 14 

Jan. 12 

Mar. 14 

Mar. 4 

Jan. 17 

May 28 

Nov. 19 

Jan. 6 

Aug. 19 

Mar. 2 

June 20 

Oct. 27 

Sept. 14 

Dec. 28 

Nov. 6 

Sept, 24 

Oct. 31 



220 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Jacobus, Charity, and Peter Hawley 1782 

Jaoobusse, Sophia, Essex, and Jacob Van Reype, Essex 1761 

Jacocks, Grace, Monmouth, and Nicholas Brown, Monmouth 1741 

Jaqard, Ann, Gloucester, and Charles Fennimore, Burlington 1744 

Jaqard, Hester, Deptford, and Jonathan Ward, Deptford 1765 

James, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and George Job (minor), Monmouth . . 1744 

James", Hannah, Burlington, and James Sebet, Burlington 1736 

James, Jerusha, Freehold, and William Parker, Freehold 1766 

James, Jane, and Elijah Carman, Hunterdon 1780 

James, Joanna, and Richard Bawker, Burlington 1741 

James, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and Samuel Griscom, Philadelphia .... 1741 

James, Sarah, Monmouth, and William McKuight, Monmouth 1744 

Jamison, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Arthur Van Kirk, Perth Amboy 1757 

Jaquas, Dorithy, Middlesex, and John Johnson, Middlesex 1760 

Jacquatt, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Hugh Sharp, Burlington 1743 

Jacquatt, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Lanning, Burlington 1711 

Jacquet, Ann, and Henry Roe, Gloucester 1780 

Jarolaman, Blandena, and Jacob Cock, Somerset 1782 

Jay, Mary, and Audrew Pierce, Cumberland 1793 

Jay, Tabitha, and Abel Adams, Gloucester 1784 

Jeakey, Mary Catharina, and William Smither, Burlington 1734 

Jefferney, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and Roger Laws Martin, Shrewsb'y. 1761 

Jeffery, Lidy, Monmouth, and Lewis Jeffery, Monmouth 1765 

Jeffery, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Tallman, Shrewsbury 1766 

Jennison, Lucy, and Charles Robertson, New York 1784 

Jenings, Anne, and Thomas Kendall 1690 

Jenkins, Elizabeth, and Ludla'm Hand, Cape May 1768 

Jenkins, Eunice, Cumberland, and Elisha Swinney, Cumbeiland 1771 

Jenkins, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Jacob Van Kirk, Bucks 1735 

Jenkins, Mary, Burlington, and Levi Haines, Burlington 1774 

Jenkins, Mary, and Abraham Shelley, Philadelphia 1774 

Jenkins, Mary, and John Brooks, Cumberland 1778 

Jenkins, Susannah, and Joseph Venables, Evesham 1778 

Jennet, Abigail, and John Smallwood, Gloucester 1772 

Jennet, Alice, Burlington, and George. Hunsinger, Burlington 1764 

Jennings, Ann, Gloucester, and John Chew, Gloucester 1739 

Jennings, Anne, Somerset, and David Laforge, Middlesex 1756 

Jennings, Hannah, and Thomas Barber, Salem 1770 

Jennings, Sarah, Gloucester, and George Flaniugham, Gloucester... 1736 

Jenny, Martha, and Nicholas Parker, Bucks, Pa 1 732 

Jerrnan, Susannah, Hopewell, and John Ayars, Cumberland 1751 

Jermine, Margaret, Monmouth, and Aaron Dirchon Van Horn, Mon'h.1756 

Jerney, Mary, Staten Island, and Adraen Scout 1743 

Jerolmau, Petertie, Bergen, and John Lewis, Bergen 1767 

.lervis, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Dunfee, Burlington 1763 

Jervis, Patience, Burlington, and William Fagins, Burlington 1768 



June 


15 


Feb. 


23 


April 


«) 


Sept. 


10 


June 


25 


May 


26 


Dec. 


28 


July 


9 


Nov. 


3 


May 


13 


Feb. 


6 


Mar. 


31 


May 


2 


Dec. 


23 


April 


27 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


16 


April 


26 


Aug. 


5 


Feb. 


16 


Oct. 


12 


Nov. 


3 


May 


12 


Jan. 


6 


July 


5 


Feb. 


12 


May 


12 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


10 


June 


4 


April 


3 


June 


14 


Feb. 


16 


Dec. 


9 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


17 


May 


24 


Sept. 


24 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


6 


Jan. 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 22 1 

Jess, Ann, Burlington, ami Barzilla Bishop, Burlington 1776 

Jess, KachelJ, Northampton, and Henry Reives, Northampton 17<;r» 

Jessop, Alice, and Henry Hazelton, Pennsylvania 1779 

.lessDpe, Margaret, Newton, and Henry Stephens, Gloucester. 1753 

Jewel, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Henry Kitchen, Hunterdon 1770 

Jewell, -lane, Hunterdon, and Joseph Hogeland, Hunterdon 1771 

Jewell, Sarah, Hunterdon, and George Bowman, Hunterdon 1708 

Jobes, Deborah, Middletown, and John Roberts, Middletown 1753 

.lul.es, Mary, and Philip Merot, Burlington 1760 

Jobs, Amy, and William Little, Burlington 1758 

Jobs, Anna, Shrewsbury, and William Stillwell, Shrewsbury 1762 

Jobs, Elizabeth, Upper Freehold, and William Willkie, Upper Freeh'd. 1758 

Jobs, Euphama, Burlington, and Joseph Heustis, Burlington 1776 

Jobs, Martha, Richmond Co., N. Y., and Henry Perrine, Middlesex. . .1741 

Johnson, Abigail, Burlington, and William Scoby, Gloucester 1780 

Johnson, Alice, and John Debowe 1 7 1 t 

Johnson, Amy, and Jonathan Mills, Cape May 1768 

Johnson, Ann, Salem, and John Hall, Salem 1741 

Johnson, Aud, Burlington, and Martin Gash, Burlington 1766 

Johnson, Ann, and Thomas Eddis, Cumberland. 178U 

Johnson, Ann, and Moses Page, Philadelphia 1785 

Johnson, Ann, and Robert Fish, Somerset 1786 

Johnson, Anne, Middletown, and John Collins, Middletown . .. 1758 

Johnson, Belitie, Staten Island, aud Henry Butler, Staten Island 1752 

Johnson, Bridget, Buck's, Pa., aud Thomas Goheen, Bucks, Pa 1732 

Johnson, Britta, Pennsylvania, and Thomas West, Pennsylvania 1735 

Johnson, Catharine, and Joseph Price, Willingborough 1782 

Johnson, Catherine, Middletown, and Joseph Golden, Middletown... 1754 

Johnson, Catherine, Newark, and James Banks, Jr., Newark 1758 

Johnson, Catherine, ManningtoD, and John Walker, Manniugton . . . . 1765 
Johnson, Catherine. Burlington, aud William Donnelly, Burlington. . .1775 

Johnsou, Catherine, and William Armstrong, Amwell.. 1776 

Johuson, Christian, Gloucester, aud Abuer Doughtey, Gloucester 1762 

Johnson, Deborah, and Lott Ridgway, Jr., Springfield 1780 

Johnson, Dinah, Reading Town, aud Gerardus Aten, Reading Town. . 175' > 

Johnson, Elianor, Gloucester, and William Bright, Gloucester 1762 

Johnson, Eleanor, and Andrew Crawford , 1767 

Johnson, Eliza, and Alexander Wilson, Hunterdon 1788 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, aud Jacob Hibbs, Pennsylvania . . . 1727 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Luke Covenhoven, Middlesex 1739 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Salem, and Matthias Devoss, Salem 174C 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Monmouth, aud David Eldridge, Monmouth 1748 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Joseph Morrell, Hunterdon 1764 

Johnson, Elizabeth, Bethlehem, and David Williamson, Bethlehem. .. 1771 
Johnson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Lefnse, Burlington. . . . 1775 
Johnson, Elizabeth, and Roelof Covenhoven, Somerset 1778 



Sept. 


>2 


Mar. 


2 


April 


13 


Nov. 


8 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


16 


July 


15 


Nov. 


9 


Nov. 


8 


Feb. 


17 


June 


5 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


6 


May 


15 


April 28 


Aug. 


20 


Juue 


9 


June 


11 


Dec. 


27 


June 


12 


Mar. 


28 


May 


30 


Dec. 


18 


Oct. 


30 


Aug. 


22 


M ar. 


27 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


30 


Oct. 


17 


Oct. 


17 


April 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


28 


April 


24 


Aug. 


28 


July 


6 


June 


6 


June 


7 


June 


15 


Oct. 


26 


Oct, 


16 


Aug. 


22 




28 


Aug. 


28 


Nov. 


29 


June 


17 



222 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Johnson, Fanny, and Samuel Chester, New Jersey 1777 Aug. 2 

Johnson, Hannah, and Jacob Jacobs, Monmouth 1761 Jan. 14 

Johnson, Hannah, Gloucester, and Isaac Andrews, Gloucester 1767 Dec. 24 

Johnson, Jane, Middlesex, and Samuel Fitch, Middlesex 1739 Jan. 19 

Johnson, Jerusha, Cape May, and Thomas Hand, Cape May 1773 May 19 

Johnson, Laetitia, and Elisha Smith, Cumberland 1787 Mar. 13 

Johnson, Lydia, Cape May, and Joseph Hays, Cape May 1771 Dec. 16 

Johnson, Margaret, Somerset, and Robert Holmau, Monmouth 1741 June 3 

Johnson, Margaret, Middletown, and Frederich Debowe, Middletown 1748 May 27 

Johnson, Margaret, Middletown, and Cornelius V. D. B., Middletown. 1756 Dec. 16 

Johnson, Martha, Newark, and Uzal Ward, Newark 1746 Nov. 17 

Johnson, Martha, and James Ludlam, Cape May 1790 Jan. 5 

Johnson, Martina, Hunterdon, and John Freeman, Hunterdon 1735 Sept. 15 

Johnson, Mary, Salem, and Josiah Fithian, Salem. 1733 June 2 

Johnson, Mary, Burlington, and Edmond Cowgill, Burlington 1736 Aug. 3 

Johnson, Mary, Stateu Island, and David Laforge, Staten Island 1748 Mar. 30 

Johnson, Mary, Monmouth, and James Van Brakle, Monmouth 1754 July 6 

Johnson, Mary, Middlesex, and James Smith, Middlesex 1701 Nov. 20 

Johnson, Mary, Middlesex, aud Koert Voorhies, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 30 

Johnson, Mary, Sussex, and James Campbell, Sussex 1772 Mar. 2 

Johnson, Mary, Morristown, aud Samuel Morrison, Morristown 1 779 Nov. 1 1 

Johnson, Mary, and Cornelius McAuley, Burlington 1784 Feb. 1 

Johnson, Mary, aud Josiah Bockitt 1784 Dec. 11 

Johnson, Michael, and James Bell 1783 Jan. 11 

Johnson, Patience, Monmouth, and John Chadwick, Monmouth 1763 Nov. 7 

Johnson. Phebe, and Jacob Rickhord, Staten Island 1768 May 14 

Johnson, Phebe, Sussex, and George King, Hunterdon 1770 July 4 

Johnson, Rachel, and William Liming, Monmouth 1750 Mar. 17 

Johnson, Rachel, Monmouth, aud Gisbert Markleese, Monmouth 1752 Dec. 23 

Johnson, Rachel, Hunterdon, and John Van Campen, N'rthamp'n, Fa. 1763 Aug. 29 

Johnson, Rachel, Burlington, and Samuel Gamble, Burlingtou. . . . .1765 Sept. 13 

Johnson, Rachel, Amwell, aud Philip Yom.g, Amwell 1771 Aug. 13 

Johnson, Rhoda, Burlington, and Henry Flitcroft, Burlington 1766 Sept. 16 

Johnson, Rhoda, and Furman Mulford, Cumberland 1780 April 29 

Johnson, Sarah, aud Isaac Ivins, Burlington 1711 April 26 

Johnson, Sarah, Gloucester, and Richard Buckle, Gloucester 1729 July 1 

Johnson, Sarah, Staten Island, and Matthias Johuson, Staten Island. .1743 Dec. 26 

Johnson, Sarah, Bergen, and Henry Lobagh, Bergen 175 1 May 11 

Johnson, Sarah, Morris, and Thomas Logan, Morris. 1779 Mar. 30 

Johnson, Sarah, and Jacob Conuarroe, New Jersey. . 1782 Aug. 21 

Johnson, Susannah, and James Butler, Staten Island 1745 Sept. 12 

Johnson, Temperance, Salem, and William Ward, Gloucester 1742 Mar. 14 

Johnston, Anne, Perth Amboy, and John Terrill 1748 Nov. 29 

Johnston, Catharine, Bucks, Pa., and Joshua Vansant, Bucks, Pa.. .1728 Feb. 20 

Johnston, Catherine, and Stephen Skinner, Perth Amboy 1761 Oct. 10 

JohnstoD, Deborah, Monmouth, and Thomas Hulse, Monmouth 1750 Dec. 31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



223 



Johnston, Elizabeth, ;m<l John Wyckof, Hunterdon 1758 Aug. 17 

Johnston, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and Nathan Lawrance, Cumberl'nd. 1769 Aug. 18 

Johuston, Elizabeth, Northampton, and George Parkes, Northampton. 1772 April 20 

Johnston, Elizabeth, and John Wood, Hopewell 1780 Nov. 18 

Johnston, Ellinar, Middletown, and Nathaniel Tiltou, Middletown 17G1 Jan. 10 

Johnston, Eunice, and John Fithian, Cumberland 1769 Dec. 10 

Johnston, Enphamea, Perth Araboy, and John Johnston, Perth Amb'y. 1740 May 5 

Johnston, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Johnston, Gloucester. . . 1763 April 30 

Johnston, Hannah, Monmouth, and Joseph Heavil and, Monmouth .. 1703 Aug. 9 

Johnston, Hannah, and Daniel Moore, Hunterdon 1768 Sept. 3 

Johnston, Jane, Monmouth, and John Liyton, Monmouth 1764 Feb. 10 

Johnston, Judith, Cumberland, and Joseph Irelan, Cumberland.. ., 1776 April 24 

Johnston, Eeziah, Burlington, and Andrew Con arrow, Burlington ... 1766 May 10 

Johnston, Lidy, Shrewsbury, and Elisha E. Stout, Shrewsbury 1760 Mar. 29 

Johnston, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and John Smjth, Perth Amboy.. . . 1760 June 9 

Johnston, Mary, Middlesex, and Zebulon Collins, Middlesex 1746 Oct. 30 

Johnston, Mary, and Daniel Green, Burlington 1750 June 1 

Johnston, Mary, Freehold, and Rulif Truax, Freehold 1761 Jan. 26 

Johnston, Mary, Freehold, and John Wolley, Freehold 1766 Mar. 26 

Johnston. Mary, and Benjamin Gifford, Gloucester 1774 June 16 

Johnston, Rebecca, Bucks, Pa., and Jonathan Bunting, Bucks, Pa .. 1772 Jan. 10 

Johnston, Rebecca, Burlington, and William Lippincott, Burlington, 1777 June 13 

Johnston, Sarah, Monmouth, and Jacob Dennis, Monmouth 1751 Jan. 23 

Johnston. Sarah, Gloucester, and Nehemiah Leeds, Gloucester 1755 Aug. 2 

Johnston, Sarah, and George Jobs, Jr. , Burlington 1759 Aug. 20 

Johnston, Sarah, and John Applegate, Burlington 1785 Oct. 22 

Johnston, Solos, and Francis Borden, Monmouth 1790 Jan. 7 

Johnston, Susannah, Hunterdon, and Samuel Grandine, Monmoirth . 1752 Dec. 22 

Joley, Hester, and John Wild, Gloucester 1784 June 11 

Jolley, Dinah, Burlington, and John Bickham, Burlington 1761 Aug. 5 

Jolley, Rebecca, Burlington, and Allan McCollin, Burlington 1771 Nov. 25 

Jolley, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Andrew Bissat, Perth Amboy 1758 Mar. 11 

Jolly, Catherine, Middlesex, and William Brown, Middlesex. . 1765 Aug. 7 

Jolly, Margaret, Bucks, Pa., and John Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1729 May 27 

Jolly, Martilla, and Peter Wilmart, Middlesex 1769 May 29 

Jolly, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and John Beckett, Bucks, Pa 1732 July 17 

Jolly, Mary, and Matthias Johnson, Middlesex 17G8 May 2 

Jones, Abigail, Staten Island, and William Morrill, Staten Island 1743 Sept. 4 

Jones, Abigail, and Thomas Eastburn, Cumberland.. 1779 Aug. 23 

Jones, Ann, Piscataway, and Patrick Fenuell, Piscataway 1748 April 26 

Jones, Ann, and Thomas Scroggy, Hanover 1777 Mar. 12 

Jones, Anna, Princeton, and Robert Morrin, Princeton 1768 Oct. 29 

Jones, Anne, Gloucester, and Joseph Haines, Gloucester 1748 Sept. 29 

Jones, Deborah, and George Budd, Gloucester 1780 Feb. 1 

Jones, Edith, and John Maher, Gloucester 1733 Mar. 9 

Jones, Eleanor, Gloucester, and Benjamin Worthington, Gloucester.. .1731 Mar. 11 



224 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL. DOCUMENTS. 



Jones, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Euddrow, Burlington 1730 

Jones, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Joseph Cunningham, Monmouth. . .1746 

Jones, Elizabeth, Essex, and Samuel Jones, Essex 1761 

Jones, Elizabeth, and Moses Dobson, Salem 1768 

Jones, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Maxwell, Salem 1769 

Jones, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Chemard, Burlington 1771 

Jones, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Allen, Burlington 1772 

Jones, Elizabeth, and Isaiah Leeds, Burlington. 1778 

Jones, Grace, Bucks, Pa., and Abraham Bowne, Bucks, Pa 1749 

Jones, Hannah, Burlington, and John Stockton, Springfield 1750-1 

Jones, Hannah, Fairfield, and Jemimah Nixson, Fairfield 1763 

Jones, Hannah, and Nathaniel Hunt, Hunterdon 1769 

Jones Hannah, aud Jacob Nailer, Burlington 1783 

Jones, Isabell, Pennsylvania, and Jess Falkner, Burlington 1741 

Jones, Jane, Lancaster, Pa., and Isaac Taylor, Lancaster, Pa 1739 

Jones, Jemima, and Joseph Jones, Trenton 1782 

Jones, Letitia, Gloucester, and Joseph Eoberts, Gloucester 1764 

Jones, Lydia, Gloucester, and Joseph Dilks, Gloucester 1748 

Jones, Lydia, and William Everingham, Burlington 1777 

Jones, Lydia, and Thomas Rockhill, Burlington 1786 

Jones, Margaret, Philadelphia, and William Pocklanton, Philadelphia. 1731 

Jones, Margaret, and Joseph Jewell, Newton 1772 

Jones, Margaret, New Hanover, aud Samuel Sayler, New Hauover . . 1773 

Jones, Margaret, Burliugton, and Joseph Leeds, Burlington 1775 

Jones, Marby, aud Zerobabel Gaskill 1783 

Jones, Martha, Nottingham, and Michael Standley, Nottingham 1767 

Jones, Mary, and Jeremiah Birch, Gloucester 1736 

Jones, Mary, aud Habakkuk Eayres, Northampton 1747 

Jones, Mary. Burlington, and Habakkuk Eayre, Burlington 1747 

Jones, Mary, and Samuel Rogers, Burlington 1756 

Jones, Mary, Buck?, Pa., and Augustus Hicks, Philadelphia. . 1763 

Jones, Mary, Little Egg Harbour, and John Eobart, Lt. Egg Harbour. 1765 

Jones, Mary, Maurice Eiver, aud Nathan Shaw, Maurice River 1769 

Jones, Mary, and Obadiah Howell, Trenton 1779 

Jones, Mercy, Eeadiugtown, and Philip Dalley, Eeadiugtown 1718 

Jones, Penelope, Burlington, and Mathew Wright, Burlington 1742 

Jone«, Rachel, Philadelphia, and Robert Vernon, Philadelphia 1738 

Jones, Rachel, Burlington, and Henry Coats, Burlington 1783 

Jones, Rebecca, Gloucester, and William Holmes, Gloucester 1730 

Jones, Rebecca, Burlington, aud Isaac Cramer, Burlington 1765 

Jones, Sarah, Bucks, and William Hooper, Bucks 1739 

Jones, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph MingiD, New Hanover 1748 

Jones, Sarah, Springfield, and John Murphy, Burlington 1749 

Jones, Sarah, Mount Holly, and William Shute, Philadelphia 1775 

Jones, Sarah, and Joseph Sutton 1779 

Jones, Sarah, and Joseph Le Riche, Morris 1779 



Nov. 


2 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


18 


Mar. 


12 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


30 


Aug. 


31 


June 


3 


Nov. 


1 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


8 


Feb. 


9 


Jan. 


14 


Aug. 


25 


June 


11 


Oct. 


15 


Feb. 


14 


Jan. 


4 


Sept. 


30 


Oct. 


26 


June 


25 


Jan. 


11 


Sept. 


14 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


13 


July 


30 


April 


20 


May 


4 


May 


24 


Nov. 


27 


Nov. 


5 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


16 


Juue 


8 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


17 


April 


14 


Jan. 


14 


Oct. 


2 


July 


1 


Sept, 


17 


Julv 


28 


Aug. 


10 


May 


20 


July 


12 


July 


19 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 225 

Jones, Sarah, Burlington, and John Ballinger, Burlington 1784 

Jones, Sukey, Bergen, and Martin Bovee, Essex 1749 

Jones, Susanna, and Peter Berry, Morris 1751 

Jones, Susannah, Freehold, and Joseph Preston, Freehold 1759 

Jones, Tacey, Burlington, and Samuel Holder, Burlington 1736 

Jones, Tainar, and Nathan Drake, Hunterdon 1770 

Jonsou, Catharine, Monmouth, and James Mitchell, Monmouth 1755 

Jonson, Elsey, Monmouth, and John Lake, Monmouth 1759 

Jonson, Hannah, and Joseph Houldin, Cape May 1600 

Jonson, Rody, and Isaiah Wright, Northampton 1784 

Jonstou, Elizabeth, and Isaac Cordeary, Gloucester 1755 

Jonstou, Margaret, Monmouth, and Rulif Lambers, Monmouth 1755 

Joralemon, Elizabeth, Essex, and Johannes Dow, Essex 1740 

Joralmou, Elizabeth, Essex, and William Van Emberh, Essex 1754 

Joralmon — see Vralmon. 

Jordan, Hannah, Salem, and Alexander Miller, Salem 1730 

Jordan, Sarah, and Johu Guest, Middlesex 1767 

Jordon, Jerusey, and William Borradaille, Burlington 1782 

Jorman, Sarah, and Jacob Fowler, Burlington 1781 

Jourdan, Mary, and William Gardiner, Burlington 1779 

Joyce, Mary, Burlington, and Manuel Stratton, Burlington 1741 

Joyce, Martha, and Manuel Stratten, Burlington 1741 

Joyce, Mary, and James Wilson, Evesham .... 1781 

Joyner, Jane, and Bartholomew Minderman 1693 

Justice, Mary, and Lott Dunbar, Hunterdon 1762 

Kacklein, Peter, Jr., Sussex, and Sarah Snider 1774 

Kaighin, John, Gloucester, and Abigail Hiuchman. 1732 

Kaighiu, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Prudence Butcher, Gloucester 1767 

Kaighin, William, Gloucester, aud Abigail Cooper 1737 

Kaighn, Samuel, Gloucester, and Mary Gerrard, Gloucester 1768 

Kain, William, Gloucester, and Mary Coles 1777 

Kale, Chris., Burlington, and Lydia Atkinson, Burlington 1767 

Kanaday, Henry, Somerset, and Elizabeth Fisher 1781 

Kannady, Henry, Somerset, aud Mary Quick 1780 

Kar, Joseph, Middlesex, and Mary Moore, Middlesex 1763 

Kara, Richard, Middlesex, aud Ann Groom, Middlesex. . 1732 

Kastner, John, Somerset, and Magdalen Bulmer, Somerset 1748 

Kay, Francis, Gloucester, and Jemima French 1743 

Kay, Isaac, Gloucester, and Mary Aun Gregory, Gloucester 1738 

Kay, Isaac, Gloucester, and Hope French, Gloucester 1748 

Kay, John, Gloucester, and Rebecca Hackley 1762 

Kay, John, Gloucester, and Kessiah Thorue 1779 

Kays, William, and Barbara Smith, Burlington 1743 

Keau, Thomas, Cumberland, and Mary Mack 1777 

Kearney, James. Monmouth, and Aguess Fresneau 1771 

Kearney, Michael, Ambov, and Elizabeth Lawrence, Burlington 1774 

15 



Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


16 


June 


15 


April 


4 


Nov. 


1 


May 


21 


Sept. 


25 


April 


5 


Oct. 


11 


July 


23 


Aug. 


2 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


1 


Sept. 


24 


April 


7 


Oct. 


14 


Sept. 


14 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


17 


Feb. 


20 


Feb. 


20 


Jan. 


4 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


28 


Mar. 


2 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


8 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


5 


April 


28 


Feb. 


7 


Nov. 


16 


April 


22 


June 


15 


July 


7 


April 


2 


Feb. 


23 


April 


12 


Nov. 


2 


May 


11 


Dec. 


11 


June 


5 


June 


3Q 



226 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kearney, Thomas, Middletown, and Mary Hartsborue, Freehold 17-19 

Kearny, James, and Margaret Keid, Freehold 1751 

Kearny, Ravand, Middlesex, and Ann Hude 1766 

Keasbey, Edward, Salem, and Sarah Quinton, Salem 1765 

Keasby, Edward, Salem, and Prudence Quinton, Salem 1746 

Keating, John, Burlington, aud Hannah Myers, Burlington 1764 

Keeler, Jacob, Burlington, and Janet Brackney 1777 

Keeler, William, Burlington, and Theodosia Budd 1785 

Keen, Aunanias, Gloucester, and Susanna Lock 1785 

Keen, Daniel, Salem, and Mary Hoffman 1784 

Keen, Erick, Gloucester, and Mary Lippincott 1769 

Keen, Jacob, Cumberland, and Sarah Mulford 1779 

Keen, James, Morris, and Mary Rolf, Morris 1768 

Keen, Jonas, Salem, and Christiana Vanneman, Salem 1763 

Keen, Mathias, Bucks, Pa , and Hannah Jackson 1731 

Keen, Nicholas, Salem, and Catherine Miller, Salem 1767 

Keen, Peter, Salem, and Elizabeth Basset, Salem 1747 

Keen, Reynolds, and Nancy Lawrence, Monmouth 1782 

Keen, Seely, Salem, and Bersheba Cole 1760 

Keer, James, Hunterdon, and Hannah Bakehone . . 1775 

Kees, Joseph, aud Ann Boar 1762 

Keith, Alexander, Delaware, and Thomasiue Palmer, Philadelphia .... 1731 

Kelch, Philip, Salem, and Margaret Drollinger, Salem 1764 

Kell, James, Philadelphia, and Susannah White, Philadelphia 1735 

Kelle, John, Cape May, and Susanna Steelman, Cape May 1764 

Kelley, Abraham, Burlington, and Deborah Hammell 1786 

Kelley, James, Burlington, and Ann Len, Burlington 1736 

Kelley, James, Burlington, aud Lettice Fort 1777 

Kelley, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Cusblow, Salem 1768 

Kelley, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Martin 1778 

Kellay, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Phebe Buckman, Pennsylvania. . . . 1768 

Kelley, Patrick, aud Elizabeth Hibbs 1742 

Kellogg, Reuben, Cumberland, and Mary Bray 1781 

Kelly, Andrew, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Akin, Perth Amboy. . . . 1752 
Kelly, Cornelius, Burlington, aud Penelope McDauiel, Burlington .... 1739 

Kelly, James, Hunterdon, aud Martha Reeder, Hunterdon 1773 

Kelly. Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Ivins, Burlington 1776 

Kelly, William, Burlington, and Katharine Sharoe, Burlington 1745 

Kelly, William, Sussex, and Sebina Fennel], Sussex 1769 

Kelsey, Benjamin, Essex, and Hannah Atkinson, Essex 1741 

Kelsey, James, Monmouth, aud J imima Wilson, Monmouth 1759 

Kelsey, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Garritson, Hunterdon 1774 

Kelsey, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Butler, Burlington 1782 

Kemble, Abel, Burlington, and Mary Bolten, Burlington 1768 

Kemble, Edward, Burlington, and Hannah Wright 1777 

Kemble, Elton, Burlington, aud Sarah Stevenson 1761 



Dec. 


30 


July 


6 


Dec. 


31 


May 


4 


Oct. 


8 


May 


21 


April 


17 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


17 


Nov. 


7 


May 


22 


Mar. 


28 


July 


28 


Feb. 


15 


Jan. 


12 


Oct, 


14 


June 


20 


May 


29 


July 


28 


Nov. 


25 


April 


30 


Jan. 


15 


Nov. 


23 


Aug. 


9 


Oct. 


24 


Mar. 


22 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


24 


Sept, 


30 


April 


9 


Feb. 


14 


Jan. 


1 


Aug. 


18 


Aug. 


1 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


28 


Aug. 


12 


Feb. 


20 


July 


1 


Feb. 


24 


Aug. 


16 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


14 


Oct. 


3 


Sept. 


14 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 22; 

Ketuble, Hezekiah, Gloucester, and Abigail Cox 1780 

Kenible, John, Burliugtou, aud Charity Stevenson 1778 

Kemble, Peter, and Elizabeth Tuite, Treuton 1749*. 

Kenible, Ptter, Jr. , Morris, and Gertrude Gouverneur 1784 

Kemble, Samuel, Jr., Burlington, and Polly Ross 1782 

Kemble, Thomas, Burlington, and Ruth Garwood 1772 

Kemble, Thomas, Burlington, and Priscilla Burr, Burlington 1773 

Kemble, Vespasian, Burlington, and Rachel Haines, Evesham 1746 

Kemble, Vespasian, Gloucester, and Hester French, Gloucester 1774 

Kemings, James. Burlington, and Anne Hodsou, Burlington 1727 

Kemp, Reuben, Sussex, and Jane Stewart, Sussex 1762 

Kempe, Anthony, Hunterdon, and Leah Morgan, Staten Island 1734 

Kemper, Jacob, Morris, and Sarah Stewart 1785 

Kempton, Samuel, Middlesex, and Mary Skinner, Middlesex. 1775 

Kempton, William. Burlington, and Levina Merritt 1783 

Kendall, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Elton, Burlington 1684 

Kendall, Thomas, and Anne Jennings 1690 

Keney, Peter, Somerset, and Sarah Bertson, Hunterdon 1758 

Kennard, Joseph, and Esther Dungworth 1735 

Kennedy, Samuel, Jr., Sussex, and Elizabeth Bevers 1768 

Kennedy, Thomas, Bergen, and Mary Wallin. 1779 

Kennedy, William, Philadelphia, and Mary Bohannan 1764 

Kenney, Philip, Burlington, and Sarab Bryan, Burlington 1736 

Kenney, William, Monmouth, and Deborah Wilson, Monmouth 1761 

Kent, David, Middlesex, and Rachel Bloomfield, Middlesex 1744 

Kent, Ephraim, Cape May, and Sarah Golden .... 1774 

Kent, Erasmus, Salem, and Ann Eaton, Salem.. 1747 

Kent, Erasmus, Salem, and Elizabeth Oakford 1764 

Kent, Erasmus, Salem, and Elinor Hilderbrand, Salem 1770 

Kent, Ishmael, Burlington, and Elizabeth Collins, Burlington 1731 

Kent, John, Middlesex, and Charity Cutter 1769 

Kent, Stephen, Middlesex, and Mary Carman 1768 

Kent, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Powell, Gloucester. 1733 

Kent, William, Middlesex, and Charity Freeman, Middlesex 1756 

Kentie, John, Newtown, aud Hunnah Sharp 1733 

Kenton, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Shnbb, Burlington. 1757 

Ker, Joseph, Monmouth, aud Euphan Watson, Monmouth 1746-7 

Ker, Samuel, Monmouth, and Ann Watson, Monmouth 1757 

Ker, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Catherine Vaucleave 1779 

Ker, William, Middlesex, and Catherine Garrison 1770 

Kirby, John, Greenwich, and Elizabeth Allen 1774 

Kerlin, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail Hazelton, Burlington 1763 

Kerlin, Matthias, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Thomas 1772 

Kershaw, Abraham, Somerset, and Amea Kennada 1779 

Kester, Peter, Hunterdon, and Ann Coar 1733 

Kester, Peter, Burlington, and Theodosia Hickman, Burlington. 1773 



Jan. 


29 


Sept. 


24 


Oct. 


20 


June 


5 


Jan. 


3 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


5 


Mar. 


15 


July 


21 


Julv 


21 


May 


31 


May 


15 


May 


7 


Feb. 


2 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


6 


Mar. 


30 


Dec. 


6 


Oct. 


8 


Mar, 


15 


April 


6 


Feb. 


3 


Oct. 


27 


Aug. 


15 


May 


13 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


15 


April 


23 


Dec. 


26 


Feb. 


8 


July 


26 


Nov. 


1 


May 


1 


Sept. 


25 


Feb. 


9 


Mar. 


23 


May 


31 


June 


12 


Oct. 


5 


Feb. 


1 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


l ll 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


4 



228 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ketcham, Daniel L., Monmouth, and Esther Gifford, Monmouth . . . .1760 

Ketcham, Daniel, Monmouth, and Alice Holmes 1771 

Ketcham, David, Monmouth, and Anna Wall, Monmouth 1755 

Ketcham. David, Monmouth, and Mary Morford, Monmouth 1762 

Ketcham, Josiab, Hunterdon, and Rachel Bryant 17S4 

Ketcham, Micajah. Monmouth, and Hannah Ellison, Monmouth 1754 

Ketcham, Edward. Cumberland, and Rhoda "Woodland 1773 

Key, Job, Gloucester, and Rachel Adams 1773 

Key, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Matson 17S2 

Kidd, Alexander, Middlesex, and Sophia Watson, Middlesex 17ti7 

Kidd, John, Salem, and Martha Culler, Salem 1729 

Kidd, John, Salem, and Jane Duniapp 1757 

Kidd, Joseph, Salem, and Elizabeth Hackett, Salem 1769 

Kidd, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Elinor Wans 1732 

Kidder, Wielder, Somerset, and Margaret Middagh 1781 

Kiggin, James, Philadelphia, and Sophia Pickle 17S0 

Kiging, Ebenezer, Cumberland, and Sarah Denton, Cumberland 1759 

Kille, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Powell 1768 

Killey, Aaron, Burlington, and Mercilah Harris, Burlington 1766 

Killey, David, Monmouth, and Hannah Woodmansey, Monmouth ...1730 

Killey, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Tillton. Monmouth 1747 

Killgore, James, Burlington, and Neoiny Brown, Burlington 1730 

Hilly, Samuel, Burlington, and Bathsheba Richards. 1733 

Kilpatrick, James. Middlesex, and Elizabeth McColm, Middlesex ... 1757 

Killpatrick, Thomas, Burlington, aud Ann Palmer, Burlington 1761 

Kimball, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Leeds, Burlington. .. 1732 

Kimball, George, Burlington, and Mary Elton, Burlington 1739 

Kimball, John, Burlington, and Ann Leeds, Burlington 1738 

Kimpton, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Victory 1731 

Kimsey, Abraham, Burlington, and Rhoda Stockton 1779 

Kimsey, Reuben, Cumberland, aud Ruth Vanemon 1779 

Kimsey, "William, Gloucester, and Luey Tredway, Gloucester 1739 

Kimsey, "William, Gloucester, and Deborah Tatuin, Gloucester 1748 

Kind, Andrew, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hughes, Gloucester 1768 

Kindall, George, Burlington, and Rebecca Gardiner 1740 

Kindall, John, Burlington, and Phebe Stevens, Burlington 1741 

Kindall, Reese, Salem, and Haunah McNicholas : . . . 1773 

Kiudell, Job, Burlington, and Anue Dotey, Burlington 1775 

Kindell, Thomas, Burlington, an 1 Rachel Brass, Burlington. 1750 

Kindle, Robert, Burlington, aud Francis Pitman, Burlington 1748 

Kiug, Anthony, Moumoutb, and Flora McClane, Monmouth 1736 

King, Ary, Essex, and Peterchey Vralmon, ] Essex 1754 

King, Benajah, Burlington, and Mary Britton 17S4 

Kiug, Elias, Monmouth, aud Hauuah Hulet, Monmouth 1757 

i Joraleman. 



July 


14 


Mar. 


27 


Oct. 


IS 


Feb. 


10 


Dec. 


4 


Aug. 


21 


April 


3 


Mar. 


3 


Sept, 


19 


Sept. 


27 


May 


1 


Mar. 


8 


Jan. 


18 


Feb. 


5 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


2 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


20 


Jan. 


28 


Feb. 


25 


Aug. 


20 


Dec. 


14 


May 


23 


Sept. 


13 


Sept, 


9 


May 


20 


Nov. 


27 


Aug. 


24 


Feb. 


25 


Sept, 


27 


June 


8 


May 


16 


Dec. 


19 


April 


IS 


Dec. 


25 


Aug. 


3 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


28 


Sept, 


13 


Oct. 


22 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



229 



Kiug, Frederick, Salem, and Susannah Hilman 1751 Oct. 7 

King, George, Hunterdon, and Phebe Jobuson, Sussex 1 77U July 4 

King, Hendrick, Essex, and Leab Stiemetz, Essex 1761 Mar. 11 

King, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Boulton 17G8 Nov. 4 

King, John, Monmouth, and Susannah Cowgill 1737 Sept. 24 

King, John, Burlington, and Sarah Carman, Burlington . 17(55 Oct. 8 

King, Jobn, Philadelphia, and Anne Steel, Somerset 17G9 Feb. 14 

King, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Sarah Wilson, Hunterdon 1775 Nov. 16 

King, Obadiah, Middlesex, and Nancy Shepherd, South Amboy 1767 Feb. 7 

King, Robert, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Riley, Perth Amboy 1752 Sept. 1 

Kiug, Samuel, Burlington, and Theodocia Biiggs 1757 Jan. 28 

King, Samuel, Salem, and Elizabeth Penton 1761 Mar. 23 

King, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Simony Burlington 176-4 Sept. 10 

King, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Kesster, Hunterdon 1771 Oct. 14 

King, William, Burlington, and Mary West 1778 June 6 

Kiug, William, Jr., and Margaret Schambers 1780 May 15 

Kingslaud, Edmund, Bergen, and Sally Wilson 1763 Feb. 22 

Kingsland, Edmund, Morris, and Anne Lowe . . 1777 Nov. 10 

Kingsland, Isaac, Bergen, and Johanna Schuyler, Bergen 1741 June 3 

Kingslaud, Isaac, Jr., Bergen, and Elizabeth Harrison, Bergen .1753 Jan. 19 

Kingsland, John, and Anne Wilkison, Newark 1752 Feb. 13 

Kingsland, William, Bergen, and Ann Dally, New York 1742 Oct. 18 

Kingston, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Crippe, Burlington ..... 1741 Mar. 23 

Kinnan, John, Monmouth, and Rachel Hutchinson 1770 Feb. 28 

Kinnan, John, Middlesex, and Deborah Dennis 1780 Dec. 4 

Kinnan, Joseph, Monmouth, and Ruth Drummond, Monmouth .1 752 July 23 

Kinnan, Peter, Bergen, and Mary Fine 1780 June 20 

Kinnan, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Mary Savery, Perth Amboy 1749 Dec. 23 

Kinnan, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Mary Robinson, Perth Amboy. . . 1760 Feb. 4 

Kinnan, William, Middlesex, and Eleanor Loofbourow, Middlesex 1763 Nov. 29 

Kinney, David, Sussex, and Margaret Shipman 1784 Feb. 13 

Kinney, Jacob, Somerset, and Sarah Wykoff 1779 Feb. 10 

Kinney, Peter, Somerset, and Williampy Wykoff 1779 Feb. 6 

Kinsey, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Price 1758 Mar. 25 

Kint, James, Bergen, and Catherine Parchman 1780 Sept. 22 

Kip, Hendrick, Bergen, and Catherine Garritse 1790 Nov. 22 

Kip, Henry, Middlesex, and Mary Matthews, Middlesex 1739 Oct. 25 

Kip, John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Vanvoorheese 1764 Nov. 25 

Kipp, Isaac N., Bergen, and Mary Banta 1779 Nov. 22 

Kippin, William, New York, and Sarah Lippincott, Monmouth 1747 Oct. 24 

Kirby, Job, Monmouth, and Mary Beakes 1790 Mar. 10 

Kirby, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Pettit, Burlington 1776 May 20 

Kirby, Jonathan, Burlington, and Ame Black 1768 June 11 

Kirby, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Carter 1783 Mar. 3 

Kirby, Richard, Burlington, and Elizabeth Foulks 1749-50 Jan. 30 

Kirby, Richard, Salem, and Hannah Colson, Salem 1769 Nov. 6 



230 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kirby, Samuel, Burlington, and Lenah Hartshorne, Burlington 1766 

Kirby, Stephen, Cumberland, and Mary Lore, Cumberland .... 1773 

Kirby, Stephen, Cumberland, and Margaret Whitaker 1778 

Kirkbride, Phineas, Burlington, and Mary Rogers 1779 

Kirk, James, Burlington, and Ann Oldman 1732 

Kirkpatrick, Alexander, Somerset, and Sarah Carle, Morris 1774 

Kirkpatrick, William, Hunterdon, and Parnell Devanport, Hunterdon. 1761 
Kirnsey, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Clemaus, Gloucester. .. 1760 

Kitchen, Henry, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Jewel, Hunterdon 1770 

Kitchen, William, Hunterdon, and Elsey Beam 1782 

Kitchens, John, Burlington, and Ann Nordyke, Burlington 1758 

Kline, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Phebe Nevius, Somerset 1778 

Kline, John, Hunterdon, and Jane La Quier, Hunterdon 1774 

Knap, Peter, Middlesex, and Hume Ayers, Middlesex 1743 

Knap, Peter, Middlesex, and Rebecca Thomson, Middlesex 1753 

Kuight, Jonathan, Gloucester, aud Sarah Heppard, Gloucester 1756 

Kuight, Thomas, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Browne, Burlington 1686 

Knott, David, Monmouth, and Isabell Little, Monmouth 1753 

Knott, Peter, Monmouth, and Jane Orsborn, Monmouth 1764 

Knox, George, 9 Regt., Pa., and Sarah Medless, Newark 1780 

Krewson, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Aun Wdliamson, Hunterdon 1774 

Krose, Garrit, Staten Island, and Clautie Sickelse, Bergen 1739 

Kugh, Casparus, Bergen, and Lydia Terhune, Bergen 1760 

Kuyper, Cornelius, Jr., Philadelphia, aud Hannah Newton, Cape May. 1769 

Kuyper, Hendricus, Bergen, aud Catherine G uabrants 1750 

Kyrlin, Thomas, Burlington, and Grace Baffin, Burlington 1741 

FEMALES. -K- 

Kaighin, Charity, Gloucester, and Jacob Clement, Gloucester 1769 

Kaighn, Sarah, and Joseph Hinchmau, Gloucester 1774 

Kallam, Susanna, Burlington, and Nathaniel Potts, Burlington 1741 

Kane, Sarah, Somerset, and Francis Holliushead, Somerset 1739 

Kannau, Susanna, Somerset, aud Gowen McCoy, Somerset 1758 

Karr, Catherine, aud Felix Herbert, Somerset 1778 

Karson, Mary, and Richard Hutcherson, Middlesex 1769 

Kase, Cathriue, aud David Everitt, Hunterdon . 1786 

Kay, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Packer, Gloucester 1759 

Kay, Elizabeth, and John West, Jr., Philadelphia 1784 

Kay, Sarah, Burlington, and John Hooten, Burlington 1737 

Kay, Sarah, and William McKuight, Gloucester 1788 

Kearl, Ann, Monmouth, and John Test, Monmouth.. 1767 

Kearney, Arabella Euphemia, Monmouth, and Henry Leonard, M'th. . 1751 
Kearney, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Courtland Skinner, P'th Amb'y. 1751 

Kearney, Mary, and Joseph Shippen, Philadelphia 1736 

Kearney, Sally, Perth Amboy, and John Skinner, Perth Amboy 1774 

Kearney, Susanna, Perth Amboy, and Richard Stevens, Perth Amboy. 1758 



April 19 

Oct. 30 

Dec. '26 

July 22 

Sept. 19 

May 3 

July 1 

Nov. 26 

Oct. 30 

May 23 

Feb. 23 

July 5 

Jan. 12 

Feb. 15 

May 26 

May 4 

Aug. 12 

July 3 

May 25 

Jan. 31 

Oct. 31 

June 16 

Dec. 24 

June 20 

May 24 

Mar. 29 



Sept. 9 
Nov. 15 
Nov. 30 
Nov. 3 
April 3 
Dec. 14 
Mar. 22 
Mar. 10 
Oct. 29 
April 17 
April 23 
Aug. 20 
Dec. 14 
Oct. 19 
Nov. 30 
May 29 
Feb. 15 
Mar. 31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 23 I 

Kearns, Catherine, and Silvester Hynds, Burlington 1759 Feb. 8 

Kearny, Mary, Monmouth, and Philip Lott, New York City 1774 Sept. 12 

Keasbey, Prudence, Salem, and David Sayre, Allownys Creek 1774 Oct. 18 

Keohan, John, Monmouth, and John Holmes, Monmouth 1753 Mar. 20 

Keen, Christina, Cumberland, and Gemaliel Garrison, Salem 1762 Oct. 8 

Keen, Magdalen, Salem, and Jeremiah Smith, Philadelphia 1738 Sept. 10 

Keen, Margaret, Pennsylvania, and John Arden, Burlington 1774 June 14 

Keen, Sarah, Salem, and Abraham Richman, Piles Grove , 1771 Oct. 30 

Keene, Christian, and Robert Brodnax, Bucks, Pa. 1734 Oct. 9 

Kelley, Bridget, Bristol, Pa., and Joseph Brutou, Bristol, Pa 1767 Aug. 30 

Kelley, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and James Clarkson, Philadelphia 1727 June 19 

Kelley, Rachel, and Zephaniah Taylor, Springfield .... 1785 Oct. 25 

Kelley, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and James Woolley, Shrewsbury 1761 Dec. 8 

Kelliham, Sarah, aud Adrian Van Riper, Essex 1784 July 29 

Kelly, Amy, Woodbridge, and Elijah Harris, Piscataway 1757 June 15 

Kelly, Anne, and John Crawford, Gloucester . . 17»3 July 13 

Kelly, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, aud Denuis Dunn, Perth Amboy 1753 April 28 

Kelly, Elizabeth, Woolwich, and George Shinu, Woolwich 1769 April 3 

Kelly, Elizabeth, and John Hainmell, Burlington 1778 Aug. 5 

Kelly, Jane, Springfield, and Benjamin Trumis, Burlington 1767 Feb. 24 

Kelly, Jane, and Jacob Rail, Burlington .1778 Mar. 23 

Kelly, Mary, Middlesex, aud Elias V. Court, Jr., Middlesex 1748 June 30 

Kelly, Mary, Hunterdon, aud James Berry, Hunterdon 1773 July 19 

Kelly, Mary, and Samuel Davis, Burlington 1783 Nov. 7 

Kelly, Rachel, Alloways Creek, and Abel Smith, Salem 1765 May 17 

Kelly, Rebecca, and John Hunnywell, Sussex 1768 Jan. 26 

Kelsay, Elisabeth, and Dan Bowen, Cumberland 1780 Dec. 20 

Kelsey, Temperance, and Joseph Morgan, Hunterdon 1780 April 24 

Kemble, Anu, and William Miller, Burlington 1777 April 7 

Kemble, Anna, Burlington, aud Solomon Mason, Burlington 1754 Sept. 13 

Kemble, Huldah, and Job Rossell, Burlington 1775 May 13 

Kemble, Margaret, and Thomas Gage, The Hon. Brig. General 1758 Dec. 7 

Kemble, Mary, Northampton, aud William Middleton, Burlington 1746 Oct. 9 

Kemble, Mary, Woodbridge, aud Samuel Compton, Woodbridge 1718 Feb. 13 

Kemble, Mary, Burlington, and Charles Bevan, Philadelphia 1772 July 9 

Kemble, Mary, and Zachariah Rosell, New Hanover 1783 Dec. 24 

Kemble, Sarah, and Benjamin Bickerton, Gloucester 1778 Dec. 4 

Kemble, Sarah, and James Wour, Burlington 1779 Mar. 26 

Kemble, Susannah, Burlington, and Abraham Stockton, Burlington. .1774 June 6 

Kemp, Jemima, and Abel Thompson, Evesham 1778 Sept. 28 

Ken, Sarah, Freehold, and Thomas Sweetman, Freehold 1765 April 15 

Kendal, Jane, Burlington, and William Chumard, Burlington 1773 Oct. 4 

Kennada, Anna, and Abraham Kershow, Somerset 1779 Nov. 27 

Kennade, Elizabeth, and Jacob Cornell, Somerset 1779 Nov. 27 

Kenney, Dorothy, Somerset, and William Danelson, Somerset 1750 Oct. 25 

Kenney, Jane, Hunterdon, and Edward Harrington, Hunterdon 1750 July 16 



232 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kennedy, Anne, Burlington, and William Jackson, Burlington 1773 June 

Kennedy, Elizabeth, and James McDannel, Monmouth 1739 Jan. 

Keunedy, Elizabeth, and Samuel Thatcher. 1771 Mar. 

Kennedy, Sarah, and James Henderson, Somerset 17G8 Aug. 

Kenny, Sarah, Morris, and Samuel Tuthill, Morris 1751 Sept. 

Kent, Aun, and Charles Peterson 1691 Mar. 

Kent, Ann, Salem, and William Hunt, Salem 1772 Jan. 

Kens, Esther, Cape May, and William Seagrave, Cape May. . .... 1737 Oct. 

Kent, Rebecca, and Samuel Fentou, Burlington 1769 Nov. 

Kent, Sarah, Salem, and David Allen, Salem ... 1767 Mar. 

Kent, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Peter Ent, Hunterdon 1776 Jan. 

Kent, Susannah, Cape May, and James Miller, Cape May 1755 June 

Kenton, Hannah, and John Tices, Cumberland 1786 July 

Kenton, Mary, Burlington, and Hezekiah Wood, Burlington 1771 Mar. 

Ker, Mary, Freehold, and Peter Watson, Freehold 1757 Jan. 

Kernes, Anna, Middlesex, and Emanuel Newman, Shrewsbury 1767 Feb. 

Kerr, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Herriot, Somerset. 1759 Jan. 

Kesster, Rebecca, Hunterdon, and Thomas King, Hunterdon 1771 Oct. 

Kester, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Hambleton 1786 April 

Ketcham, Esther, Monmouth, and John Emens, Monmouth 1747 May 

Ketcham, Esther, Monmouth, and Nathan Stout, Amwell 1767 Oct. 

Ketcham, Mary, Perth Atnboy, and Luyks Smock, Perth Amboy 1752 Aug. 

Ketcham, Phebe, Monmouth, and Obadiah Stiwell, Monmouth 1761 June 

Ketcham, Sarah, and John Mattison, Hunterdon 1779 Dec. 

Ketcheu, Mary, and Thomas Mason, Burlington 1759 Dec. 

Kettle, Ruth, and Thomas Bibb 1693 July 

Key, Mary, and John Sprague, Burlington 1786 Dec. 

Key, Sarah, and Nathan Eyre, Philadelphia. ... 1791 Mar. 

Key, Sara, and Benjamin Ford, Chester, Pa 1782 Oct. 

Kidd, Elizabeth, and John Callahan 1765 June 

Kidd, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and James Heatou, Bucks, Pa 1776 June 

Kidd, Margaret, Bucks, Pa., and John Burk, Bucks, Pa 1732 Nov. 

Kidney, Hannah, Essex, and Christian Corson, Staten Island 1761 July 

Killam, Lucia, Amboy, and Thomas Estell, Monmouth 1751 Jan. 

Killday, Bridget, and William Harding, Burlington 178-1 June 

Kille, Catharine, and John Larkius, Burlington 1780 July 

Kille, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Gale, Burlington 1739 Oct. 

Kille, Mary, Burlington, and James Powell, Philadelphia 1740 Sept. 

Kille, Mercy, Gloucester, and Aaron Howell, Gloucester 1760 Jan. 

Killey, Anne, Shrewsbury, aud Tunis Aumack, Shrewsbury 1758 Oct. 

Kimball, Ellen, and William Hancock 1735 Oct, 

Kimball, Hannah, and John Mackintosh 1735 Oct. 

Kimbal, Sarah, and William Stevenson, Burlington 1740 April 

Kimble, Edith, Burlington, and James Sherwin, Burlington 1748 Mar. 

Kimble, Hannah, Burlington, and Samuel Loker, Burlington 1730 Nov. 

Kimble, Martha, Burlington, and Samuel Matlack, Burlington 1759 April 



12 
29 
18 
17 

9 
18 

9 

3 
17 

2 
27 

3 
31 
14 

4 
21 
29 
14 

3 

4 
24 
13 
13 
21 

1 
20 
22 

3 
11 

1 

5 

6 
10 

1 
14 
31 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 233 

Kimble, Mary, and Asa Schooley, Burlington 1786 

Kimble, Rachel, Burlington, and Joseph Baker, Burlington 1754 

Kimble, Rachel, and George Bickerton 1780 

Kimme, Elizabeth, and Jeremiah Towser, Cumberland 17 — 

Kimme, Mary, and Jonathan Brooks, Cape May 1778 

Kimming, Anne, Middletown, and Moses Winter, Middletown 1749 

Kimpsou, Susannah, Burlington, and John Butler, Burlington 1767 

Kiinsey, Eleanor, and Thomas Miluor, Gloucester 1763 

Kimsey, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jeremiah Matlack, Burlington . . . .1772 

K'nison, Mary, Burlington, and Edward Esdall, Burlington 1774 

Kiudall, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Patrick Field, Burlington 1740 

Kiudall, Elizabeth, BurliugtoD, and William Fenton, Burlington 1773 

Kindel, Mary, Burlington, and John Bsnnet, Burlington 1741 

Kindel), Achsah, Chesterfield, and John Hoy, Chesterfield 1782 

Kiue, Jane, Burlington, and John Mullen, Burlington 1761 

King, Achsah, and Samuel Ireton, Burlington , 1779 

King, Amy, Kiugwood, and John Stockton, Hunterdon 1764 

King, Anne, and Jeremiah Dawson, Burlington 1778 

Kiug, Catharine, Burlington, and Francis Jervis, Philadelphia 1737 

King, Catharine, Roxbury, and William Walton, Pequauack 1768 

Kiug, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Stephen Akin, Monmouth 1761 

King, Elizabeth, Hanover, and William Sprouls, Hanover 1765 

King, Elizabeth, and Jacob Swiger, Burlington 1766 

King, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Joseph Pritchard, Philadelphia. . . . 1774 

King, Hannah, Burlington, and John Budd, Burlington 1750 

King, Hannah, Burlington, and Edward Pancoast, Burlington 1761 

King, Jane, Hunterdon, and John Imlay, Hunterdon 1764 

King, Mary, Burlington, and Obadiah Hireton, Burlington 1728 

Kiug, Mary, Philadelphia, and Edward Tew, Philadelphia 1734 

King, Mary, Hunterdon, and Mansfield Hunt, Hunterdon 1736 

King, Mary, Essex, and Adrian Dow, Essex 1748 

Kiug, Mary, Burlington, and Obadiah Garwood, Burlington 1756 

Kiug, Mary, and William Turner, Philadelphia 1761 

King, Mary, and David Demaree. . 1782 

Kiug, Miriam, Springfield, and Peter Ogle, Spriugfield 1772 

King, Rachel, and John Norcross, Burlington 1765 

Kiug, Rebecca, aud Thomas Potts, Mansfield 1777 

King, Theodosia, Northampton, and Joshua Norcross, Northampton. . . 1767 

Kingsland, Catharine, and Matthias De Hart, Essex 1746 

Kingsland, Catherine, and William Gerau. . 1779 

Kiugsland, Mary, Bergen, and Edmund Leslie, Somerset 1768 

Kiugsland, Mary, aud James Joraleman 1779 

Kinuan, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Thomas Pringle, Perth Amboy 1759 

Kinnau, Lucy, Monmouth, aud George Doan, Monmouth 1756 

Kiuuey, Elizabeth, aud Jouas Simds, Massachusetts 1777 

Kiunison, Hannah, Pennsylvania, and George Hobson, Burlington. . . .1732 



Jan. 


25 


Oct. 


17 


Jan. 


29 


April 


20 


Nov. 


16 


Jan. 


17 


Oct. 


6 


April 


8 


May 


21 


Mar. 


14 


July 


16 


Aug. 


9 


June 


8 


Mar. 


31 


Nov. 


28 


April 


3 


Mar. 


17 


July 


29 


Dec. 


28 


Oct. 


17 


April 


1 


Nov. 


9 


Sept. 


7 


June 


25 


Dec. 


31 


Aug. 


15 


Oct. 


24 


July 


29 


Sept. 


30 


Sept. 


25 


Feb. 


9 


Aug. 


17 


June 


29 


Aug. 


31 


Aug. 


10 


Sept. 


18 


Sept. 


13 


April 


14 


Mar. 


31 


May 


14 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


27 


Oct, 


27 


April 


11 


Aug. 


8 



234 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS, 

g , . w -;■•• . - ... 17">8 Feb. 22 

Kip, antie, Essex, and Paxton, Essex 1761 July 25 

Kip Cattinely, Essex, and Jacob C >ers, Bergen 1753 Juno L3 

x and Eu \U Yreelandt, Bargen lTo t Nov. is 

Kip, S N iVwk, and Rnbert Lsayeraft, Essex 17<U Mar. 24 

find William Hoop n 1767 Deo. H 

I ! , and Garret V« eder, Saddle River 1780 Fob. i '■> 

Kipp Catharine, ssex, ; . Abraham B is i:. Essex 1752 April 13 

Kipp Qeesj i, B» rgen, and I m >b Bogert, Bergen 1771 A.ug. 1 

I ~ tkerhoff, Bergen.. 1700 Sepi 17 

K L%na, Monmouth, and Samuel Hntton, Monmouth — 1754 Feb. 4 

x '■ ith, and John Johnsen, Monmouth. ........ 1739 Sept 28 

\ , U uitan, and Daniel Polhamus, Raritan 1750 May 12 

% irliugton, and James Feagan, B »lin jton 1740 Feb. 

Kirbv. lun, Bui S ' ...177"' Nov. '21 

3 iry, Burlington 1745 Nov. IS 

v • and Lbraham Boston, Burlington 1764 Sept 15 

and Thomas Child, Backs, Pa 78 Noi 3 

x - M - Pa 1746 Dee. 29 

x t, Martha, - S set 1747 A.ug. 10 

Kipell, Margaret, Am\?ell, and John Snyder, Kingwood 1781 Feb 

\ ad Jos ia Mott, Hunterdon 177^ Sept 22 

Klin, rod Jacob NufE, Hunterdon 1751 Dec 25 

Kuar- B kh, and 1". s prs, 2 -\ 1769 Mar. 23 

-x Middlesex, - art, Middlesex 1765 July 27 

Kuk'. Bristol, and Josepl -col 1740 April 25 

\ Eannah, and lall, Middlesex 1769 Deo. 4 

I nuah. Mount U \'.y. and Joseph l\>r;er. Evesham 1771 May IS 

\ Sara adS 1781 Mar. 17 

g ' mm •.' : .. Monmouth .1759 Mar. 21 

a romouth, and Jol " .... 1770 April 2-4 

\ v • 3, Moi ; Jane 17 

ith, and Remembi . M'h.1744 Nov. 3 

x Sarah, 2 Sai tt, & I turnout h 1747 Aug. IS 

a \ ... 1 nmouth 1780 Mar. 

V s, - s rdon 177S May 1 

Kuowles, Hann iseph Fentou ITS ^ Nov. 4 

Kuo-> - , Philadelphia, and Wills, Philadelphia 1742 Feb - ; 

- - River 1753 Mar. IS 

- Sarah, and William - 1780 Feb. 10 

' oiua A. H 1779 Sej 

Dsoi 17"1 May 11 

.'-. .v.ois. Bunterdon, and Jemima Stout. Hunterdon 1772 July 27 

terman, Xatkauu'.. New Wrk. and Mary Merrill. Staten Island. . .174S June 15 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 235 

Lackey, Robert, Middlesex, and Susannah Noe, Middlesex .1771 

Lad 1, Samuel, Gloucester, and Sarab Hambilton, Qloncester 1751 

• orge, Monmouth, and Mary Lippincott, Monmontb 1730 

Lafel Monmontb, and Sarab Phillips, Monmontb 17 JO 

L ifi'-r, Jobn, S >merset, an I Mary Tilton, 8 unerset ]77] 

Laforge, Adrian, Jr.. Staten bland, and Lydia Pontine, Middlesex.. . 1763 
Laforge, David, Staten Island, and Mary Johnson, Staten Island. ..1748 

I. Grai ■ , Jelis, Somerset, and Add'- La Grange, Somerset 1748 

La / Abraham, Middlesex, and Catherine Edgar .1700 

ind P1j< be Onge, Burlington 1731 

Lainj/, Joshua, Hunterdon, and Patience Reed 1770 

Lair, William, Hunterdon, and Sarah Ross, Hunterdon 1776 

Lain). Moses, Monmoutb, and Elizabeth English, Monmouth 1765 

Laird, William, Monmouth, and Jane McEnight 170-3 

Lak, Amariah, Gloucester, and Nemoiah Townsend, Gloucester 1700 

Lake, Abraham, Cumberland, and Abigail Heaton 1781 

L ike, Andri w, Glouc* ster, and .Mary Ingerson . 1777 

Lake, Conert, > Bergen, and Salome Van Saan, Bergen 1780 

Like, Dani Gartara Steelman, G ter 1730 

Lake, Henry, Middlesex, and Mary Holwey, Middlesex 1740 

Lake, John, Monmouth, and Elsey J rason, Monmouth 1759 

Lamb, Jacob, Barlington, and Mary Sbinn 

Lamb, Jacob, Barlington, and Elizabeth Shinn ] 777 

Lamb, Jacob, Burlington, and S irah Inskeep 1777 

Lamb, John, Essex, and Hiley Brown ll'.ri 

Lamb, Joseph, Burlington, and Reb< cca Budd 1738 

Lamb, Joseph, Burlington, and E Jith Taylor ] 7r2 

Lamb, Nenemiah, Barlington, and Lettioe Foster, Burlington 1772 

Lambent, Rulif, Monmouth, and Margaret Jonston, Monmouth 1755 

Lamber-,on, Cornelius, Middlesex, and Sarah Ellison, Middlesex 1752 

Lamberson, James, New Jersey, and Sarah Warne 1745 

Lamberson, Simon, Middlesex, and Anne Green 1745 

Lambert, Gershom, Hunterdon, and MaryBarbary, Hunterdon 1770 

Lambert, John, Hunterdon, and Hannah Dennis 1781 

Lambert, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Eliza Woolrerton, Hunterdon 177i 

Lambson, Giles, Salem, and Sarah Mecum 1777 

Lambson, if tnce, Salem, and Margarett Mecum 175o 

Lambson, Matthias, Salem, and S irah Copner .] 758 

Lambson, Mathias, Salem, and Anne Newman 1700 

Lamburt, Josias, Monrnouth, and Joanhah Woodward, Hunterdon. . . 17 

Lamburt, Moses, Monmouth, and Sarah Horner 1737 

Lame, John, Burlington, and Anne Ewing, Darlington 1758 

Lame, John, Burlington, and Dinah Turner * 17-0 

Lamer-, ju. Conrad, Somerset, and Esther Parsell, Somerset 1750 

.rad ? 



Oct, 


12 


, ,,. 


2 




27 


Feb. 


17 


April 


4 


Dec. 


8 


Mar. 


30 


Aug. 


10 


Sept. 


27 


July 


22 


Eel.. 


13 


Jan. 


31 


Sept. 


4 


S'-pt. 


18 


June 


4 


Mar. 


10 


J »■'■. 


11 


Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


14 


Feb. 


21 


April 


5 


April 


10 


Mar. 


3 


April 


_- 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


28 


May 


27 


Sept. 


12 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


23 




7 


Oct. 


14 


Jan. 


15 


Oct. 




Mar. 


22 


Mar. 


20 


May 


20 


Dec 


14 


Dec. 


22 


July 


23 


Sept. 


12 


April 


. 


May 


1 


Oct. 


27 



236 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Laud, John, Burlington, and Catherine Hoar 1778 

Land, Thomas, Burlington, and Alice Higbee 17(53 

Land, Thomas, Gloucester, and Margaret Wilson 1772 

Land, William, Burlington, and SarahMorris 1781 

Lane, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Mary Hoffman, Hunterdon 1773 

Line, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Tiny Monfort 1782 

Lane, Gilbert, Monmouth, and Eleanor Smock, Monmouth 1741 

Lane, Guilbert, Somerset, and Rebecca Pertron . 1783 

Lane, Guisbert, Monmouth, and Mary Fisher, Monmouth 1716 

Lane, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Hankinson, Monmouth 1763 

Lane, Joseph, Jr., Middlesex, and Catherine Priest 1781 

Lane, Stephen, Burlington, and Ann Edward 1777 

Lane, Wdliam, Somerset, and Jannetia Rappelyea, Somerset 1750 

Lane, William, Somerset, and Mary Brokaw 1781 

Lauen, Richard, Sussex, and Catherine McDonald 1781 

Langdale, John, Philadelphia, and Sarah Hudson, Philadelphia 1737 

Laugercan, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Bozworth, Burlington. ... 1741 

Langford, John, Burlington, and Isabella Bowman, Burlington 1686 

Langford, John, and Effey Black 1732 

Langley, Thomas, Gloucester, and Ruth Chisam 1775 

Langstaft, Laban, Gloucester, and Anne Hewit, Gloucester 1744 

Langton, Thomas, Salem, and Ruth Wright, Salem 1746 

Laning, Enoch, Hunterdon, and Sarah Abbit 1785 

Lining, John, Cumberland, and Anna Ewing 1785 

Lankins, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Bennett, Monmouth 1779 

Lannin, William, Burlington, and Esther Campbell, Burlington 1783 

Lanning, John, Monmouth, and Keziah Combs 1757 

Lanning, John, Burlington, and Grace Craft, Burlington 1761 

Lanning, John, Cumberland, and Rhoda Izard, Cumberland 1773 

Lanning, John, Burlington, and Amey Arnel 1777 

Lanning, Joseph, Burliugton, and Mary Jaquatt, Burlington 1741 

Lamming, Joseph, Burlington, and Marcy Lownsberry 1756 

Lanning, Ralph, Hunterdon, and Rebeckah Smith 1782 

Lanning, Samuel, Burlington, and Ann Elkington 1732 

Lansing, Garrit G., Bergen, and Auu Zabriskie, Bergen 1789 

Laquar, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bray, Monmouth 1747 

Larason, David, and Jerusha Smith 1 780 

Larason, James, and Rachel Hudnot 1783 

Large, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Mary Runyan 1780 

Larkius, John, Burlington, and Catharine Kille 1780 

Laroe, Henry, Grange, N. Y., and Marretye Maudeviel, Morris 1780 

Larowe, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Anna Ford 1780 

Larren, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Sutton, Burlington 1763 

Larzclere, Nicholas, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Britton, Bucks, Pa 1766 

Lashley, Edward, Gloucester, and Rachel Sedmau 1758 

Laton, Obadia, Monmouth, and Hulden Hemones, Monmouth 1758 



Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


28 


Sept. 


1 


May 


9 


Feb. 


1 


Aug. 


9 


June 


6 


Nov. 


25 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


8 


June 


4 


Nov. 


3 


May 


26 


Dec. 


30 


April 


29 


Oct. 


30 


July 


14 


Aug. 


22 


Dec. 


10 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


10 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


6 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


11 


May 


20 


Nov. 


12 


Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


7 


July 


30 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


27 


Oct. 


9 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


11 


Feb. 


10 


July 


31 


Feb. 


24 


April 


23 


May 


21 


Mar. 


11 


Aug. 


28 


Mar. 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 237 

Latorat, Peter, Hunterdon, and Margaret Stout, Hunterdon.. 1777 Nov. 21 

Laughton, Benjamin, Cape May, and Elizabeth Huton, Cape May. 1739-40 Feb. 23 

Lavenner, John, Burlington, and Lydia Atkinson, Burlington 1729 Aug. 20 

Lawler, Thomas, Fauquier, Va . Swab. Gromo, New Jersey 1779 Jan. 12 

Lawrance, Nathan, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Johnston, Cumberl'd..l769 Aug. 18 

Lawrance, Samuel, Monmouth, and Mary Tilton, Monmouth ....... 1756 Kov. 13 

Lawrason, Jobn, Somerset, aud Catherine Demon, Somerset 1750 June 18 

Lawrence, Andrew, Burlington, and Sarah Wallace 1774 Feb. 3 

Lawrence, Benjamin, East Jersey, and Rebecca Harbut 1758 Feb. 11 

Lawrence, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Euphen Barton, Monmouth ...1779 May 25 

Lawrence, Caleb, New York, aud Elizabeth Lawrence, Monmouth 1747 June -20 

Lawrence Giles, Pennsylvania, and Wilmeth Harry, Pennsylvania . . 1738 Nov. 23 

Lawrence, Jacob, Monmouth, and Pathena Polhemus .1779 May 29 

Lawrence, Jacob, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Feorigin 1767 Oct. 14 

Lawrence, James, Monmouth, aud Catherine Waters, Burlington 1765 Oct. 29 

Lawrence, James, Jr., Monmouth, and Mary Rogers 1785 Feb. 27 

Lawrence, John, Monmouth, and Hannah Borden, Burlington 1731 April 26 

Lawrence, John, Burlington, and Anne Leonard, Middlesex 1753 July 18 

Lawrence, John, Burlington, and Martha Tallman 1759 Nov. 14 

Lawrence, John, Jr., Essex, and Elizabeth Wells 1777 Aug. 27 

Lawrence, Jonathan, Orange, N. Y., aud Jaunet Neah 1784 Nov. 2 

Lawrence, Joseph, Jr., Monmouth, aud Deborah Tdton, Monmouth. . 1766 Feb. 22 

Lawrence, Richard, aud Catherine Stelle, Monmouth 1747 Sept. 16 

Lawrence, William, Monmouth, and Marah Duley, Monmouth 1753 Mar. 19 

Lawrence, William, Philadelphia, and Margaret Wood, Philadelphia. .1755 May 17 

Lawshe, John, Hunterdon, and Penelope Chamberlin 1779 Sept. 3 

Layer, Michael, Middlesex, and Elizabetb Dove 1758 Mar. 13 

Layton, Andrew, Monmouth, and Mary Wilkison, Monmouth 1761 Dec. 19 

Layton, Samuel, Monmouth, and Sarah Williams, Monmouth 1755 Dec. 25 

Layton, Asher, Monmouth, and Asene Emans, Monmouth . 1762 April 16 

Layton, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Nevill, Middlesex 1761 Dec. 26 

Layton, John, Monmouth, aud Jane Johnston, Monmouth 1764 Feb. 10 

Layton, Safty, Monmouth, and Christian Fleming, Monmouth 1765 Jau. 4 

Layton, Thomas, Monmouth, and Rebecka Stilwell, Middlesex 1758 April 15 

Layton, William, Monmouth, and Hannah White, Monmouth 1753 May 24 

Laytou, William, Monmouth, and Catherine Van Pelt 1764 Nov. 19 

Lazier, John, Bergen, and Ann Lazier, Bergen 1767' April 29 

Lazillier, Nicholas, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Bessonett, Bucks, Pa. . .1741 Mar. 28 

Lea, William, Monmouth, aud Zilpha Gifford, Monmouth 1763 June 1 

Leadam, Johu, Bucks, Pa., and Susanna Lancaster, Bucks, Pa 1730 Feb. 21 

Leadlie, Thomas, Middlesex, aud Mary Blane, Middlesex .1740 Dec. 29 

League, Samuel, Salem, and Mary McFagin, Salem 1764 Feb. 18 

Leahy, John, Hunterdon, aud Penelope Hunt 1784 Jan. 7 

Leake, Daniel, Gloucester, and Sarah Lucas, Gloucester 1764 Aug. 17 

Leake, Samuel, Cumberland, and Elizabeth McQueen, Cumberland. . .1769 Feb. 14 

Learning, Aaron, Jr., Cape May, and Mary Foreman, Cape May 1738 Feb. 13 



238 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Learning, Jonathan, Cape May, and Margaret Stiles 1763 

Learning, Jonathan, Cape May, and Judith Hand 1766 

Learning, Jonathan, Cape May, and Sarah Ewing 1780 

Learning, Persons, Cape May, and Charlotta Eldreflge, Cape May 1782 

Learning, Thomas, Cape May, and Elizabeth Learning, Cape May 1740 

Leainyng, Christopher, Cape May, and Sarah Spicer, Cape May 1761 

Leap, Henry, Burlington, and Mary Willis, Burlington 1777 

Leaver, Frederick V., Somerset, and Elizabeth Vandyke 1780 

Leawert, George, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Burrows 1778 

Leaycraft, Robert, Essex, and Sarah Kip, New York 1761 

Leaycraft, William, Orange, N. Y., and Eleanor Bogert 1783 

Le boyteulx, Paul, Middlesex, and Elisabeth Henry, Middlesex 1749 

Leconard, Nicholas, Gloucester, and Mary Cardiffe, Burlington 1743 

Leconey, William, Burlington, and Abigail Crispin 1787 

Leddel, William, Morris, and Pheby Wyck, Morris 1770 

Lee, Abel, Gloucester, and Mary Wood, Gloucester 1733 

Lee, Abel, Gloucester, and Mary Doughty, Gloucester 1 761 

Lee, Abel, Cape May, and Susannah Snell 1783 

Lee, David, Monmouth, and Margaret Perine, Monmouth 1761 

Lee, Hezekiah, Gloucester, and Margaret Breasor, Gloucester 1755 

Lee, John, Burlington, and Johanna Fort, Burlington 1727 

Lee, John, Middlesex, and Hannah Arvine, Staten Island 1741 

Lee, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Cyphers 1766 

Lee, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Hannah Smith, Hunterdon 1767 

Lee, Joshua, Middlesex, and Hannah Dove, Monmouth 1739 

Lee, Robert, Somerset, and Sarah Shaw, Somerset 1770 

Lee, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Gandy, Gloucester 1757 

Lee, Thomas, Burlington, and Theodocia Powell 1759 

Lee, Thomas, Sussex, and Margaret Bartron 1781 

Lee, William, Burlington, and Joan Smith, Burlington 1683 

Leeard, Archibald, Monmouth, and Sarah Lard, Monmouth 1757 

Leeb, Gustavus, Upper Penns Neck, and Mary Plunkett, Penns Neck.. 1760 

Leech, Isaac, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Holcomb 1781 

Leech, Jesse. Burlington, and Elizabeth Parker, Burlington 1780 

Leech, Uz, Burlington, and Elizabeth Tallman 1781 

Leeds, Abraham, Burlington, and Anne Lamb, Burlington 1750 

Leeds, Daniel, Gloucester, and Rebecca Steelman, Gloucester 1751 

Leeds, Daniel, Gloucester, and Mary Steelman 1775 

Leeds, Isaiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Jones 1778 

Leeds, James, Gloucester, and Rody Byard 1785 

Leeds, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Judith Steelman 1776 

Leeds, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Corelry, Burlington 1737 

Leeds, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Giffer, Gloucester 1760 

Leeds, Joseph, Burlington, and Margaret Jones, Burlington 1775 

Leeds, Nehemiah, and Elizabeth Wood 1735 

Leeds, Nehemiah, Gloucester, and Sarah Johnston, Gloucester 1755 



Jan. 25 

Aug. 14 

Nov. 6 

Oct. 21 

April 25 

Aug. 8 

Mar. 

June 

Oct. 

Mar. 

Oct, 

Nov. 

Aug. 

Oct. 

April 

Mar. 

Feb. 

July 

Aug. 

May 

Jan. 

July 

Nov. 

July 

July 

June 

Mar. 

Nov. 

Oct. 

Sept. 23 

Mar. 8 

Dec. 

Feb. 

June 

May 

Mar. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

June 

Feb. 

Dec. 

June 

May 

Oct. 

Sept. 

Aug. 



1 
16 
27 
24 
16 

9 
30 
31 

4 

7 

7 
24 

6 
26 

4 
21 
29 

2 
28 

5 
25 

6 
10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



239 



Leeds, Nehemiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Eayre, Burlington .... 1774 April 4 

Leeds, Nehemiah, Jr., Gloucester, and Ann Pizley, Gloucester 1763 Sept. 5 

Leeds, Philo, Burlington, and Surah Shinn, Burlington 1740 Nov. 1 

Leeds, Robert, Gloucester, and Margaret Leeds 1784 Mar. 9 

Leeds, Solomon, Gloucester, and Martha Farrow, Burlington 1765 Jan. 30 

Leeds, Titan, Burlington, and Hope Frenoh 1759 Jan. 31 

Leeds, Titan, Burlington, and Mary Warrington 1782 Feb. 26 

Leek, John, and Phebe Devinney 1735 Jan. 12 

Leek, John, Egg Harbour, and Martha Rose, Egg Harbour 1761 July 3 

Leek, John, Cape May, and Lydya Tates, Cape May 1763 June 14 

Leek, Nathan, Cumberland, and Hannah Fithian, Cumberland 1761 Dec. 1 

Leek, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Matthis 1784 Mar. 25 

Leeke, Levi, Cumbeiland, and Mabel Reeves 1783 July 28 

Leffers, Peter, Monmouth, and Mary Vanmater, Monmouth 1759 June 11 

Leforge, Charles, Staten Island, and Elizabeth Butler, Staten Island. .1757 Oct. 25 

L3forge, David, Middlesex, and Anne Jennings, Somerset 1756 June 14 

Leforge, David, Middlesex, and Martha Pierson, Middlesex •. . 1757 June 4 

Lef use, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Johnson, Burlington .... 1775 Nov. 29 

Leigh, Amos, Hunterdon, and Ann Hoff 1782 Oct. 23 

Leigh, Ichabod, Hunterdon, and Anne Stout, Somerset 1744 July 23 

Leigh, Joseph, and Jerusha Evans 1775 Mar. 21 

Leigh, Samuel, Somerset, and Amy Black-well, Somerset 1774 Dec. 10 

Leish, Henry, Sussex, and Elizabeth Landon, Sussex 1771 Dec. 31 

Lemner, Owens, Staten Island, and Rebecca Hussey 1745 Jan. 13 

Leonard, Daniel, Middlesex, and Susannah Doughty, Middlesex 1761 Nov. 20 

Leonard, Elias, Burlington, and Mary Ervin 1779 Feb. 18 

Leonard, Henry, Monmouth, and Arabella Euphemia Kearney, M'th. 1751 Oct. 18 

Leonard, John, Cape May, and Ann Corson, Cape May 1732 Dec. 29 

Leonard, John, Monmouth, and Deborah Sheppard, Monmouth 1759 Dec. 17 

Leonard, John, Monmouth, and Frances Schooly, Burlington 1769 May 26 

Leonard, Joseph, Monmouth, and Magdalen Gombould, Monmouth. . 1766 Sept. 11 

Leonard, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Bray 1773 Oct. 12 

Leonard, Michael, Burlington, and Ann Brigs 1782 June 20 

Leonard, Nicholas, Burlington, and Catharina Scheriper 1761 May 12 

Leonard, Patrick, Monmouth, and Margaret Delaney, Monmouth. . . . 1765 Feb. 15 

Leonard, Samuel, Cape May, and Joan Williams, Cape May 1733 June 27 

Leonard, Thomas, Monmouth, and M ary Lawrence, Monmouth 1741 May 21 

Leonard, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah White, Monmouth 1767 April 30 

Leonard, William, Middlesex, and Anne Shaw 1779 June 25 

Lepper, Thomas, Monmouth, and Isabel Robertson, Monmouth 1744 April 6 

Lerew, Peter, Hunterdon, and Nelly Conoway, Hunterdon 1765 Sept. 18 

Le Riche, Joseph, Morris, and Sarah Jones 1779 July 19 

Leslie, Edmund, Somerset, and Mary Kingsland, Bergen 1768 Feb. 10 

Lester, Stephen, Cumberland, and Susannah Smith, Cumberland 1773 Nov. 21 

Letford, Robert, Gloucester, and Mary England 1785 Jan. 13 

Letson, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elisabeth White 1752 Dec. 1 



240 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Letts, Elijah, Middlesex, and Hannah Rose 1769 

Letts, Elisha, Middlesex, and Mary Disbrow, Middlesex 1772 

Letts, Francis, Monmouth, and Mele Spray, Monmouth 1762 

Letts, Francis, Jr., Middlesex, and Sarah Letts, Middlesex 1760 

Letts, James, Middlesex, and Sarah Sheppard, Middlesex 1760 

Letts, James, Middlesex, and Hannah Campbell 1774 

Letts, Thomas, Monmouth, and Kezia Bennet, Monmouth 1771 

Lewis, Amaziah, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Sweet, Monmouth 1743 

Lewis, Benjamin, Somerset, and Anne Doty, Somerset 17C8 

Lewis, Edward, Pennsylvania, and Jane Williams, Pennsylvania 1730 

Lewis, Isaac, Richmond, N. Y., and Bellitje Butler 1767 

Lewis, James, Salem, and Rachel Scull, Salem 1774 

Lewis, Jesse, Bristol, Pa., and Rachel Brelsfoard, Bristol 1764 

Lewis, John, Salem, and Mary Burden, Salem 1730 

Lewis, John, Salem, and Ruth Roberts 1741 

Lewis, Johu, Bergen, and Petertie Jerolman, Bergen 1767 

Lewis, John, Bucks, Pa., and Rachel Fox 1780 

Lewi«, John, Burlington, and Lydia Sharp, Burlington 1784 

Lewis, Jonathan, Richmond, N. Y. , and Abigail Pintard, Monmouth. 1756 

Lewis, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Stratton, Burlington 1733 

Lewis, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Coulton, Monmouth. . .1749-50 

Lewis, Zeah, Somerset, and Anna Doughty, Somerset 1760 

Leydekker, Samuel B., Bergen, and Catherine Provoost, Bergen 1764 

Liddou, James, Bucks, Pa., and Ann Lane, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Lie, James, Bergen, and Meeri Cornwill 1766 

Light, Matthew, Middlesex, and Catherine Vredenburgh, Middlesex. . 1779 

Liming, John, Monmouth, and Mary Coxe, Monmouth 1740 

Liming, William, Monmouth, and Rachel Johnson. 1750 

Linch, Samuel, Salem, and Sarah Pedrick, Saleni 1730 

Lindsley, Jauia, Morris, and Hannah Nuttman, Morris 1752 

Lines, Johu, Bergen, and Helena Bruyn 1779 

Linn, Alexander, Somerset, and Sarah McCay, Somerset 1745 

Linn, Alexander, Sussex, and Hannah Armstrong 1779 

Linn, Joseph, Somerset, and Martha Kirkpatrick, Somerset. . ... 1747 

Linnington. John, Philadelphia, and Mary Arney, Burlington 1766 

Linthicum, Edmund, Burlington, and Meribah Reeves, Burlington.. . 1783 

Lippicotte, James, Monmouth, and Hannah Hance, Monmouth 1757 

Lippincott, Amaziah, and Hannah Prickett 1768 

Lippincott, Aquila, Burlington, and Agues Inskip 1784 

Lippincott, Arney, Burlington, and Rebecca Almon, Burlington 1761 

Lippincott, Arney, Burlington, and Elizabeth Evans 1779 

Lippincott, Benjamin, Burlington, and Haunah Hewlings 1783 

Lippincott, Caleb, Burlington, and Jemima Shinn 1782 

Lippincott, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Coles 1756 

Lippincott, Darius, Monmouth, and Naomi Allen, Monmouth 1743 

Lippincott, David, Burlington, and Mary Chambers, Burlington 1728 



Dec. 


20 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


2 


Mav 


30 


Feb. 


20 


Dec. 


24 


June 


27 


July 


30 


Feb. 


10 


July 


4 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


3 


Aug. 


8 


Nov. 


18 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


12 


Aug. 


3 


Aug. 


28 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


June 


17 


Jan. 


5 


May 


29 


Nov. 


29 


Aug. 


12 


Nov. 


4 


Mar. 


17 


Sept. 


10 


Oct. 


6 


Nov. 


27 


April 


27 


April 


17 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


13 


Sept. 


29 


Nov. 


14 


Oct. 


29 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


21 


Jan. 


2 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


July 


20 


June 


26 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 24I 

Lippincott, David, Burlington, and Rebeckak Stockton, Burlington. . . 1731 Juue 1 

Lippincott, David, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Woolley, Monmouth — 1757 Dec. 5 

Lippiucott, Enos, Burlington, and Elizabeth Doughty 1779 Sept. 18 

Lippiucott, Jacob, Burlington, aud Hanuah Lippiucott, Burlington. . .1775 July 15 

Lippiucott, Jacob, Jr., Monmouth, and Lydia Woolley, Monmouth. .. 1753 Dec. 11 

Lippiucott, James, Monmouth, and Rachel Brewer, Monmouth 1750 June 22 

Lippiucott, James, Monmouth, and Sarah Wardill, Monmouth 1756 Feb. 4 

Lippiucott, James, Burliugton, and Susannah Evans, Burlington 1771 Jan. 28 

Lippiucott, James, Burlington, and Hannah Crispin 1777 Sept. 2u 

Lippiucott, Job, Burlington, and Anna Ogburu, Burlington 1728 June 25 

Lippiucott, Job, Burliugton, and Sarah Barnes 1779 Mar. 29 

Lippiucott, Job, Burliugton, aud Beasely Wells 1780 Feb. 24 

Lippincott, Job, Burlingtou, and Bathsheba Evans 1794 Feb. 24 

Lippiucott, John, Burliugton, and Anne Eves, Burlington 1746 Mar. 13 

Lippiucott, John, Burliugton, aud Abigail Collins, Burlington 1770 Mar. 12 

Lippiucott, John, Burliugton, and Rachel Hughes 1779 Sept. 20 

Lippiucott, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Elton, Burlington 1782 Aug. 1 

Lippiucott, Jonathan, Burlington, and Anue Eves, Burlington 1746 Mar. 13 

Lippincott, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Mary Cook, Monmouth 1757 Dec. 16 

Lippiucott, Jonathan, Salem, and Naomi Tyley, Salem 1770 Dec. 6 

Lippincott, Josiah, Burlington, and Merriam Slim 1791 Aug. 15 

Lippincott, Judiah, Burlington, and Mary Dugless, Burlington 1762 Mar. 27 

Lippincott, Levi, Burlington, and Lettis Wills, Burlington 1773 April 12 

Lippincott, Moses, Burliugton, and Mary Hewlings, Burlington. . . .1778 Oct. 3 

Lippincott, Obadiah, Monmouth, and Phebe Cathcart, Monmouth 1752 July 2 

Lippincott, Peter, and Mary Froth 1783 Dec. 10 

Lippincott, Remembrance, Gloucester, and Hannah Bates, Gloucester. 1 732 Nov. 29 

Lippincott, Remembrance, Mon'h, and Elizabeth Riddle (widow), M'h. 1744 Nov. 1 

Lippincott, Remembrance, Jr. , M'h, and Rebekah Knott (spiuster), M'h. 1744 Nov. 3 

Lippincott, Richard, Burlington, aud Hannah Clemens, Burlington 1751 May 1 

Lippincott, Samuel, Burliugton, and Mary Amey 1737 Oct. 20 

Lippincott, Samuel, Monmouth, aud Sarah Knott, Monmouth 1747 Aug. 18 

Lippincott, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Applyn 1758 Jan. 7 

Lippincott, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Lain, Monmouth 1761 April 16 

Lippincott, Samuel, Moumouth, and Mary Lippincott, Monmouth . . 1767 June 23 

Lippiucott, Thomas, Monmouth, and Johannah Parker, Monmouth. ..1760 April 19 

Lippincott, Thomas, Burlingtou, aud Elizabeth Haines, Burlington. . .1767 Aug. 15 

Lippiucott, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Walker 1778 April 6 

Lippincott, Thomas, Burlington, and Rachel Haiues 1779 Jan. 6 

Lippencott, Uriah, Monmouth, and Vallaria Chambers, Monmouth 1752 Aug. 17 

Lippincott, William, Burliugton, aud Rebecca Johnston, Burlington. . 1777 June 13 

Lippincott, William, Burlington, and Rhoda Lishman 1779 Aug. 9 

Lishmau, Henry, Burlington, aud Sarah Powell, Burlington 1771 May 13 

Lisk, Charles, Richmond, N. Y., and Mary Valentine, Richmond, N. Y.1742 July 24 

Lisk, James, Staten Island, and Alice Saltar,' Staten Island 1757 Aug. 16 

Liss, Philip, Burlingtou, and Jane McGinnis 1756 May 1 

16 



242 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lister, William, Essex, and Auna Rodman, Burlington 1759 Oct. 20 

Lithgow, Daniel, Salem, and Gertrue Beesly 1771 July 11 

Little, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Wales, Monmouth 1752 Dec. 23 

Little, John, Monmouth, and Mary Leeds, Gloucester . 1768 April 16 

Little, John, Cape May, and Esther Barrit, Gloucester 1769 Aug. 29 

Little, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Silverthom 1780 April 27 

Little, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Margaret Little, Hunterdon 1767 Sept. 16 

Little, William, Burlington, and Amy Jobs 1758 Feb. 17 

Little, William, Hunterdon, and Agnes Armstrong, Hunterdon 1770 July 5 

Livesey, Paulus, Bergen, and Elizabeth Ltttkens 1767 Feb. 20 

Livingston, Robert, Cumberland, and Pations Davis 1754 Sept. 26 

Livingston, Robert R., Jr., New York, and Mary Stevens 1770 Sept. 8 

Lloyd, Amos, Hunterdon, and Rebecka Parent. 1780 May 20 

Lloyd, Ephraim, Salem, and Anne Walker, Salem 1716 May 18 

Loazear, John, BergeD, and Mary Berdett, Bergen 1768 May 6 

Lock, Andrew, Salem, and Eleanor Nealson „ 1773 Mar. 11 

Lock, Charles, and Mary Faucett. 17 

Lock, Francis, Jr., Hunterdon, and Ann McMurtrie, Hunterdon 1771 Sept. 30 

Lock, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Hosel, Salem 1772 Sept. 21 

Lock, William, Cumberland, and Sarah Parent 1778 Dec. 1 

Lockhart, James, Somerset, and Mary Berry, Somerset 1752 Mar. 7 

Lodge, Benjamin, Salem, and Sarah Fisher, Gloucester 1712 Oct. 15 

Lodge, Benjamiu, Gloucester, and Rebeckah Allen, Gloucester 1762 Nov. 17 

Lodge, l John, Waterford, and Mary Pattison, Evesham 1717 Sept. 22 

Lofetra, Edmond, Monmouth, and Mary Brewer, Monmouth 1741 Oct. 20 

Logan, Daniel, Monmouth, and Rachel Baird, Monmouth 1717 Oct. 24 

Logan, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Alcott, Burlington 1780 May 20 

Logan, Thomas, Morris, and Sarah Johnson, Morris 1779 Mar. 30 

Loker, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Kimble, Burlington 1730 Nov. 5 

London, Edward, Burlington, and Sibella Sharp 1779 Aug. 11 

Long, Andrew, Gloucester, and Katherine Cox, Gloucester 1730 Dec. 2 

Long, Ansel 1, Cumberland, and Margaret Finlaw, Cumberland 1750 Dec. 10 

Long, Constant, Cumberland, and Unis Shepperd 1778 June 16 

Long, Daniel, Salem, and Prudence Graves, Salem 1768 Oct. 6 

Long, David, Cumberland, and Kerenhappuck Shepperd 1757 Jan. 10 

Long, Joseph, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Vanhook 1785 Aug. 27 

Long, Martin, Burlington, and Mary Ong 1760 April 24 

Longlee, John, Salem, and Sarah Allen, Salem 1761 May 13 

Longstaff, Laban, Gloucester, and Anne Hewit, Gloucester 1744 Dec. 10 

Longstreet, Awrey, Middlesex, and Lydia Hull, Middlesex 1754 May 6 

Longstreet, Christoffel, Monmouth, and Nellie Schenck, Monmouth. . . 1753 Nov. 28 

Longstreet, Derrick, Somerset, and Catherine Stryker 1778 July 28 

Longstreet, Garret, Monmouth, and Catherine Lawrence, Monmouth.. 1761 May 9 

i In the marriage bond James Inskeep wenj security for John Lodge. The marriage rec- 
ord says the license was issued to James Inskeep. and the marriage is indexed in the latter 
name on p. 211. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 243 

Longstreet, Garret, Monmouth, and Catherine Smock, Monmouth. .. .1763 

I , ingstreet, Gilbert, Monmouth, and Elinor Hankinson 1777 

Lougstreet, John, Monmouth, and Lucy Topscot 1769 

Longstreet, Peter, Monmouth, and Jane Covenhoven, Monmouth. 1763 
Longstreet, Richard, Monmouth, andPrudence Parker, Monmouth. .. .1763 
Longstreet, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Longstreet, Monmoutb.1753 
Longstreet, Samuel, Monmouth, and Barbara Antonides, Monmouth. 1756 

Longstreet, £toffel, Monmouth, and Abigail Woolley, Monmouth 1743 

Longstreet, Stoffel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bills, Monmouth 1748 

Longworth, [saac, Essex, and Catherine Ogdeu, Essex 1761 

Loofbourrow, David, Burlington, and Amy Gaskill 1779 

Loofbourrow, Elias, Middlesex, and Margaret Shanks 1766 

Loofburrow, Jacob, Monmouth, and Sarah Leg, Monmouth 1758 

Loofburrow, Simon, Somerset, and Jane Wilson, Somerset 1751 

Loper, Aaron, Salem, and Rebecca Collwell, Salem 1751 

Loper, John, Salem, and Hannah Garretson, Salem 1757 

Loper, William, Jr. , Salem, and Bethiuia Packer, Gloucester 1759 

Lord, Abraham, Salem, and Anicka Mullicka 1736 

Lord, Abraham, Salem, and Mary Sparks, Saiem. 1758 

Lord, Edmond, Gloucester, and Susanna Attwood, Gloucester 1736 

Lord, John, Gloucester, and Mary Borton, Burlington 1750 

Lord, Joseph, Gloucester, and Eleanor Chester, Gloucester. ... 1750 

Lord, Joshua, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Piles, Gloucester 1772 

Lord, Silas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bates, Burlington 1774 

Lorton, John, Jr., Middlesex, and Rachel Combs, Middlesex 1752 

Lortou, William, Middlesex, and Martha Bloodgood, Middlesex 1760 

Losey, Peter, Burlington, and Ruth Severn, Burlington 1774 

Lott, Gershom, Hunterdon, and Kesiah Phillips . . . 1768 

Lott, John, Middlesex, and Mary Neilson, Middlesex 1761 

Lott, Philip, New York City, and Mary Kearny, Monmouth 1774 

Louderback, John, Salem, and Amy Harris 1776 

Lough, Robert, Somerset, and Eleanor Polk 1768 

Lounsberry, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Mary Kirby, Burlington 1745 

Lovett, Jonathan, Burlington, and Sarah Tautuin, Burlington 1741 

Love, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Martha Hand, Cape May 1769 

Love, Nathaniel, ( 'umberland, and Rachel Cook 1778 

Love, Seth, Cumberland, and Abigail Whitecar, Cumberland 1778 

Love, William, Cumberland, and Ellener Forgison, Cumberland 1763 

Loveless, John, Burlington, and Ann Craft, Burlington 1742 

Low, Abrani, Somerset, and Ida Stoothoff, Somerset 1753 

Low, Cornelius, Somerset, and Catherine Yanduyn, Somerset 1716 

Low, Dirck, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Emans, Hunterdon 1717 

Low, Nicholas, New York, and Sarah Low, Essex 1753 

Low, Peter, Middlesex, and Jane Vandoursen, Middlesex 1751 

Low, Thomas, Gloucester, and Esther Wood 1780 

Lowden, William Burlington, and Ann Peacock 1785 



Dec. 


27 


Nov. 


22 


Jan. 


28 


Dec. 


19 


July 


27 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


16 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


29 


July 


15 


Jan. 


16 


April 


17 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


10 


Mar. 


26 


April 


2 


April 


4 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


13 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


23 


Oct. 


2 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


19 


Dec. 


16 


Sept. 


12 


Jan. 


12 


June 


27 


Nov. 


18 


May 


7 


Sept. 


5 


Sept. 


28 


May 


8 


Mar 


5 


Nov. 


15 


Jan. 


23 


Sept. 


27 


June 


1 


April 


26 


Sept. 


26 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


13 



244 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lowey, Michael, and Deborah Ustick 1750 

Lownsberry, John, Salem, and Sarah Bartleson, Salem 1 761 

Lowrey, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Mary Lee, Hunterdon 1770 

Lowrey, William, Hunterdon, and Martha Howe, Trenton 1779 

Lowry, Mathew, Sussex, and Abigail Warford, Sussex 1762 

Lowry, William, Monmouth, and Mary Lawrence, Monmouth 1731 

Loxley, Abraham, Somerset, and Catherine Lowzade 1779 

Loxley, Benjamin, Philadelphia, and Catherine Cox, Monmouth 1761 

Loyd, Ephraim, Salem, and Sarah Smith, Salem 1775 

Loyd, John, New Jersey, and Catherine Craig 1745 

Loyd, John, Salem, and Mary Linck, Salem 1760 

Loyd, Timothy, Jr., Monmouth, and Lydia Gordon, Monmouth 1740 

Lozier, Nicholas, Bergen, and Mary Crusea, Bergen , . . . 1768 

Losier, Nicholas, Bergen, and Charity Conklin, Orange, N. Y 1771 

Lozier, Peter, Bergen, and Elizabeth Naugel, Orange, N. Y 1764 

Lucas, Robert, Burlington, and Rebecca Fennimore, Burlington 1730 

Lucas, Robert, Burlington, and Sarah Hancock 1782 

Lucas, Seth, Burlington, and Esther Hewlings, Burlington 1760 

Lucer, Thomas, Monmouth, and Grace McDaniel 1759 

Lucus, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Saunders, Burlington 1750 

Ludlam, Anthony, Cape May, and Pheabe Reed, Cape May 1771 

Ludlam, Christopher, Cape May, and Amelia Hand, Cape May 1776 

Ludlam, Henry, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Shotwell, Essex 1772 

Ludlam, Henry, Cape May, and Rohannah Hand, Cape May 1772 

Ludlam, Henry, Cape May, and Hannah Smith, Cape May 1772 

Ludlam, Jacob, Cumberland, and Rachel Worthington 1784 

Ludlam, James, Cape May, and Martha Johnson 1790 

Ludlam, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Auna Whildin, Cape May 1774 

Ludlam, Joseph, Cape May, and Alathan Smith 1732 

Ludlam, Joseph, Cape May, and Abigail Young, Cape May 1747 

Ludlam, Joseph, Jr., Cape May, and Abigail Scull, Cape May 1757 

Ludlam, Providence, Cape May, and Sarah Vickers 1760 

Ludlam, Thomas, Cape May, and Zilpha Smith 1790 

Ludlein, Norton, Cumberland, and Phebe Bacon 1779 

Ludlow, John R., Essex, and Elizabeth Vreland 1787 

Ludwick, Simon, Hunterdon, and Ann Dougan 1780 

Luke, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Parrison 1762 

Luken, Daniel, Monmouth, and Amy McDaniel 1760 

Lukens, James, Philadelphia, and Deborah Lynn 1772 

Lummis, Edward, Salem, and Margaret Elinor, Salem 1737 

Lummis, Edward, Cumberland, and Polly Elmer 1786 

Lummis, Manoah, Cumberland, and Mary Elmer 1779 

Lummis, Parsons, Cumberland, and Hannah Diament 1779 

Lummis, Samuel, Salem, and Catherine Philpot 1784 

Lundbeck, Nicholas, and Peggy Homer 1783 

Lundy, William, Sussex, and Mary Webster, Sussex 1767 



June 


16 


Nov. 


18 


April 


24 


Dec. 


31 


May 


24 


Mar. 


11 


June 


1 


Sept. 


1 


Sept. 


25 


Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


25 


Aug. 


6 


Sept. 


2 


Aug. 


27 


May 


25 


May 


18 


Nov. 


22 


Nov. 


24 


Aug. 


6 


Nov. 


1 


April 


2 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


8 


June 


30 


Jan. 


21 


Jan. 


5 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


17 


Jan. 


18 


Sept. 


6 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


8 


Nov. 


21 


May 


30 


April 


12 


Dec. 


8 


July 


25 


April 


15 


Aug. 


5 


July 


5 


April 


6 


Nov. 


13 


April 


13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 245 

Lupardns, Christian, Hunterdon, and Nautche Wicoff, Somerset 1783 Nov. 15 

Luptou, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Amy Garrison, Cumberland . . 1761 Aug. 25 

Lupton, Nathan, Cumberland, and Sarah Lupton, Cumberland 17M) Mar. 25 

Lupton, Silas, Cape May, and Mary Stiles, Cape May 1756 May 11 

Lupton, Stephen, Cumberland, and Roda ( larrison 1778 Oct. 21 

Lutes, Jacob, Burlington, and Rebecca Warrick 1777 Aug. 20 

Lutsey, Caspar, Burlington, and Catharine Weaver, Burlington 1773 June 27 

Lutkius, Hendrick, Bergen, and Elizabeth Vanhorne, Bergen 1753 May 19 

Luyster, Johaunis, Monmouth, and Sarah Swart, Monmouth 1758 Dec. 11 

Lyddon, Abraham, Gloucester, and Mary Cooper 1734 May 11 

Lydekker, Gerrit, Bergen, and Elizabeth Coley, Bergen 1770 Aug. 6 

Lynch, Patrick, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Chapman, Monmouth . . . 1743 July 18 

Lyndall, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Rowan, Burlington 1778 April 17 

Lyndon, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Davis, Burlington 1730 Dec. 23 

Lyne, James, Middlesex, and Helena Williamson, Middlesex 1744 Aug. 6 

Lyne, John, Burlington City, and Anne Hay, Burlington City 1748 Jan. 19 

Lynn, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Sarah Norwood .. 1737 May 26 

Lyon, Charles, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Stritch, Philadelphia 1770 June 5 

Lyon, Gideon, Somerset, and Anne Savage 1778 Nov. 15 

Lyon, Isaac, Morris, and Rebekka Condict, Morris 1779 June 28 

Lyons, Isaac, Charles Co., Md., and Mary Higgins, Middlesex 1757 Dec. 6 

Lyons, William, Hunterdon, and Anna Dilts 1783 Mar. 24 

FEMALES. L 

Laboyteaur, Elizabeth, and Andrew Brown, Monmouth 1783 Mar. 12 

Ladd, Mary, Gloucester, and Tobias Holloway, Gloucester 1732 Mar. 8 

Laferty, Priscilla, Somerset, and William Steward, Somerset 1748 April 11 

Lafferty, Ann, Penns Neck, and George Simpkins, Penus Neck 1779 Jan. 9 

Laforce, Sarah, Piscataway, and David Crow, Middlesex 1765 April 16 

Lafteu, Susan, and Henry Holtey, Hunterdon 1773 Sept. 24 

La Grange, Anne, Somerset, and Jelis La Grange, Somerset 1748 Aug. 10 

Lagrange, Deborah, Somerset, and Philip Tunison, Middlesex 1748 Jan. 30 

Lagrange, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Jacob Ten Eick, Jr., Somerset. . . 1768 Feb. 25 

Lagrange, Frances, and Edward Vaughan Dougan 1773 Mar. 13 

Lagrange, Jannitie, Somerset, and Levis V. Middleswart 1748 Nov. 14 

Lain, Catherine, Somerset, and Timothy Brush, Jr., Hunterdon 1769 Dec. 16 

Lain, Elizabeth, and Joseph Golden, Jr., Hunterdon 1752 Feb. 4 

Lain, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Lippiucott, Monmouth 1761 April 16 

Lain, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and James Haukinson, Monmouth 1764 July 11 

Lain, Hannah, and John Werden, Monmouth 1761 Jan. 14 

Lain, Rachel, Freehold, and John Pettinger, Freehold .... 1759 June 9 

Laing, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Elisha Pound, Piscataway . . 1744 July 27 

Laing, Mary, Somerset, and John Vail, Somerset 1751 Oct. 8 

Laird, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and -Jonathan English, Monmouth 1763 May 21 

Laird, Jane, Monmouth, and John Henderson, Monmouth 1761 Jan. 29 

Lake, Elizabeth, Long Island, and Hendrick Banta, Bergen 1769 Aug. 2 



246 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lake, Neiltie, Middlesex, and Matthias Johnson, Middlesex 1739 

Like, Martha, Burlington, and Thomas Miller, Burlington 1729 

Lake, Mary, Middlesex, and Arent Van Corlaer, Middlesex 1743 

Lake, Sarah, and Elias Steelrnan, Gloucester , 1730 

Larnh, Anne, Burlington, and Abraham Leeds, Burlington 1750 

Lamb, Anna, and Jonathan Pettit, Mansfield 1779 

Lamb, Margaret, Burlington, and George Haines, Burlington 1731 

Lamb, Margaret, Burlington, aud 'Ihomas Antram, Jr., Burlington. . .1757 

Lamb, Patience, and Noah Clark, Essex 1769 

Lamberson, Elenor, Hunterdon, and Abraham McKinney, Hunterdon. 1771 

Lambert, Adriantje, and Niclas liomine, Morris 1787 

Lambert, Catherine, and Jacob Banta, Bergen 1788 

Lambert. Elizabeth, and John Meredith 1694 

Lambert, Jerusa, Amwell, and Peter Taylor, Amwell ... 1770 

Lambertson, Sarah, Monmouth, and William Fleu, Monmouth 1762 

Lambertson, Cornelia, Middlesex, and Barnert Sutpheu, Middlesex. ..1749 

Lambson, Catherine, Salem, and Joseph Alman, Salem.. 1763 

Lame, Hannah, Burlington, and Jacob Taylor, Burlington 1781 

Lame, Mary, and Joseph Bowker, Burlington 1784 

Lame, Sarah, and Daniel Ernest, Burlington 17 7 9 

Lancaster, Susanna, Bucks, Pa., and John Leadam, Bucks, Pa 1730 

Laud, Judith, Burlington, and John Walker, Burlington 1746 

Landol, Dorothy, and Obadiah Ayers, Somerset 1746 

Xandon, Elizabeth, Sussex, and Henry Leish, Sussex 1771 

Lane, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and James Liddon, Bucks, Pa . 1771 

Lane, Catherine, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Wardell, Shrewsbury 1750 

Lane, Eleanor, Middlesex, and Matthias Van 1 ike. Middlesex 1746 

Lane, Elizabeth, Middletowu, and John Tilton, Middletown 1742 

Lane, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and James Fitz Randolph, Woodbridge. 1775 

Lane, Hannah, Hunterdon, and Abraham Emaus, Hunterdon 1768 

Lane, Hannah, and John Van Middlesworth, Somerset 1781 

Lane, Jane, Monmouth, and William Arnold, Monmouth 1746 

Lane, Lena, Freehold, and Richard Pettinger, Freehold 1756 

Lane, Mary, Somerset, and Aaron Booram, Somerset 1749 

Lane, Mary, Monmouth, and Christopher Vandeventer, Monmouth. .. 1755 

Lane, Mary, Monmouth, and Benjamin Brewer, Monmouth 1767 

Lane, Mary, and Samuel Vau Kirk, New Jersey 1779 

Lane, Sarah, Cape May, and John Chester, Cape May 1741 

Lane, Sarah, and William Woods, Sussex 1785 

Lane, Susannah, and John Gordon, Hunterdon 1778 

Langley, Charity, and Ephraim Albertson, 1782 

Langley, Elizabeth, and Felix Hammel, Burlington 1770 

Langstaff, Mary, Piscataway, and Henry Sutton, Piscataway 1751 

Laugworthy, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and William Davenport, P*th Amb. 1762 

Laning, Martha, and Elijah Blackwell, Hunterdon 1781 

Laning, Mary, Burlington," aud William Price, Burlington 1730 



June 


9 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


14 


Feb. 


22 


June 


7 


Mar. 


25 


June 


5 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


14 


Jan. 


22 


April 


4 


Oct. 


18 


Oct. 


28 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


10 


Mar. 


27 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


13 


Feb. 


21 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


31 


May 


29 


Feb. 


21 


May 


14 


Feb. 


15 


May 


3 


Nov. 


4 


Oct. 


29 


April 


14 


April 


19 


Dec. 


4 


June 


3 


Jan. 


16 


Aug. 


26 


April 


13 


Mar. 


22 


Mar. 


19 


June 


15 


April 


26 


Oct. 


1 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


20 


Jan. 


21 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



247 



Laning, Sarah, Burlington, and Isaac Baggs, Burlington 1763 Aug. 13 

Lanning, Cynthia, and Thomas Mayberry 1774 May 11 

Lanning, Hannah, Burlington, and Thomas Bishop, Burlington 1739 Aug. 1 

Lanning,. Hannah, Burlington, and Samuel Craft, Burlington 1763 Dec. 29 

Lanning, Hannah, Burlington, and Abraham Alloways, Burlington. ... 1773 July 29 

Lanning, Martha, and Joshua Bishop, Burlington 1739 Jan. 29 

Lanning. Mary, and George Craft, Burlington 1760 Jan. 14 

Lanning Mary, and Joseph Osier, Gloucester 1783 Aug. 7 

Lanning, Sarah, and George Beavers, Hunterdon 

Lanning, Susanna, and John Reed, Hunterdon 1733 Mar. 21 

Laquier, Jane, Hunterdon, and John Kline, Hunterdon 1774 Jan. 12 

Larac, Elizabeth, and John Christie, Bergen 1780 June 16 

Larason, Catherine, and Benjamin Sexton, Hunterdon 1779 Nov. 24 

Larison, Actia, and John Humphreys, Hunterdon 1776 Nov. 29 

Lard, Sarah, Monmouth, and Archibald Leeard, Monmouth 1757 Mar. 8 

Lardner, Jane. Gloucester, and Elijah Clark, Gloucester 1756 Apiil 20 

Lareson, Anne, Hopewell, and Jared Sexton, Hopewell 1768 Mar. 28 

Large, Abigail, and Peter llockllar, Amwell 1778 May 14 

Large, Charity, and Benjamin Roberts, Hunterdon 1768 Feb. 4 

Large, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Stephen Woolley, Shrewsbury .... 1760 June 18 

Larkius, Catharine, and David Heslip, Burlington 1778 June 18 

Larkins, Nelly, and Thomas Clevinger 1762 Aug. 7 

Latham, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Cornelius Ewetse, New York 1743 Aug. 20 

Lattymore, Phanny, and William Downs, Gloucester 1778 Mar. 23 

Lauder, Dorothy, and Joseph Brooks, Sussex 1769 July 24 

Laurence, Rachel, and William Smith, Morris 1779 Feb. 15 

Laverton, Catherine, and Peirce Matthews, Hunterdon 1781 Feb. 1 

Lawrance, Deborah, Burlington, and Joseph Vandyke, Freehold 1765 Mar. 2 

Lawrance, Deborah, Monmouth, and William Brand, Monmouth 1767 Feb. 21 

Lawrance, Martha, Salem, and Thomas Hallsted, Salem .... 1761 Jan. 3 

Lawrance, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and James Reed, Freehold 1762 Feb. 2 

Lawrason, Eeziah, and William V.antilburg, Somerset 1745 Dec. 20 

Lawrence, Abigail, Cumberland, and Theophilus Elmer, Cumberland. .1765 Sept. 3 

Lawrence, Alice, Burlington, and Isaiah Folks, Burlington 1728 Mar. 22 

Lawrence, Ann, and John Parker, Burlington 1789 Feb. 24 

Lawrence, Catharine, Monmouth, and Garret Longstreet, Monmouth.. 1761 May 9 

Lawrence, Catharine, and William Armstrong, Orange, N. Y 1777 Nov. 26 

Lawrence, Catharine, and Jackson Brown French, Burlington 1790 Oct. 1 

Lawrence, Charity, and Isaac Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1783 Dec. 27 

Lawrence, Deborah, and ( 'hristopher Fiunigan, Burlington 1746 Mar. 28 

Lawrence, Eleanor, Monmouth, and James Holmes, New York 1765 May 30 

Lawrence, Elizabeth, Salem, and Isaac Garrison, Salem 1727 Mar. 24 

Lawrence, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Caleb Lawrence, New York 1747 June 20 

Lawrence, Elizabeth, Up. Freehold, and Dr. James Newell, Allenntw'n.1749 Dec. 12 

Lawrence, Elizabeth, and Joseph James, Gloucester 1764 Jan. 26 

Lawrence, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Michael Kearney, Amboy 1774 June 30 



248 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lawrence, Hannah, Chesterfield, and Jonathan Fowler, Burlington. . .1742 

Lawrence, Hannah, and William Smith, Burlington 1784 

Lawrence, Jamson, and Thomas Massey, Cumberland 1780 

Lawrence, Jane, and Lewis Guest, Monmouth 1747 

Lawrence, Kasiah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Cheesman, Gloucester. . 1730 

Lawrence, Mary, Monmouth, and William Lowry, Monmouth 1731 

Lawrence, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas Leonard, Monmouth 1741 

Lawrence, Mary, Monmouth, and Cornelius Harrell, Monmouth 1743 

Lawrence, Mary, Middlesex, and Thomas Bass, Middlesex .1761 

Lawrence, Mary, and Isaac Imlay, Monmouth 1781 

Lawrence, Nancy, Monmouth, and Reynold Keen 1782 

Lawrence, Rachel, Middlesex, and Robert Montgomerie, Monmouth. . 1745 
Lawrence, Rebecca, Monmouth, and William Douglas, Monmouth. . . . 1734 

Lawrence, Salany, and Peter Dickards, Burlington 1759 

Lawrence, Sarah, and James Goelet, Burlington 1788 

Lawrence, Susan, and John Jacob Feasch 1790 

Lawrie, Anu, Monmouth, and Thomas Morford, Monmouth 1739 

Lawrie, Elizabeth, and George Holloway, Monmouth 17G8 

Layer, Susanah, and Joseph Tiudol, Middlesex 1781 

Laypole, Catherine, Gloucester, and James Bright, Gloucester. 1765 

Layton, Catherine, Shrewsbury, and Gershom Cotterell, Freehold 1757 

Layton, Ester, and Richard Borden, Middletown 1747 

Layton, Hester. Monmouth, and John Cottrell, Monmouth , . . . . 1762 

Layton, Johannah, Monmouth, and Cornelius Emaus, Monmouth. ... 1763 

Layton, Johannah, Middletown, and Joseph Smith, Middletown 1764 

Layton, Marcy, Middletown, and William Smith, Middletown 1762 

Layton, Mary, Middletown, and Samuel Bowne, Middletown 1751 

Layton, Bebekah, Monmouth, and Christopher Morris, Monmouth 1742 

Layton, Sarah, Monmouth, a'nd Ezekiel C001 er, Monmouth 1766 

Lazear, Jane, and Andreas Zabriskie, Hackensack 1769 

Lazier, Ann, Bergen, and John Lazier, Bergen 1767 

Lea, Mary, and Permenas Corson, Cape May 1774 

Leach, Susannah, and Aaron Stathun, Cumberland 1786 

Leader, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and George Dickenson, Philadelphia. . 1730 

Leake, Phoebe, and John Towers, Philadelphia 1779 

Leak, Rachel, Stow Creek, and Ambrose Whitacar, Fairfield 1772 

Learning, Deborah, Cape May, and Jacob ISpicer, Cape May. 1752 

Learning, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Thomas Learning, Cape May. . . . 1740 

Learning, Elizabeth, Cape May, and John Newton, Cape May 1761 

Learning, Lydia, Cape May, and Jeremiah Eldridge, Cape May 1775 

Learning, Mary, and Joseph C. Fisher. Philadelphia 1782 

Learning, Priscilla, Cape May, and Eli Eldredge, Cape May 1761 

Learning, Sarah, Cape May, and Jesse Hand, Cape May 1763 

Lean, Sarah, and Hendrick Smock, New Jersey 1780 

Leasear, Catherine, New York, and Jacobus Brown. New York 1754 

Lebby, Joanna, Burlington, 'and Rogers Fort, Burlington 1733 April 12 



Sept. 


20 


May 


19 


Mar. 


8 


May 


5 


Sept. 


19 


Mar. 


11 


May 


21 


Oct. 


7 


Sept. 


14 


Oct. 


10 


May 


29 


Dec. 


3 


Jan. 


9 


Feb. 


6 


July 


19 


April 


21 


Sept. 


25 


June 


22 


Dec. 


J4 


Aug. 


20 


Sept. 


12 


May 


28 


Jan. 


6 


Jan. 


13 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


28 


May 


1 


Sept. 


4 


Aug. 


4 


April 


29 


April 


12 


Feb. 


2 


Nov. 


13 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


16 


April 


25 


June 


25 


Sept. 


8 


Sept. 


17 


June 


20 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 249 

Lecaw, Mary, Middlesex, and Garret Ryder, Middlesex 1780 April 22 

LeConte, Martha, Staten Island, and John Measerearn, Staten Island. . 1750 Feb. 1 

Lecroy, Hannah, and David Car mack, Salem 1775 Jan. 18 

Leddel, Esther, Elizabeth, and Jeremiah Tingley, Elizabeth , . . . 1778 July 5 

Lee, Anne, Gloucester, and Zubulon Gandy, Gloucester. 1757 Mar. 28 

Lee, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Maplin 1G95 June 4 

Lee, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Reuben McFerson, Hunterdon. 1775 April 24 

Lee, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Asa, Burlington 1780 Feb. 12 

Lee, Hannah, Burlington, and Micajah Reeve, Burlington 1754 Mar. 2 

Lee, Jane, Monmouth, and Bryan Dougherty, Monmouth 1756 Mar. 16 

Lee, Jain, and Jacob Mills, Gloucester 1775 Nov. 1 3 

Lee, Margaret, Burlington, and Richard Westcote, Burlington 1761 Mar. 18 

Lee, Mary, Burlington, and Abraham Potts, Burlington. ... 1750 Jan. 1 

Lee, Mary, New Brunswick, and James Willson, New Brunswick 1750 Mar. 22 

Lee, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Hughes, Perth Amboy 1763 Jan. 6 

Lee, Mary, Hunterdon, and Nathaniel Lowrey, Hunterdon 1770 April 24 

Lee, Mary, Burlington, and James Mason, Burlington 1782 Mar. 9 

Lee, Neighomy, and John Heath, Somerset .... 1780 Jan. 5 

Lee, Rachel, and Joshua Ely 1699 Nov. 9 

Lee, Rachel, Great Egg Harbor, and Jesse Freeman, Cape May 1760 Feb. 27 

Lee, Rebecca, Amwell, and Wheldin Rouze, Amwell 1774 Jan. 18 

Lees, Sarah, and William Worriel, Northampton 1784 Oct. 22 

Leeds, Sybilla, Burlington, and Martin Dusell, Burlington 1784 Aug. 13 

Leech, Elizabeth, and Abraham Blair, Burlington 1781 May 22 

Leeds, Abigail, and Joshua Shaw, Great Egg Harbour. . . 1759 Feb. 13 

Leeds, Ann, Burlington, and John Kimball, Burlington 1738 Aug. 24 

Leeds, Ann, Burlington, and Nathaniel Thomas, Monmouth 1 738 Oct. 23 

Leeds, Ann, Northampton, and Isaiah Croshaw, Burlington 1779 April 3 

Leeds, Charlotte, Burlington, and Edmund Haines, Burlington 1782 Dec. 17 

Leeds, Deborah, Egg Harbor, and John Pullen, Egg Harbor 1748 Feb. 1 

Leeds, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Benjamin Kimball, Burlington 1732 May 20 

Leeds, Hannah, and Hosea Eayres, Burlington 1773 Aug. 2 

Leeds, Hannah, Gloucester, and William Cramer, Burlington 1774 Mar. 14 

Leeds, Hannah, and Joseph Mingin, Burlington 1777 Nov. 20 

Leeds, Jeremiah, and Thomas Budd 1735 Jan. 5 

Leeds, Jemima, Northampton, and Joseph Woodrow, Northampton. . .1765 Oct. 31 

Leeds, Jemima, and Francis Hitcraft, Cumberland 1784 Jan. 28 

Leeds, Kesia, and James Jess. 1872 May 8 

Leeds, Margaret, and Robert Leeds, Gloucester ... 1784 Mar. 9 

Leeds, Mary, Gloucester, and John Little, Monmouth 1768 April 16 

Leeds, Mercy, Burlington, and Isaac Huff, Burlington 1771 Dec. 2 

Leeds, Rachel, and Thomas Marshall, Burlington 1788 April 19 

Leeds, Rebecca, and Cornelius McCollum 1785 Nov. 16 

Leeds, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Doran, Burlington 1777 Dec. 13 

Leeds, Sarah, and Edward Higby, Gloucester 1781 May 20 

Leeds, Sarah, Northampton, and John Sleeper, Jr., Northampton 1783 Mar. 5 



25O NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Leek, Lena, and George Conke 1778 

Leek, Mary, Egg Harbour, and Joseph Sooy, Egg Harbour 1761 

Leek, Rachel, Burlington, and Thomas Ford, Burlington 1747 

Leek, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Coate, Burlington 17j4 

Lefetra, Sarah, Monmouth, and Samuel Rogers, Monmouth 1750 

Lefever, Ann, and John Worledge, Salem 1681 

Lefletreau, Elizabeth, and John Berry, Monmouth 1731 

Leffers, Altie, Monmouth, and Gerrit Wyckoff, Monmouth 1715 

Lefferson, Anne, Monmouth, and Cornelius Van Cleeve, Monmouth. . . 1765 

Lefferts, Sarah, and James Beekman, New York 1775 

Leferty, Catherine, Somerset, and Asher Herriott, Somerset 1755 

Leg, Sarah, Monmouth, and Jacob Loof borrow, Monmouth. 1758 

Leigh, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and Alexander Campbell, Perth Amb'y. 1712 

Leland, Margaret, Burlington, and John Watkinson, Burlington 1776 

Leland, Susanna, BurlingtoD, and John Toole. Burlington 1740 

Leming, Deborah, and William Koos, Monmouth . 1762 

Leming, Merribah, and Jacob Morris, Monmouth 1772 

Lemontis, Rachel, Somerset, and Asher Noe, Somerset. . . . 1751 

Lemmon, Deborah, Freehold, and Nicolis Potter, Freehold 1755 

Lemmon, Hannah, and James Giberson, Monmouth 1771 

Le Miser, Leab, Bucks, Pa., and Peter Williamson, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Lenuord, Rachel, and John Ichmormeau, Hunterdon 1780 

Leonard, Abigail, and Benjamin Holden, Cape May 1746 

Leonard, Anne, Middlesex, and John Lawrence, Burlington 1753 

Leonard, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Othniel Rogers, Monmouth 1741 

Leonard, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Francis Goelet, New York. ... 1752 
Leonard, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Constantine Chew, Gloucester .... 1763 

Leonard, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Holmes, Monmouth 1765 

Leonard, Johaunah, Monmouth, and James Parker, Monmouth 1748 

Leonard, Lydia, and Richard Stillewell, Middletown 1752 

Leonard, Margaret, and Robert Montgomery, Jr., Monmouth 1771 

Leonard, Mary, Gloucester, and John Hains, Gloucester 1771 

Leonard, Patience, Monmouth, and Ebenezer Scott, Monmouth 1718 

Leonard, Rachel, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Savants, Perth Amboy. . .1753 

Leonard, Sarah, and Thomas Brimley, Shrewsbury 1746 

Leonard, Sarah, Upper Freehold, and Daniel Robins, Upper Freehold. 1747 

Leonard, Susannah, Burlington, and John Flego, Burlington. . 1775 

Leppett, Catharine, Monmouth, and Samuel Goodenough, Monmouth. 1755 

Leslie, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and William Thomson, Somerset 1758 

Lester, Martha, Bucks, Pa., and Moses Coppock, Bucks 1710 

Lestraing, Phebe, Freehold, and Robert Travis, Freehold 1761 

Letts, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Thomas Cawood, Perth Amboy 1751 

Letts, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and John Higgins, Middlesex 1765 

Letts, Elsie, Perth Amboy, and Nathaniel Culver, New Brunswick .... 1761 

Letts, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and David Hubbs, Perth Amboy 1760 

Letts, Margaret, South Amboy, and William Rose, South Amboy 1766 



Oct. 


31 


July 


15 


July 


2 


Jan. 


2 


Aug. 


28 


Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


4 


June 


17 


May 


30 


Jan. 


6 


Jan. 


16 


Jan. 


7 


July 


24 


Sept. 


22 


Nov. 


24 


Jan. 


18 


May 


24 


Feb., 


15 


July 


30 


Jan. 


19 


Aug. 


15 


April 


5 


July 


18 


Oct. 


15 


June 


20 


Mar. 


18 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


14 


Oct, 


1 


Jan. 


20 


July 


14 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


1 


July 


11 


Nov. 


2 


Sept. 


22 


Oct. 


21 


Jnlv 


7 


May 


11 


Feb. 


li 


Jan. 


26 


May 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Letts, Mary, Perth Ainboy, and Thomas Jordan, Perth Amboy 1752 

Letts, Mary, South Amboy, and Johu Rue, South Amboy 1758 

Letts, Mary, and Josiah Grant, Burlington 1778 

Letts, Phebe, Perth Amboy, and Elijah Disbrow, Perth Amboy 1771 

Letts, Rachel, and Isaac \\ i bb, Middlesex 1771 

Letts, Sarah, Middlesex, and Francis Letts, Middlesex 17G0 

Letts, Zenab, Middlesex, and John Furmau, Jr., Princeton 1768 

Lewis, Anne, and John Heath, Perth Ainboy 1746 

Lewis, Anne, Burlington, and Stephen Price, Upper Freehold 1768 

Lewis, Elizabeth, Newton, and David Twining, Newton 1762 

Lewis, Ellenor, Cohanse, and John Fuller, Cohanse 1683 

Lewis, Hannab, and Peter Sever, Evesham 1757 

Lewis, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Joseph Codington, Woodbridge. . . 1756 

Lewis, Mary, Burlington, and Josiab Jones, Burlington 1757 

Lewis, Ruth, Salem, and Abel Harris, Salem 1746 

Leziere, Mary, Bergen, and Peter Fisyuer, Bergen 1760 

License, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Joseph Thorn, Gloucester 1757 

Lie, Mercy, and William Day, Bergen 1766 

Liester, Christian, Cumberland, and Francis Byram, Cumberland... 1773 

Light, Elizabeth, and John Chadwick, Burlington , 1688 

Likius, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Butterworth, Burlington. . . . 1757 

Linch, Hannah, Gloucester, and William Guest, Gloucester 1764 

Linch, Katharine, Monmouth, and Abraham Gifford, Monmouth 1741 

Linch, Mary, Salem, and John Loyd, Salem 1760 

Lindon, Sarah, Burlington, and James Browne, Burlington 1737 

Lindsay, Jennet, Pennsylvania, and Alexander Summerill, Pennsylv'a. 1737 

Lindsey, Mary, and Benjamin Savill, Mansfield ] 778 

Lindsley, Rachel, and Stephen Conklin, Jr., Morris 1778 

Lindley, Phebe, Essex, and John Cos, Somerset 1751 

Liner, Margaret, Somerset, and Joseph Gaston, Somerset 1772 

Lineson, Catalentie, New York, and Heudrick Blaen, Somerset 1748 

Linn, Sarah, and Robert Helen, Somerset. . ^ 1769 

Linnsson, Mary, New Brunswick, and John Keed, New Brunswick .... 1751 

Linzey, Rachel, Gloucester, and Joseph Nicholson, Gloucester 1748 

Lipiucott, Anna, Monmouth, and Thomas Hnlit, Monmouth 1755 

Lipiucott, Deborah, Salem, and Nathan Allen, Salem 1764 

Lipiucott, Elisabeth, Shrewsbury, ami James Wardell, Shrewsbury ... 1755 

Lippencutt, Judith, Burlington, and William Pine, Gloucester 1780 

Lippett, Sarah, Middletown, and William White, Shrewsbury 1766 

Lippincott, Abigail, Monmouth, and John Grandin, Monmouth. ... 1747-8 

Lippiucott, Ann, Monmouth, and George White, Monmouth 1747 

Lippincott, Anna, Burlington, and Thomas Taylor, Burlington 1746 

Lippincott, Anna, and Elias Hammitt, Burlington 1779 

Lippiucott, Catharine, Monmouth, and Charles C tlman, Monmouth. . . 1764 
Lippincott, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Edward Gaskill, Jr., Burling'n. 1732 
Lippincott, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Francis White, Monmouth 1749 



2;i 



Sept. 


27 


July 


24 


April 


18 


June 


15 


Oct, 


15 


May 


30 


May 


14 


Feb. 


21 


Sept. 


21 


May 


1 


July 


16 


July 


16 


Feb. 


19 


Dec. 


17 


June 


21 


Feb. 


2 


Feb. 


19 


Mar. 


19 


May 


10 


July 


26 


Mar. 


12 


Aug. 


1 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


25 


April 


20 


Mar. 


16 


May 


7 


July 


31 


Nov. 


2 


June 


1 


Jan. 


16 


Oct. 


25 


May 


10 


Dec. 


23 


Mar. 


22 


Jan. 


19 


May 


25 


Feb. 


18 


Mar. 


19 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


6 


Jan. 


6 


July 


11 


Aug. 


12 


Nov. 


11 



2 $2 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lippincott, Elizabeth, and Samuel Atkinson, Burliugton 1779 

Lippincott, Elizabeth, and Joseph Borden, Burliugton .... 1783 

Lippincott, Elizabeth, and William Smith, Salem 1784 

Lippincott, Elizabeth, and Jacob Baker, Salem 1785 

Dippincott, Grace, and Jabez Bnzby, Burlington 1768 

Lippincott, Hannah, Burlington, and John Budd, Burlington 1764 

Lippincott, Hannah, Burlington, and Jacob Lippincott, Burlington. ..1775 

Lippincott, Hannah, and Abraham Vanserveer, Burlington 1782 

Lippincott, Hope, Evesham, and Thomas Wallis, Evesham 1750 

Lippincott, Jannet, Monmouth, and Jacob Black, Monmouth 1742 

Lippincott, Jerusha, Northampton, and Amos Rockhill, Mansfield 1751 

Lippincott, Lydia, Burlington, and John Wiley, Burlington 1780 

Lippincott, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Ichabod Woodruff, Shrewsbury. . .1739 

Lippincott, Mary, Monmouth, and George Laftra, Monmouth 1739 

Lippincott, Mary, Burlington, and Henry Powelson, Burlington 1760 

Lippincott, Mary, Burlington, and Job Moore, Burlington 1766 

Lippincott, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Lippincott, Monmouth . . . 1707 

Lippincott, Mary, and Erick Keen, Gloucester 1769 

Lippincott, Mary, Burliugton, and John Black, Burlington 1770 

Lippincott, Mary, Springfield, and Joseph Shinn, Northampton 1783 

Lippincott, Mary, and George Eyre, Burlington 1789 

Lippincott, Mercy, Chester, and Ephraim Stiles, Chester 1749 

Lippincott, Rachel, Monmouth, and Silvanus Bills, Monmouth 1744 

Lippincott, Rachel, and Joshua Crispen, Burlington 177J 

Lippincott, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Cole, Burlington 1769 

Lippincott, Rhoda, Monmouth, and Edmund Harker, Monmouth. ... 1765 

Lippincott, Phoebe, Burlington, and Daniel Hancock, Burlington 1774 

Lippincott, Ruth, and David Stockton, Burlington 1733 

Lippincott, Ruth", Greenwich, and William Powell, Philadelphia 1748 

Lippincott, Sarah, Monmouth, and William Kippin, New York „ . 1747 

Lippincott, Sybilla, Burliugton, and Jonathan Sleeper, Burlington. . . . 1763 

Lippit, Rebeckah, Middletown, and Roluf Schenck, Freehold 1762 

Lirdlam,! Elizabeth, Cape May, and Lewis Cresse, Cape May 1740 

Liscomb, Elizabeth, and Joseph Inslee, Hunterdon 1779 

Lish, Martha, and John Dilley, Hunterdon 17G8 

Lisk, Nautie, and Marinus Garritson, Essex 1778 

Lishman, Rhoda, and William Lippincott, Burlington 1779 

Lishtnau, Sarah, and William Pancoast, Burliugton 1784 

Lisning, Dinah, Monmouth, and Jeremiah Everingham, Monmouth. .1746 

Little, Aun, Monmouth, and John Connelley, Philadelphia 1780 

Little, Esther, Great Egg Harbour, and Job Somers, Gt. Egg Harbour. 1774 

Little, Hannah, Momnouth, and Benjamin Dennis, Monmouth 1764 

Little, Isabell, and James Hubbert, Cape May 1731 

Little, Isabell, Monmouth, and Andrew McDowell, Monmouth 1750 



April 


22 


Sept. 


22 


July 


12 


Oct. 


18 


July 


17 


July 


28 


July 


15 


Nov. 


20 


July 


12 


Dec. 


9 


April 


16 


Aug. 


29 


Jan. 


29 


Nov. 


27 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


26 


June 


23 


May 


2 '2 


Sept. 


22 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


30 


April 


3 


June 


9 


May 


10 


Jan. 


7 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


1 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


24 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


22 


Sept. 


1 


Feb. 


4 


June 


4 


May 


19 


Aug. 


9 


Feb. 


19 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


30 


Mar. 


1 


Jan. 


6 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


8 



i Probably should be Luulam. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Little, Isabell, Monmouth, and David Knott, Monmouth 1753 

Little, Margaret, Hunterdon, and Joseph Little, Hunterdon 1767 

Little, Miiry, Shrewsbury, aud Daniel Seabrook, Shrewsbury 1759 

Little, Mary, Essex, aud Samuel Stanby, Essex Co 1771 

Little, Sarah, Burlington, and Stephen Cramer, Burlington 1719 

Little, Sarah, and Timothy Downing, Burlington 1783 

Liveton, Mary, Middlesex, and David Cox, New York 1762 

Lloyd, Catherine, Salem, and Jeremiah Wood, Long Island 1736 

Lloyd, Hannah, Monmouth, and David Gordon, Monmouth 17-40 

Lloyd, Mary, and John Briarly 1768 

Lock, Beata, Salem, and Peter Cock, Gloucester 1738 

Lock, Mary, Gloucester, and Andrew Cox, Gloucester 1760 

Lock, Susanna, and Aunaneas Keen, Gloucester 1785 

Loekhart, Mary, Somerset, and Asher Herriott, Sussex 1763 

Lodge, Anne, Gloucester, and Thomas Jayard, Gloucester 1743-4 

Lodge, Mary, Evesham, and Joseph Padrield, Evesham 1759 

Lodibank, Elizabeth, and James McKleu, Hunterdon 1779 

Loffborougli, Mary, Monmouth, and William llobinson, Middlesex 1744 

Logan, Jannet. Somerset, and Hugh Minery, Somerset 1751 

Logan, Margaret, and John Rolston, Morris 1785 

Logan, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and John Pursed, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Logan, Mary, aud Cornelius Covenhoven, Monmouth 1770 

Logan, Sarah, and Benjamin Bunting, Bucks 1758 

Logan, Susanna, Salem, aud Thomas Bulluck, Salem 1763 

Loker, Hannah, Burlington, and William Pitman, Burliugton 1741 

Lomason, Ann, Hunterdon, and Henry Henunety, Hunterdon 1763 

Lon, Ami, Burlington, aud James Kelley, Burlington 1736 

London. Joanna, Burlington, and William Armstrong, Burlington 1776 

Long, Eleanor, Cohansie. and Caleb Stackhouse, Cohansie 1767 

Long, Ellenor, and John Bright, Gloucester 1756 

Long, Jane Margaret, P'thAmboy, Benj'n Fitz Randle, Bound Brook. .1759 

Long, Pleasant, Stow Creek, and William Newcomb, Cumberland 1759 

Long, Sarah, and David Bums, Cape May 1789 

Longfield, Mary, New Brunswick, and Alexander Connolly, New Bvvk. 1747 
Longstreet, Anne, Monmouth, aud Samuel Osborn, Jr., Monmouth. ..1740 

Longstreet, Anue, aud William Burtis, Monmouth 1764 

Longstreet, Ariautie, Hunterdon, aud Derrick Aten, Hunterdon 1749 

Longstreet, Christina, Monmouth, and William Williamson, Middlesex. 1741 
Longstreet, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Longstreet, Monm'uth.1753 

Longstreet, Elsey, Shrewsbury, and Peter Wikoff, Freehold 1759 

Longstreet, Hanah, and Joseph Mount, Middlesex 1780 

Longstreet, Katharine, Monmouth, aud William Chamberlain, M'mth. 1746 

Longstreet, Mary, Monmouth, and Francis Jeffery, Monmouth 1757 

Longstreet, Moyike, Monmouth, aud Rinear Van Sickle, Monmouth. . 1746 

Longstreet, Morica, Middlesex, and James Reed, Monmouth 1754 

Longstreet, Nelle, Monmouth, and James Irons, Jr., Monmouth 1752 



253 

July 3 

Sept. 16 

June 19 

Nov. 19 

Oct. 31 

Dec. 30 

Sept. 30 

July 2 

Aug. 6 

Sept. 6 

Jan. 5 

June 30 

Feb. 7 

Oct. 24 

Jan. 4 

Oct. 8 

May 20 

Nov. 23 

Sept. 17 

Mar. 28 

Dec. 24 

July 10 

Dec. 4 

Feb. 26 

Nov. 4 

Sept. 9 

Nov. 5 

Mar. 26 

Aug. 22 

Jan. 12 

Dec. 8 

May 31 

July 1 

July 31 

July 3 

Mar. 15 

Aug. 16 

Aug. 24 

Nov. 2 

Oct. 29 

Dec. 4 

Dec. 22 

Dec. 12 
April 29 

May 28 

May 23 



254 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lougstreet, Rackal, Shrewsbury, and Jacob Vandorn, Freehold 1763 

Lougstreet, Rachel, Monmouth, and William Hendrickson, Monm'th. . 1768 

Lougstreet, Wyntie, Monmouth, and William Goyon, Monmouth 1742 

Loof burrow, Abigail, Perth Amboy, aud John Flannery, Perth Amb'y. 1749 

Loofbourrow, Catherine, Middletown, aud Thomas Johuson 1752 

Loofbourow, Eleanor, Middlesex, and William Kinnan, Middlesex. ... 1763 

Loofbourrow, Hauuah, Woodbridge, and Llobert Iselstine 1756 

Loofbury, Hannah, Middlesex, and Stephen Deare, Middlesex.. .... 1763 

Loofbourrow, Margaret, Woodbridge, and Robert Combs, Woodbridge. 1753 

Loots, Rachel, Bargen, and Sieba Banta, Bergen 1763 

Lord, Anne, Burlington, and Uriah Foster, Burlington 1770 

Lord, Hannah, Cape May, and Nathan Goldin, Cape May 1730 

Lord, Mary, Deptford, and Andrew Sloau, Deptford 1746 

Lord, Rachel, Burlington, and James Hughes, Burlington 1737 

Lord, Sarah, Gloucester, and John Tathum, Gloucester.. 1729 

Lord, Sarah, and James Franklin, Gloucester 1770 

Lore, Ellenor, and Frederick Peterson, Cumberland 1775 

Lore, Mary, Cumberland, and Stephen Kirby, Cumberland 1773 

Lorens, Emy, and Andrew Morton, Gloucester 1735 

Loiiug, Rosanah, and Uriah Steelmau, Gloucester 1770 

Lorton, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Edward Stoughton, Middlesex 1754 

Lose, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Samuel Whittemore, Essex 3 753 

Lott, Abigail, aud Vincent Wetherill, New Brunswick , . 1773 

Lott, Catherine, and Thomas McDowell, Middlesex 1775 

Lott, Mary, and Jonathan Muirheid, Hunterdon 1779 

Loudibank, Margaret, and Eden Ashton, Hunterdon 1780 

Louf berry, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Thomas luglis, P'th Amboy.. 1740 

Louring, Ann, and Aaron Hand, Cumberland 1777 

Loveland, Mary, aud David Morrow, Burlington 1784 

Loveland, Ruth, Lt. Egg Harbour, aud Stephen Cramer, Lt. Egg HV..1761 

Loveland, Susannah, Trenton, and John Cuming, Trenton 1742 

Lovell, Rachel, Burlington, and James Wills, Philadelphia 1750 

Lovett, Hannah, and Joseph Cooper, Bristol, Pa 1781 

Lovett, Mary, and William Hewlings 1695 

Lovett, Mary, Burlington, and John Ivins, Burlington 1776 

Lovett, Rebecca, Burlington, and Samuel Scattergood, Burlington. . . .1730 

Lovett, Sarah, Burlington, and John Hendry, Burlington 1761 

Lovett, Sarah, and William Wright, Burlington 1769 

Lovett, Susannah, and James Powell, Northampton 1779 

Lovit, Nancy, and 1 >aniel Bunting, Burlington 1779 

Low, Judith, and Rynear Rynearson, Somerset 1780 

Low, Juliet, and Peter Stryker, Somerset 1779 

Low, Leanah, and William Coats, Hunterdon .... 1781 

Low, Maritie, Hunterdon, and John Cole, Hunterdon. .'. .1749 

Low, Sarah, Essex, and Nicholas Low, New York 1753 

Lowden, Mary, and Henry McGonegal, Burlington 1788 



Oct. 


21 


Feb. 


22 


Oct. 


1 


April 


4 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


29 


April 


27 


Sept. 


19 


Sept. 


4 


Dec. 


15 


Nov. 


12 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


4 


Mar. 


1 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


8 


June 


1 


Nov. 


25 


Aug. 


30 


April 


17 


June 


1 


April 


13 


Aug. 


17 


Dec. 


10 


May 


10 


Dec. 


6 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


19 


Oct. 


23 


May 


30 


July 


23 


Mar. 


26 


Feb. 


6 


Nov. 


24 


Oct. 


10 


Jan. 


4 


July 


12 


Dec. 


16 


July 


21 


Sept. 


13 


Mar. 


19 


April 


26 


April 


8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



255 



Lewder, Edith, Burlington, and Zebulon Webb, Burlington 1740 May 26 

Lowderbeck, G-ene, and John Curry, Salem 1775 Jan. 30 

Lowe, Anne, and Edmund Kingsland, Morris 1777 Nov. 10 

Lownes, Susanna, Philadelphia, and William Forrester, Philadelphia.. 1731 Oct. 5 

Lownsberry, Marcy, and Joseph Lanning, Burlington 1756 Dec. 7 

Lowrance, Elizabeth, Somerset, and William Young, Morris 1773 Feb. 1 

Lowrey, Elizabeth, Amwell, and Thomas Skelton, Amwell 1772 Jan. 18 

Lowzada, Catherine, and Abraham Loxley, Somerset 1779 June 1 

Loyd, Anna, Middlesex, and Johu Anderson, Freehold 1763 Mar. 7 

Loyd, Priscilla, Salem, and Joseph Bishop, Cumberland 1761 April 21 

Loyd, Sarah, Lower Penns Neck, Joseph Tindall, Low'r Penns Neck. .1771 Oct. 16 

Lualleu, Elizabeth, John Carter, Gloucester 1781 June 18 

Lucas, Elizabeth, Willingborough, and Timothy Thomas, Will'gbr'h. .1744 Nov. 

Lucas, Elizabeth, Piscataway, and John Oliphant, Piscataway 1760 Oct. 21 

Lucas, Margaret, Burlington, and David Thomas, Burlington 1746 Oct. 27 

Lucas, Mary, Gloucester, and Henry Moran, Gloucester 1739 Mar. 11 

Lucas, Miry, Burlington, and Caleb Shinn, Burlington. . * 1771 Dec. 23 

Lucas, Rebecca, and Robert Farrell, Burlington 1734 April 20 

Lucas, Sarah, Gloucester, and Daniel Leake, Gloucester 1764 Aug. 17 

Lucking, Ann, Burlington, and John Chalmer, Burlington 1762 May 5 

Ludlam. Abigail, and Jonathan Smith, Cape May 1758 June 27 

Ludlam, Alathare, Cape May, and Jonathan Smith, Cape May 1761 Dec. 26 

Ludlam, Beulah, Cape May, and John Cresse, Cape May 1739 May 18 

Ludlam, Deborah, and Jesse Somers, Gloucester 1790 July 24 

Ludlam, Esther, Cape May, and Christopher Smith, Cape May. . 1768 Sept. 2 

Ludlam, Hannah, and John Somers, Gloucester 1784 Jan. 31 

Ludlam, Phebe, Cape May, and Elishfii Eldridge, Cape May 1729 Sept. 20 

Ludlam— See Lirdlam. 

Ludlum, Phebe, Cape May, and Henry Reed, Fairfield 1765 Oct. 31 

Ludlum, Phebe, and David Sheppard, Fairfield 1783 May 24 

Ludlum, Priscilla, and Henry Young Townsend, Cape May 1769 May 9 

Ludlum, Rachel, and Renel Sayre, Salem 1779 Jan. 23 

Lukemire, Elizabeth, James Johnston, Jr., Burlington 1785 Dec. 2 

Lukes, Mary, Gloucester, and Elisha Heard, Gloucester 1767 Sept. 19 

Lum, Elizabeth, and Joseph Marsh, Morris 1779 Nov. 2 

Lummis, Phebe, and Anthony Gould, Cumberland 1781 Mar. 6 

Lupardus, Cornelia, Middlesex, and Evart Van Winkle, Somerset 1752 Dec. 9 

Lupton, Annie, Cumberland, and Thomas Podgett, Cumberland 1761 April 7 

Lupton, Mary, and Thomas Hedges, Cape May 1762 Feb. 16 

Lupton, Sarah, Cumberland, and Natl an Lupton, Cumberland 1780 Mar. 25 

Lupter, Sarah, Monmouth, and Ryke Snydam, Monmouth.. 1741 June 2 

Luptin, Sarah, and John Bateman, Salem. . 1646 Aug. 21 

Lutkins, Elizabeth, and Paul us Levesey, Bergen 1767 Feb. 20 

Luzeor, Hankey, and John Outwater, Bergen 1768 Oct. 4 

Lycans, Elizabeth, and Samuel Brayman, Burlington 1783 Jan. 14 

Lyddel, Sarah, Staten Island, and Vbraham Woglom, Staten Island. 1758 Nov. 29 



2$6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Lyddeil, Rhoda, Staten Island, and Winants Winants, Staten Island. .1747 

Lydecker, Catherine, Bergen, and Oliver Bourdett, Bergen. 1769 

Lydecker, Lydia, and John Bartholf, Bergen 1787 

Lydekka, Cornelia, Bergen, and Michael Moore, Bergen 1761 

Lykens, Gertrude, Burlington, and Joseph Johnson, Burlington 1745 

Lyn, Mary, .Somerset, and William Simson, Somerset 1770 

Lyng, Jemima, ami William Wynants, Elizabethtown 1765 

Lynn, Deborah, and James Lukens, Philadelphia 1772 

Lyon, Hannah, and John Cary, Jr., Morris 1778 

Lyon, Margaret, Monmouth, and David Herbert ..... 1744 

Lyons, Mary, Burlington, and Job Field, Philadelphia 1170 

MALES. M 

Macafee, Michael, Middlesex, and Anna Bunions, Morris 1752 

McA £ ey, Robert, Monmouth, and Eleanor Read, Monmouth 1748 

McAuley, Cornelius, Burlington, and Mary Johnson 1784 

McCafferty, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Creidock, Monmouth. ..1744 

McCain, Daniel, Somerset, and Prosilla Gaston, Somerset 1771 

McCalester, James, Hunterdon, and Hannah Davison 1780 

MoCall, Robert, Gloucester, and Susannah Paul, Gloucester 1735-6 

McCalla, Aulay, Cumberland, and Hannah Gibbon 1787 

M.cCalla, Edward, Monmouth, and Lucrese Right, Monmouth 1765 

McCallum, Hugh, Monmouth, and Mary Campbell, Monmouth 1748 

McGinn, Hugh, Middlesex, and Judith Valette, Middlesex 1741 

McCarty, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Olive Titus 1733 

McCarty, Duncan, Middlesex, and Ann Trimble, Middlesex 1749 

McCarty, Matthew, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Gwinn 17G0 

McCarty, Thomas, Gloucester, and Abigail Marpole 1773 

McChesny, John, Middlesex, and Catherine Newell, Middlesex 1753 

McCleain, Samuel, Gloucester, and Abigail Hammock, Gloucester. . . . 1773 

McClean, Alexander, Burlington, and Mary Snippen, Burlington 1773 

McClean, Charles, Middlesex, and Lydia Cheesman, Monmouth 1751 

McClean, John, and Mary Van Kirk 1783 

McClean, Mindert, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Britton, Monmouth... 1762 

McCleese, Cornelius, Burlington, and Mary Pettit, Burlington 1748 

McCleese, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Elinor Tunison, Monmouth... 1756 

McClenan, Samuel, Salem, and Mary Worldin, Salem 1741 

McCleary, James, Somerset, and Mary Stewart, Somerset 1740 

McCliutock, Samuel, Cumberland, and Rebecca Garrison 1779 

McCloud, Alexander, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Skeech .' 1734 

McClutch, Obadiah, Burlington, and Mary Brooks 1784 

McCollin, Allan, Burlington, and Rebecca Jolley, Burlington 1771 

McCollister, John, Salem, and Rebecca Richman, Salem 1762 

McColloch, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Inskeep, Gloucester 1749 

McCollough, James, Sussex, and Anne Douglass, Sussex 1770 

McCollum, Cornelius, and Rebecca Leeds 1785 



June 


8 


Feb. 


15 


Sept. 


8 


Feb. 


3 


July 


•25 


Kov. 


9 


Sept. 


10 


July 


25 


Dec. 


28 


July 


2 


July 


2 


April 


16 


Jan. 


3 


Feb. 


1 


April 


21 


Sept. 


24 


Oct, 


16 


Mar. 


11 


April 


9 


April 


17 


April 


11 


July 


13 


Oct. 


25 


May 


27 


July 


30 


April 


12 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


30 


July 


11 


June 


4 


May 


4 


Aug. 


13 


April 


U 


Nov. 


31 


Mar. 


12 


Jan. 


12 


June 


29 


May 


3 


Nov. 


25 


May 


31 


May 


24 


June 


25 


Nov. 


16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 257 

McColum, James, Somerset, ami Elizabeth Parker, Somerset 1750 

McComb, John, New York City; and Frances Marsh, Middlesex 1772 

McConnel, Thomas, Somerset, and Susannah McCaue, Somerset 1747 

McCounell, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Russell, Monmouth 1752 

MoCorkey, William, and Hannah Mather 1769 

McCormick, Bernard, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Collins . . . 1771) 

McCormick, John, Cape May, and Mary Taylor 1759 

McCormick, John R, Cape May, and Priscilla Raney 1775 

McCoy, Gawen, Somerset, and Susanna Kannan, Somerset 1758 

McCracken, Hugh, Sussex, and Mary Muckle Hany, Sussex 1766 

McCray, James, Hunterdon, and Anne Porter 1769 

Medea, Alexander, Hunterdon, and Phillis Henderson 1774 

McCrea, James, Monmouth, and Mary Graham, Monmouth 1740 

McCrea, Samuel, Albany, N. Y., and Margaret Slown, Somerset 1776 

McCree, John, Salem, and Mary Vanneman, Salem 1764 

McCreedy, James, Somerset, and Anna Bosoms, Somerset 1742 

McCully, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Gardener 1781 

McCulley, Samuel, Burlington, and Lydia Esdaile 17h7 

McCurtain, Thomas, Monmouth, and Deborah Cox 1771 

McDaniel, Joseph, Somerset, and Mary Allan, Middlesex 1768 

McDannel, James, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Kennedy 1739 

McDannels, Jarret, Monmouth, and Mary Rogers, Burlington 1748 

McDogal, Mathew, Monmouth, and Deborah Standley, Monmouth. . .1761 

McDonald, Alexander, Bucks, Pa., and Jemima Plumley 1781 

McDoniel, Augustus, Burlington, and Lydia Morris, Burlington 1776 

McDowel, Alexander, Burlington, and Elizabeth Allen, Burlington 1782 

McDowell, Andrew, Monmouth, and Isabell Little, Monmouth ....... 1750 

McDowell, Thomas, Middlesex, and Catherine Lott 1775 

Mace, Jacob, Orange, N. ¥., and Elenor Parsall, Orange, N. Y 1764 

McElvey, Robert, Monmouth, and Abigail Wright, Monmouth 1766 

McEweu, Daniel, Somerset, and Anne Graham, Somerset 1744 

McFaddiu, Patrick, Cecil Co., Md., Catherine Vangelder, Pompton. . 1-779 

McFerson, Reuben, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Lee, Hunterdon 1775 

McGallird, Andrew, Monmouth, and Elizabeth McMin, Monmouth . . 1744 

McGallird, William, Hunterdon, and Mary Sherins 1779 

McGee, Patrick, Monmouth, and Sarah Stewart, Middlesex 1752 

McGee, Thomas, Burlington, and Margaret Turner 1780 

McGhee, John, Monmouth, and Sophia Embly, Monmouth 1727 

McGibbons, James, Monmouth, and Joanna Nonen, Monmouth ..... 1741 

McGill, Neill, Hunterdon, and Phebe Carter 1769 

MeGinness, Richard, Wellenborough, Mariam Ridgway, Wel'nbor'gh. 1775 

McGonegal, Henry, Burlington, and Mary Lowdeu 1788 

McGraw, Barnabas, Morris, and Elizabeth Faulkerson 1777 

Machett, Peter, Middlesex, and Margaret Chambers, Trenton 1739 

McHngh, Patrick, Monmouth, and Mildreth Murdock, Monmouth. . . . 1749 

Mcllvane, Joseph, Burlington, and Maria Reed 1793 

17 



Feb. 


28 


Oct. 


9 


Dec. 


23 


Oct. 


26 


Jan. 


2 


Mar. 


29 


April 


20 


Aug. 


11 


April 


3 


June 


11 


M ar. 


22 


Jan. 


8 


April 


8 


April 


6 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


22 


Mar. 


28 


Nov. 


29 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


1 


Jan. 


29 


May 


11 


May 


23 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


10 


May 


8 


Mar, 


8 


June 


1 


May 


24 


Mar. 


18 


"Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


14 


April 


24 


Oct, 


19 


May 


5 


July 


25 


Feb. 


10 


June 


5 


July 


1 


June 


25 


June 


20 


April 


8 


Aug. 


5 


Jan. 


3 


Oct. 


11 


Sept. 


19 



258 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Mcllvane, William, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Rodman . . 1773 

Machafferty, James, Gloucester, and Louisa Hews 1785 

Mackavariy, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Toffit, Burlington 17i9 

MackCollum, John, Somerset, and Mary Berndrow 1768 

McKean, Thomas, Newcastle, Del., and Mary Borden, Bordeutown ..1763 

McKee, Hugh, Cumberland, and Polly Woodruff 1789 

Mackeny, William, Somerset, and Hannah Fenwick, Somerset 1749 

Mackey, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Young, Cape May 1746 

Mackie, John, Philadelphia, and Hannah Butterworth, New Jersey. . . 1770 
McKinzy, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Rebeckah Emmins, Hunterdon . . 1747 
McKinney, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Elenor Lemberson, Hunterdon. 1771 
McKinstry, John, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Hanison, Monmouth. . . 1739 

McKinstry, John, Hunterdon, ami Sarah Ege, Hunterdon 1775 

Mackintosh, John, and Hanna Kimall 1735 

Mackintosh, Lauglin, Monmoutb, and Catherine Harvey, Monmouth. . 1757 

Macklatche, John, Burlington, and Amy Eldrige 1742 

Macklees, Peter, Gloucester, and Comfort Steelman, Gloucester 1740 

McKlese, James, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Lodibank. . . . . 1779 

McKlese, John, Monmouth, and Catherine Bown, Monmouth 1739 

Macknight, Charles, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Stevens, Monmouth. . 1746 

McKnight, Charles, Hunterdon, and Mary Watson, Hunterdon 1771 

McKnight, James. Burlington, and Elizabeth Carry. Burlington 1765 

McKnight, William, Monmoiith, and Sarah James, Monmouth 1744 

McKnight, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Kay 1788 

McKoan, John, Salem, and Martha Hopkins, Salem 1764 

McLanning, Samuel, Salem, and Mary Woldiu, Salem 1741 

McLuen, Hugh, Somerset, and Jane Wilson, Somerset 1753 

McMasters, Robert, Pennsylvania, and Ester Palmer, New Jersey ... 1777 

McMurray, Samuel, Somerset, and Isabel Ware, Somerset 1753 

McMurray, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth White, Monmouth. . . . 1755 
McMurtrie, David, Philadelphia, and Margery Foster, Philadelphia. . . 1754 

McMurtry, John, Somerset, and Margaret Gomes 1781 

McNeil, Domiuick, Hunterdon, and Anne McVee, Hunterdon 1763 

McNeilus, William, and Sarah Brown 1780 

McNichol, Andrew, Salem, and Orphic Staubury 1785 

McNincb, Samuel, Sussex, and Mary Scott 1779 

McPherson, William, Bucks, Pa., and Margaret Smith, Bucks, Pa. . . .1764 

McQuillen, James, Sussex, and Sarah Simpson 1777 

McQuown, Robert, New Jersey, and Mary Hellen 1745 

McSkiuuer, B amy, Burlington, and Mary Sink 1784 

Maffet, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Martin, Gloucester 1765 

Maffet, Richard, Gloucester, and Mary Cozens 1785 

Maffet, Thomas, Gloucester, and Aun Scott, Gloucester 1770 

Magee, James, Monmouth, and Lydia Wall, Monmouth.. ... 1752 

Magee, Patrick, Somerset, and Rebecca Braunegan, Middlesex 1778 

Mager, William, Sussex, and Catherine Stihvell 1768 



Nov. 


6 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


27 


Jan. 


13 


July 


21 


May 


18 


Aug. 


7 


April 


25 


Aug. 


6 


April 


17 


Mar. 


4 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


21 


June 


19 


Jan. 


16 


May 


20 


Dec. 


21 


Aug. 


19 


May 


2 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


31 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


31 


July 


25 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


21 


Aug. 


18 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


7 


Dec. 


20 


Dec. 


28 


Jan. 


7 


June 


5 


May 


22 


June 


28 


Mar. 


3 


April 


13 


Feb. 


24 


Oct. 


30 


Sept. 


19 


July 


22 


Oct. 


8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



259 



Magbee, James, and Susannah Patton, Monmouth 1757 

Maguineas, Arthur, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Burton 17G3 

Maguire, Matthew, Philadelphia, and Anne Mannington, Philadelphia. 1774 

Mihair, Francis, Salem, and Elizabeth Caspersou, Salem 1745 

Maher, John, Gloucester, and Edith Jones. 1733 

Maicleese, Cornelius, Burlington, and Mary Pettit, Burlington 1748 

Main, Andrew, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Hoff, Monmouth 1759 

Main, George, Sussex, and Mary Vane, Sussex 1771 

Malsberry, John, Burlington, and Mary Bowker, Burlington 1736 

Malsbury, John, Burlington, and Martha Sopers 1746 

Malson, Daniel, Monmouth, and Amy Williams, Monmouth 1737 

Man, Thomas, Gloucester, and Margaret Bouham 1776 

Mauaring, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Hendrickson, Salem 1727 

Manata, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Thompson 1777 

Mance, John, Staten Island, and Ann Mitchell 1770 

Maning, Ephraim, Middlesex, and Sarah Martin, Middlesex 1763 

Mann, William, Mount Holly, and Beulah Gaskill 1784 

Manueriug, Thomas, Gloucester, and Doshia Hammitt, Gloucester... 1761 

Manners, John, Hunterdon, and Rachel Stout 1780 

Manning, Daniel, Somerset, and Sarah Corle 1781 

Manning, James, Middlesex, and Mary Ford, Middlesex 1752 

Manning, James, Essex, and Margaret Stites, Essex 1763 

Manning, Jeremiah, Essex, and Ursula Drake, Hunterdon 1758 

Manning, Jeremiah, Middlesex, and Rachel Randolph, Middlesex 1764 

Maiming, Johu, Somerset, and Zeruiah Randolph, Middlesex 1763 

Manning, Joseph, Morris, and Providence Cooper, Morris 1768 

Manning, Richard, Morris, and Ann Randolph, Middlesex 1753 

Manning, Solomon, Gloucester, and Lidia Cosier, Gloucester 1747 

Manring, Richard, Gloucester, and Mary Adams, Gloucester 1749 

Mapel, Jacob, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Stanford, Somerset 1769 

Mapel, Stephen, Middlesex, and Mary Slack 1780 

Maplin, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Lee 1695 

Marckall, Addam, and Esther English 1741 

Margerum, Benjamin, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth White 1769 

Margerum, Richard, Jr., Bucks, Pa., and Rebekah White 1768 

Marjeram, Henry, and Jane Rigg 1693 

Markes, Phillip, Monmouth, aud Margaret Brewer, Monmouth 1760 

Markleese, Gysbert, Monmouth, and Rachel Johnson, Monmouth . . 1752 

Markworth, William, Trenton, and Anna Roberts 1779 

Marland, Robert, Burlington, and Rachel Eyre 1769 

Marlatt, John, Hunterdon, and Jane Van Sickle, Hunterdon 1752 

Marlatt, Richard, Hunterdon, and Nelly Marlatt 1772 

Martin, John, East New Jersey, aud Ann Burtis 1763 

Marott, Devenport, Philadelphia, and Ann Saul, Philadelphia 1770 

Marple, Northrup, Gloucester, and Ann Scull, Gloucester 1763 

Manioge, James, Gloucester, and Mary Bryant, Gloucester 1762 



April 25 

Nov. 14 
April 11 
Dec. 11 
Mar. 9 
Oct, 4 
Mar. . 20 
Jan. 4 
Sept. 18 
Feb. 2 
Jan. 12 
Jan. 30 
Mar. 14 
Dec. 15 
June 28 
Oct. 25 
Nov. 3 
Aug. 28 
Mar. 17 
Aug. 25 
Mar. 21 
Mar. 22 
Sept. 23 
Feb. 28 
Jan. 21 
June 8 
Mar. 28 
June 1 2 
Nov. 6 
Jan. 27 
Nov. 2 
June 4 
June 8 
Feb. 1 
Mar. 23 
Oct. 3 
May 3 
Dec. 23 
Mar. 2 
Mar. 6 
Sept. 25 
Nov. 23 
May 23 
Oct. 1 
Jan. 21 
Mar. 17 



260 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Marriott, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Crosby, Burlington. ..... 17S9 

Marriott, Joseph, Burlington, and Martha Nailor 1771 

Marriott, Philip, Burlington, and Abigail Hall, Burlington 1746 

Marriott, Samuel, Burlington, and Ann Miller, Burlington 1738 

Marrott, Isaac, Burlington, and Sarah White, Burlington 1743 

Marsh, Elias, Middlesex, and Mary Davenport 1745 

Marsh, Elias, Jr. , Middlesex, and Ann Brajding 1 773 

Marsh, George, Morris, and Catharine Young 1779 

Marsh, Henry, Monmouth, and Desire Rogers, Monmouth 1760 

Marsh, Henry, Bergen, and Elizabeth Symeson, Bergen 1773 

Marsh, John, Middlesex, and Catherine Hunt . 1767 

Marsh, Joseph, Middlesex, and Mary Willis, Middlesex 1773 

Marsh, Joseph, Morris, and Elizabeth Lum 1779 

Marsh, Richard, Monmouth, and Miriam Thorn 1765 

Marsh, Thomas Elliott, Gloucester, and Sarah Carpenter, Gloucester. .1764 

Marshall, James, Cumberland, and Ruth Brick 1791 

Marshall, Thomas, Burlington, and Rachel Leed 1788 

Marshon, Henry, Trenton, and Mary Yard, Trenton 1728 

Marshon, Henry, Hunterdon, and Ann Major, Hunterdon 1739 

Martin, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Marling, Burlington 1781 

Martin, Daniel, Gloucester, and Ester Bellis, Gloucester 1730 

Martin, John, Middlesex, and Rhoda Hull, Middlesex 1752 

Martin, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Gifford, Monmouth 1760 

Martin, John, Burlington, and Anna Bishop, Burliugton 1772 

Martin, Jonathan, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Deuham 1782 

Martin, Joshua, Jr., Middlesex, and Mary Rnnyon, Middlesex 1756 

Martin, Mulford, Middlesex, and Rachel Ayres, Middlesex 1741 

Martin, Nathaniel, Middlesex, and Mary Clarkson, Middlesex 1756 

Martin, Nathaniel, Middlesex, and Catherine Fitz Randolph 1758 

Martin, Robert, Middlesex, and Mary Bloomrield, Middlesex 1758 

Martin, Robert, Middlesex, and Margaret Ratten, Middlesex 1761 

Martin, Steward, Sussex, and Elizabeth Braiden 1772 

Martin, Thomas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Ayres, Middlesex 1762 

Martin, Torep., Monmouth, and Rachel Nortwike, Monmouth 1758 

Martin, William, Burliugton, and Hannah Norris 1771 

Maskell, Daniel, Cumberland, and Mary Vaughn, Cumberland 1749 

Maskell, Daniel, Cumberland, ami Sarah Woodruff, Cumberland. . . .1775 

Maskell, Thomas, Cumberland, and Ester Fithian, Cumberland 1768 

Masking, Henry, Bucks, Pa , and Ruth Harmon 1778 

Mason, Albert, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Stilwell, Monmouth 1767 

Mason, Andrew, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Denford, Pennsylvania. 1728 

Mason, Jacob, Burlington, and Rachel Tewksbury, Burlington 1763 

Mason, James, Burlington, and Mary Lee, Burlington 1782 

Mason, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Moore, Burlington 1761 

Mason, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Sarah Norton 1773 

Mason, Joseph, Cape May, and Easter Lozer 1763 



May- 


12 


July 


31 


July 


28 


July 


13 


Aug. 


12 


May 


11 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


20 


April 


22 


Oct. 


8 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


26 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


21 


April 


19 


Jan. 


20 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


6 


Jan. 


11 


April 


22 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


26 


Jan. 


3 


Sept. 


11 


Jan. 


23 


Dec. 


16 


May 


30 


Nov. 


29 


May 


4 


Mar. 


1 


Feb. 


15 


June 


21 


Aug. 


10 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


5 


Mar. 


27 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


Sept. 


28 


Nov. 


9 


Mar. 


9 


May 


21 


June 


12 


Jan. 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 26 1 

Mason, Solomon, Burlington, and Anna Kemble, Burlington 1754 

Mason, Solomon, Burlington, and Sarah Davis 1788 

Mason, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Kitchen 1759 

Mason, William, Cape May, and Judith Brooks. .... 1766 

Mason, William, Burlington, and Bebeckab Sharp 1786 

Massey, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Rawle, Philadelphia 1763 

Massey, Thomas, Cumberland, and Jameson Lawrence 1780 

Matchet, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Cole, Monmouth 1757 

Mathews, Charles, Monmouth, and Deborah Bills, Monmouth.. .. . . 1760 

Matthews, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Emaus, Monmouth 1755 

Mathews, Joseph, Monmouth, and Amy Clayton, Monmouth 1748 

Mathews, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hester Gifford, Monmouth 1743 

Mathews, William, Cape May, and Bethiah Mills, Salem 1740 

Mathis, John, Little Egg Harbor, and Marcy Crammer 1781 

Matlack, Benjamin, Gloucester, aud Hannah Rowand 1783 

Matlack, Caleb, Cumberland, and Mary Wdie 1777 

Matlack, Isaac, Gloucester, and Rebecca Bate 1733 

Matlack, Jacob, Burlington, and Ruth Woodoth .... 1733 

Matlack, Jeremiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Kinsey, Burlington ... 1772 

Matlack, John, Jr., Gloucester, and Hannah Shivers, Gloucester. 1736 

Matlack, Samuel, Burlington, and Martha Kimble, Burlington 1759 

Matlack, Timothy, Burlington, aud Hester Eldredge 1785 

Matlack, Thomas, Burlington, aud Abigail West, Burlington 1766 

Matlock, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Iudicott, Burlington 1754 

Matox, Luke, Cumberland, and Rebecca Wheeler 1787 

Matson, Abraham, Gloucester, and Rachel Adams, Gloucester 1762 

Matson, Benjamin, Burlington, and Susanna Stevenson, Burlington. . 1764 

Matson, Elias, Gloucester, and Marab Suowden 1784 

Matson, Matthias, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Wilkins 1754 

Matthews, Elijah, Cape May, and Martha Smith, Cape May 1770 

Matthews, Isaac, Cape May, and Mary Hand 1774 

Matthews, Jacob, Gloucester, and Phebe Garner 1772 

Matthews, John, Burlington, and Mary Small 1784 

Matthews, Peirce, Hunterdon, and Catherine Laverton 1781 

Matthews, Richard, Cape May, aud Judith Hughes 1772 

Matthews. Samuel, Cape May, and Temperance Stites 1771 

Matthews, Thomas, Cape May, and Hannah Cresse 1768 

Matthis, Henry, Hunterdon, and'Rosaunah Woolverton., 1782 

Mattis, Thomas, Middlesex, and Rebecca Fitz Randolph, Middlesex. . . 1749 

Mattison, Aaron, Monmouth, and Sarah Cook, Monmouth ... 1745 

Mattison, George, Salem, and Irane Van Dirke 1750 

Mattison, Jacob, Jr., Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Updyke 1779 

Mattison, James, Hunterdon, and Catherine Egbert, Hunterdon 1774 

Mattison, John, Hunterdon, aud Sarah Ketcham 1779 

Mattison, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Catharine Bowue, Hunterdon 1768 

Mattson, Jacob, Gloucester, and Mary Reyuolds 1733 



Sept. 


13 


April 


4 


Dec. 


1 


Nov. 


10 


-Ian. 


9 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


8 


April 


16 


Feb. 


22 


Feb. 


4 


July 


9 


Sept. 


6 


Dec. 


13 


Aug. 


16 


Sept. 


5 


Dec. 


18 


May 


28 


Nov. 


15 


May 


21 


Jau. 


13 


April 


23 


Dec. 


19 


Feb. 


17 


July 


25 


April 


27 


Mar. 


4 


June 


4 


May 


25 


Sept. 


12 


Oct. 


10 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


25 


Oct. 


30 


Feb. 


1 


July 


10 


Aug. 


10 


Jan. 


8 


May 


22 


June 


2 


April 


17 


April 


10 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


2 


Dec. 


21 


May 


5 


Jan. 


20 



262 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Maxson, Ephraim, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Davis, Monmouth 1764 April 27 

Maxson, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Osborne, Monmouth 1774 Oct. 14 

Maxson, Nathan, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Brown, Monmouth 1764 April 27 

Maxwell, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Jones, Salem 1769 Oct. 1 1 

Maxwell, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Jemima McClinton, Hunterdon.. .. 1771 Feb. 25 

Maxwell, William, Burlington, and Ester Wright, Burlington 1730 Dec. 22 

May, Edward, Monmouth, and Mary Mack Daniel, Monmouth 1762 Oct. 27 

May, George, Burlington, and Susanna Thompson, Burlington 1742 Jan. 24 

May, John, Essex, and Sarah Dogworthy 1746 April 10 

May, John, Gloucester, and Phebe Scull 1764 July 7 

May, William, Burlington, and Hannah Baker, Burlington 1741 Sept. 12 

May, William,, Jr., Gloucester, and Jane Edwards, Gloucester 1731 June 19 

Mayberry, Thomas, and Cynthia Lanning 1774 May 11 

Mayberry, Thomas, Mount Holly, and Mary Spring, Philadelphia 1780 Jan. 31 

Maybery, Thomas, New Jersey, and Mary Sincleair 1781 Mar. 12 

Mead, Daniel, Morris, and Phebe Harriman, Morris 1780 Mar. 11 

Mead, Giles, Bergen, and Elizabeth Van Sise 1783 Oct. 16 

Mead, Henry, Bergen, and Mary Worden -. 1789 Feb. 3 

Mead, Jacob, Bergen, and Margaret Post 1791 June 10 

Mead, John, Bergen, and Margaret Demott, Monmouth 1770 Jan. 1 

Mead, John, Poinpton, and Rebeccah Curtis 1785 Mar. 17 

Mead, Peter, Jr., Pompton, and Sarah Vansisco, Pequanock 1780 Oct. 23 

Mead, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Cox 1760 Nov. 1 

Meaghan, Connor, Bucks, Pa., and Ann Walmsley, Bucks, Pa 1733 Oct, 15 

Mean, John, Monmouth, and Marah Maccoy, Monmouth 1754 May 15 

Mears, Joseph, Monmouth, and Susannah Stewart, Burlington 1764 April 5 

Measereau, John, Staten Island, and Martha Le Conte, Staten Island. 1750 Feb. 1 

Mecom, John, Salem, and Sarah Berry, Salem 1763 Feb. 27 

Mecum, John, Middlesex, and Catherine Oakey 1765 Sept. 11 

Mecum, William, Salem, and Elinor Sinnickson, Salem 176 L Sept. 22 

Meebe, Joost, Orange Co., N. Y., and Freyntje Garrebrance, Bergen. .1769 Mar. 18 

Meeker, John, Middlesex, and Abigail Boss 1769 July 13 

Meeker, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Olliver , 1775 Jan. 12 

Meeker, Uzal, Beraen, and Elizabeth Van Voorhis 1794 Jan. 17 

Meirs, David, Monmouth, and Martha Smith, Monmouth 1763 May 28 

Meirs, George, Burlington, and Mary Prickett, Burlington 1751 May 20 

Meirs, Joseph, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Thomas, Monmouth 1763 Dec. 3 

Mellon, Patrick, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Hinds 1778 April 3 

Melrose, John, Somerset, and Mahitable Scott 1779 Aug. 27 

Melvan, John, Middlesex, and Abigail Smith, Middlesex 1774 Sept, 17 

Mere, Bynear, Somerset, and Catherine Cruzee 1780 April 1 

Meredith, John, and Elizabeth Lambert 1694 April 4 

Meredith, Eichard, and Mary Fell 1769 July 22 

Meredith, Thomas, Burlington, and Ruth Williams, Burlington 1755 June 29 

Merideth, Richard, Salem, and Christiana Neilson, Salem 1772 April 29 

Meredyth, Thomas, Burlington, and Jane Norcross, Burlington 1740 April 8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 263 

Merlatt, Abraham, Somerset, and Martha Vail, Essex 1748 

Merot, Phillip, Burlington, and Mary Jobes 1760 

Merrel, Richard, Middlesex, and Jenny Whitlock 1784 

Merrell, David, Hunterdon, and Charity Gulick 1777 

Merrell, Lambart, Middlesex, and Tabitha Dunham, Middlesex.. .. 1763 

Merrick, Timothy, Bristol, Pa., and Rebecca Hutchinson 1783 

Merrill, Abijah, Morris, and Sarah Din, Monmouth 1763 

Merrill, Jacob, Morris, and Elizabeth Folkerson 1781 

Merit, Abraham, Burlington, and Garth vey Brooks, Evesham 17S5 

Merrit, Abraham, Burlington, and Rachel Gaskill, Burlington 1757 

Merritt, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hewlings, Burlington 1782 

Merritt, Isaac, Mount Holly, and Alice Wright 1784 

Merritt, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Curtis, Burlington 1770 

Merryman, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Knott, Monmouth 1779 

Mersereau, Stephen, Staten Island, and Lydia Parker, Monmouth 1765 

Mersgen, William, New York City, and Anne Bradford, Middlesex . . .1742 

Mershori, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Catherine Case, Hunterdon 1773 

Mershon, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Catharine Wilson, Hunterdon. ... 1774 

Mershon, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Margaret Thatcher, Hunterdon 1763 

Mershon, Timothy, Hunterdon, and ADne Stevens, Hunterdon 1775 

Mershon, William, Hunterdon, and Sarah Titus, Hunterdon 1764 

Messean, Richard, Richmond, N. Y., and Christian White 1768 

Meyer, Audries, New Jersey, and Frena Morris 1740 

Meyers, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Esdell 1788 

Michal, Henry, Salem, and Mandlina Gurtjea 1759 

Mick, Michael, Burlington, and Mary Moore, Bnrlington 1783 

Mickel, Archible, Cape May, and Marcy Doubleday, Cape May 1762 

Mickel, James, Cape May, and Elizabeth Ready, Cape May 1763 

Mickell, James, Gloucester, and Sarah Estlack 1732 

Mickle, Joseph, Gloucester, and Hannah Burroughs 1771 

Micklevane, Arthur, Gloucester, and Ann Barnes 1772 

Middagg, Cornelius, Somerset, and Allie Vandeveuter, Monmouth ...1739 

Middagh, John, Long Island, and Mary Horsrield, Long Island 1760 

Middagh, Teuuis, Somerset, and Januetje Brocaw, Somerset 1750 

Middleton, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Taylor 1775 

Middleton, Hugh, Burlington, and Mary Fairley, Burlington 1714 

Middleton, Joel, Burlington, and Sarah Middleton 1780 

Middleton, John, Gloucester, and Rachel Vanemau, Gloucester 1763 

Middleton, Jonathan, Burlington, and Anne Morris, Burlington 1776 

Middleton, Nathan, Burlington, and Judith Stokes, Burlington 1777 

Middleton, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Sarah Conrow 1790 

Middleton. Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Bassett, Burlington 1761 

Middleton, Thomas, Burlington, and Abigail Brackney. . 1784 

Middleton, William, Burlington, and Mary Kimble, Burlington 1746 

Middleton, William, Gloucester, and Rachel Driver, Gloucester 1735 

Miers, Abram, Burlington, and Dorcas Andrews, Burlington 1757 



Feb. 


25 


Nov. 


8 


Feb. 


2 


Aug. 


2 


Nov. 


28 


April 


5 


July 


29 


Jan. 


23 


Feb. 


12 


Sept. 


28 


Mar. 


21 


April 


13 


June 


28 


April 


24 


Oct. 


11 


Oct, 


23 


June 


12 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


8 


April 


1 


Feb. 


27 


May 


14 


Jan. 


7 


July 


17 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


4 


Feb. 


12 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


30 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


2 


Feb. 


22 


July 


9 


July 


26 


April 


29 


Sept. 


25 


Dec. 


23 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


27 


July 


26 


Jan. 


21 


Aug. 


12 


Oct. 


6 


Oct. 


9 


July 


9 


Nov. 


14 



264 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Miers, John, Burlington, and Rachel South, Burlington 1763 Dec. 8 

Miers, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Coffee 1779 May 11 

Milhurn, Robert, Essex, and Mary Thomas, Essex 1751 Nov. 2 

Milbourn, Timothy, Hunterdon, and Sarah Morgan. 1779 Jan. 1 

Miles, John, Bristol, Pa., and Ann Davis, Philadelphia 1739 Feb. 12 

Millaird, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Wiles, Burlington. 1764 Aug. 8 

Miller, Alexander, Salem, and Hannah Jordan, Salem 1730 April 7 

Miller, Charles, Burlington, and Catherine Clevenger, Burlington. . . . 1732 June 26 

Miller, George, and Mary Dunkius 1731 July 27 

Miller, George, Salem, and Sarah Rumsey, Salem 1737 Aug. 22 

Miller, Henry, Salem, and Mary Wood, Salem 1765 April 9 

Miller, Isaac, Burlington, and Mercy Richards. 1750 Aug. 22 

Miller, Israel, Cumberland, and Abigail Miller, Cumberland 1779 Nov. 16 

Miller, James, Cape May, and Susannah Kent, Cape May 1755 June 3 

Miller, James, Gloucester, and Jane Finley, Gloucester 1765 Oct. 28 

Miller, Joel, Cumberland, and Polly Newell 1787 April 10 

Miller, Johann, Burlington, and Martha Price, Burliugton 1761 May 20 

Miller, John, Burlington, and Anne Millard, Burlington. 1728 Jan. 1 

Miller, John, Salem, and Rachel Read, Salem 1710 Oct. 31 

Miller, John, Monmouth, and Mary Horner 1761 July 21 

Miller, John, Burlington, and Hester Tanner, Burlington 1764 Oct. 3 

Miller, John, Burlington, and Catharine Bristow, Burlington 1766 April 29 

Miller, John, Gloucester, and Mary Millinor, Philadelphia 1771 Aug. 2L 

Miller, John, Cumberland, and Phebe Irelan, Cumberland 1777 July 31 

Miller, John, Pennsylvania, and Abalon Fox 1786 Mar. 20 

Miller, Matthias, New Jersey, and Anne Dixon, New Jersey 1743 Dec. 27 

Miller, Matthias, Salem, and Jean Toumson 1779 Aug. 19 

Miller, Noah, Cumberland, and Mary Mills, Cumberland 1762 Nov. 16 

Miller, Thomas, Burlington, and Martha Lake, Burlington 1729 Mar. 11 

Miller, William, Burlington, and Rachel Bunting, Burlington 1735 May 31 

Miller, William, Salem, and Catharine Graiton, Salem 1761 Aug. 15 

Miller, William, Burlington, and Ann Kemble 1777 April 7 

Milles, James, Burlington, and Saab Coppuck, Burlington. 1761 Aug. 19 

Milles, Joshua, Burlington, and Margaret Williams 1739 Nov. 1 

Mdlhouse, John, Gloucester, and Judah Rape 1785 Mar. 28 

Milliken, Richard, Burlington, and Rachel Hoskins, Burlington 1759 Dec. 18 

Mills, Benoni, Cumberland, and Lydia Hand, Cape May 1769 April 10 

Mills, Edward, Morris, and Phebe Byram 1778 May 9 

Mills, Francis, Burlington, and Euphemia Smart 1782 July 29 

Mills, Isaac, Cumberland, and Rebecca Campbell, Cumberland 17C2 Mar. 1 

Mills, Jacob, Gloucester, and Mary Heppard, Gloucester 1761 Nov. 14 

Mills, Jacob, Gloucester, and Jain Lee 1775 Nov. 13 

Mills, Jerediah, Cape May, and Elizabeth Stites, Cape May 1757 Feb. 18 

Mills, Jonathan, Cape May, and Judith Eldredge .. . 1767 Dec. 30 

Mills, Jonathan, Cape May, and Amy Johnson. . 1768 June 9 

Mills, Samuel, Cumberland, and Mary Chessney 1779 April 27 



Marriage licenses. 



26s 



Mills, William, Burlington, and Hannah Borden, Burlington 1778 Dec. 5 

Milnor, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Phebe Kirkbride, Bucks, Pa 1746 Dec. 29 

Miluor, Thomas, Gloucester, aud Eleanor Kimsey 1763 April 8 

Milton, James, Burlington, and Lydia Garwood, Burlington 1761 Aug. 1 

Milton, Walter, Cape May, aud Anne Osborn, Cape May 1746 April 19 

Milton, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Morlan 1760 Jan. 23 

Minderman, Bartholomew, aud Jane Joyner 1693 Dec. 5 

Miuery, Hugh, Somerset, and Jannet Logan, Somerset 1751 Sept. 17 

Miugen, Lewis, Burlington, and Mercy Norcross, Burlington 1773 Feb. 19 

Miugiu, Joseph. New Hanover, and Sarah Jones, New Hanover 17-18 July 28 

Mingin, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Leeds 1777 Nov. 20 

Minor, Lawrence, Burlington, and Elizabeth Piatt 1760 Dec. 8 

Minor, Samuel, Somerset, and Anna Douw, Somerset 1740 Mar. 9 

Minor, William, Somerset, and Charity Prost, Hunterdon 1777 Dec. 11 

Minser, Mark, Burlington, and Hannah Burns 1784 Mar. 10 

Mires, Aaron, Burlington, and Sarah Buttertield, Burlington 1771 Aug. 10 

Mires, Abraham, Monmouth, and Naucy Walling, Monmouth 1763 June 21 

Mires, Jacob, Monmouth, and Martha Walling, Monmouth ...1759 April 26 

Mirs, George, Burlington, and Mary Prickett, Burlington 1751 May 20 

Mirs, Martin, Monmouth, and Hester Horn, Monmouth 1762 Oct. 4 

Mitchel, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Piffets , 1757 Jan. 29 

Mitchel, Daniel, Burlington, and Anne Fort, Burlington 1783 Oct. 27 

Mitchel, Isaac, Monmouth, and Byer Hallstecd, Moumouth 1764 June 14 

Mitchel, Joseph, Middlesex, and Hannah Dunham, Middlesex 1753 June 20 

Mitchel, Lewis, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Stevens, Monmouth 1740 May 6 

Mitchel, Richard, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Martesy, Monmouth ...1741 Oct. 17 

Mitchel, Richard, Moumouth, and Elisabeth Croxson, Monmouth 1763 Sept. 23 

Mitchel, William, Cape May, and Elisabeth Townsend 1774 Nov. 21 

Mitchell, George, Burlington, and Ann Croney, Burlington 1782 Mar. 2 

Mitchell, James, Monmouth, and Catharine Jonson, Monmouth ...... 1 755 Sept. 25 

Mitchell, John, Moumouth, and Hannah Parker, Monmouth 1762 April 13 

Mitchell, John, Bucks, Pa., and Phebe Randall, Bucks, Pa 1763 Oct. 17 

Mitchell, John, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Willett, Bucks, Pa 1776 July 27 

Modlaer, Frederick, Cape May, aud Rebecca Smith, Cape May 1774 April 26 

Moffat, Thomas, Middlesex, and Margaret Gaston, Somerset 1750 Nov. 8 

Mohan, Daniel, Gloucester, and Mary Middleton, Gloucester 1750 Jan. 12 

Molesberry, Philip, Sussex, and Martha Hanna 1768 July 23 

Molleson, Gilbert, Middlesex, and Hester Martin, Middlesex 1743 Dec. 13 

Molleson, Henry, Middlesex, aud Catherine Drake, Middlesex 1749 Mar. 12 

Molloy, John, Gloucester, and Rumah Smith 1777 July 31 

Monck, Nicholas, Sussex, and Ann Warral 1774 April 16 

Monday, Isaac, Middlesex, and Ann Martin 1774 May 31 

Monday, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Griffin, Middlesex 1749 Oct. 10 

Monday, John, Middlesex, and Rachel Martin, Middlesex 1753 Jan. 19 

Monday, Nicholas, Middlesex, and Hannah Compton, Middlesex 1757 May 21 

Monee, Abraham, Staten Island, and Anna Mary Nicholas, Essex. . . .1744 Feb. 19 



266 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

M< mfoort, Peter, and Styntie Williamson 1748 

Monfort, Henry, Somerset, and Anna Nephews, Somerset 1769 

\J Mornington, William, Burlington, and Sarah Coxe, Philadelphia 1772 

Monroe, John, Burlington, and Margaret Mitchell 1736 

Monrow, George, Burlington, and Rose Sharp. 1769 

Monrow, John, Jr., Burliugton, and Sarah Biddle, Burlington 1761 

Mons, John, Burlington, and Dorothy Stout, Burlington 1759 

Montaine, Isaac, New York, and Ann Spier, Bergen 1760 

Montague, Abraham, Morris, and Margaret Henderson 1739 

Montfort, Peter, Somerset, and Mary Hoogland 1783 

Montgomere, Robert, Monmouth, and Rachel Lawrence, Middlesex. . . 1745 

Montgomerie, Alexander, and Ennies West, Monmouth 1761 

Montgomery, Anthony, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Powell 1778 

Montgomery, Archibald, Philadelphia, and Sarah Winter, Phila 1737 

Montgomery, Joseph, George Town, Md., Elizabeth Reed, G'eT'n, Md 1762 

Montgomery, Robert, Jr., Monmouth, and Elizabeth Vance 1757 

Montgomery, Robert, Jr., Monmouth, and Margaret Leonard 1771 

Montgomery, William, Monmouth, and Mary Rhea 1778 

Moode, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Vanhorue, Bucks, Pa 1776 

Moon, James, Burlington, and Alice Barry, Burlington 1744 

Moon, Jasper, Burlington, and Martha Cripps, Burlington 1773 

Moon, Peter, Middlesex, and Hannah DeGrow, Middlesex 1741 

Mooney, Hugh, Gloucester, and Nancy Shinn 1781 

Moor, Benjamin, Jr., Burlington, and Rebecca Fennimore, Burlington. 1730 

Moor, James, Burlington, and Sarah Ridgway, Burlington 1730 

Moor, James, Jr., Sussex, and Jane Miller, Sussex 1779 

Moor, John, Staten Islaud, and Mary Stilwell, Staten Island 1758 

Moor, Michael, Middlesex, and Rachel Dunn, Middlesex 17LG 

Moor, Mordica, Burlington, and Alice Walker, Burlington 1731 

Moor, Thomas, Cape May, and Catharinah Beenson, Gloucester 1740 

Moor, Thomas, Burlington, and Lucretia Haines 1783 

Moorasje, Abraham, Bergen, and Margrit Helen, Bergen 1760 

Moore, Abijab, Hunterdon, and Hannah Brown 1780 

Moore, Amos, Hunterdon, and Anne Smith 1769 

Moore, Andrew, Monmouth, and Sarah Brown, Monmouth 1772 

Moore, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Bowen 1 778 

Moore, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Hannah Johnston 1768 

Moore, Edward, Salem, and Martha Thompson, Salem 1746 

Moore, Edward, Salem, and Mary Sanderlin, Salem 1764 

Moore, Eiisha, Hunterdon, and Mary Moon 1779 

Moore, Elwell, Salem, and Margaret Ashton, Salem 1765 

Moore, Elwell, Salem, and Rebecca Miller, Salem 1771 

Moore, Enoch, Cumberland, and Mary Ware, Cumberland. . . . , ., 1752 

Moore, Enoch, Cumberland, and Rachel Hutson, Cumberland 1762 

Moore, Hampton, Cumberland, and Mary VVestcott 1783 

Moore, Henry, Middlesex, and Mary Dudin 1747 



Aug. 


9 


Feb. 


16 


Feb. 


14 


Aug. 


9 


Jan. 


14 


June 


3 


Nov. 


13 


July 


1 


Feb. 


25 


May 


9 


Dec. 


3 


Nov. 


23 


Oct. 


21 


Nov. 


14 


May 


4 


June 


14 


Nov. 


13 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


16 


June 


18 


Sept. 


1 


Nov. 


18 


July 


3 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


1 


Feb. 


10 


Mar. 


13 


May 


25 


Jan. 


17 


May 


15 


July 


29 


April 


1 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


22 


Jan. 


18 


Nov. 


17 


Sept. 


3 


Nov. 


10 


Feb. 


7 


Nov. 


25 


April 


9 


June 


18 


April 


16 


Nov. 


22 


April 


17 


May 


27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 267 

Moore, Job, Burlington, and Mary Lippincott, Burlington 1766 Nov. 26 

Moore, Job, Trenton, and Deborah Stilwell 1768 July 13 

Moore, John, Middlesex, and Mary Fraze, Essex 1751 Nov. 13 

Moore, John, Salem, and Ann Powell, Salem 1772 Feb. 8 

Moore, John, Hunterdon, and Hannah Wortman 1772 July 22 

Moore, John, Essex, and Hannah Moore, Middlesex 1773 Oct. 8 

Moore, John, Burlington, and Bathsheba Ballinger 1777 May 1 

Moore, John, Hunterdon, and Sarah Pinkerton 1783 Jan. 22 

Moore, Jonathan, Middlesex, and Catherine Ryu, Middlesex 1746 May 17 

Moore, Jonathan, Middlesex, and Mary Stone, Middlesex 1761 Aug. 12 

Moore, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Hewlings, Burlington 1783 May 12 

Moore, Joshua, Philadelphia, and Rachel Dilks, Gloucester. . .... ... 1750 Dec. 31 

Moore, Michael, Middlesex, and Posthumas Frazee, Middlesex 1740 Dec. 31 

Moore, Michael, and Martha Perlee, Staten Island 1750 Nov. 12 

Moore, Michael, Bergen, and Cornelia Lydekka, Bergen 1764 Feb. 3 

Moore, Moses, and Marthew Cornell 1783 Feb. 25 

Moore, Samuel, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Rockport 1759 Jan. 24 

Moore, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Sarah Green 1781 Sept. 24 

Moore, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Martha Burrows 1781 Feb. 13 

Moore, Thomas, Salem, and Jean Tuff, Salem. .1730 April 15 

Moore, Thomas, Bergen, and Mary Fordon, Bergen 1748 April 22 

Moon, William, Salem, and Judith Hamilton, Salem 1769 May 6 

Moore, William, Salem, and Sarah Hamilton, Salem 1770 Mar. 17 

Moore, William, Hunterdon, and Mary Smith 1778 Aug. 22 

Moores, Daniel, Middlesex, and Agnes Brown, Middlesex 1747 Dec. 2 

Moorhead, James, Middlesex, and Sarah Thompson, Monmouth 1747 April 1 6 

Moorhead, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Judith Atan 1770 April 6 

Moran, Henry, Gloucester, and Mary Lucas, Gloucester 1739 Mar. 11 

More, David, Salem, and Lyddy Richman, Salem 1771 Dec. 4 

More, Thomas, Salem, and Elizabeth Ford 1732 Jan. 17 

Mores, Robert, Burlington, and Jemima Wood, Burlington 1711 Sept. 15 

Morford, Cornelius, Burlington, and Esther Bryan, Burlington 1761 Dec. 2 L 

Morford, Jarrett, Monmouth, and Rebekah Taylor, Monmouth 1742 Jan. 3 

Morford, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Robins, Monmouth 1739 Feb. 18 

Morford, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Van Kirk, Monmouth 1761 Feb. 6 

Morford, Stephen, Somerset, and Mary Hambleton 1779 Mar. 17 

Morford, Thomas, Monmouth, and Ann Laurie, Monmouth 1739 Sept. 25 

Morford, Thomas, Monmouth, and Easter Bound, Monmouth 1752 April 20 

Morford, Thomas, Monmouth, and Sarah Taylor, Monmouth 1765 Jan. 21 

Morford, Zebulon, Middlesex, and Susannah Barton, Middlesex 1746 Jan. 12 

Morgan, Charles, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Barcraft, Pennsylvania. 1727 Sept. 25 

Morgan, Daniel, Middlesex, and Sarah Morgan, Staten Island 1752 Sept. 25 

Morgan, Daniel, Middlesex, and Jane Brown, Monmouth 1759 May 3 

Morgan, David, Gloucester, and Mary Blackwood, Gloucester 1768 June 20 

Morgan, David, and Sarah Blackwood 1780 Jan. 1 

Morgan, Denstou, Monmouth, and Ester Ong 1755 Sept. 13 



268 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Morgau, John, Monmouth, and Susanna Groom 1771 

Morgan, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Ward 1781 

Morgan, John, Cumberland, and Rebecca Shaw 1785 

Morgan, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Mickle, Newtown 1745 

Morgan, Josepb, Hunterdon, and Temperance Kelsey 1780 

Morgan, Josepb, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Batcher 1789 

Morgan, Michael, Gloucester, and Sarah Smallwood 1786 

Morgan, Michael, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hedges 1791 

Morgan, Samuel, Salem, and Elizabeth Davies 1731 

Morgan, Samuel, Salem, and Margarett Dickerson 1760 

Morgan, Samuel, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Vansant 1762 

Morphett, David, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hedges, Burlington 1735 

Morrell, Elijah, Middlesex, and Mary Wort 1780 

Morrell, John, Middlesex, and Jane Springsten 1764 

Morrell, John, New York, and Sarah Wallace 1775 

Morrell, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth JohnsoD, Hunterdon 1764 

Morrell, Samuel, Middlesex, and Margaret Warne, Middlesex 1756 

Morrell, Samuel, Middlesex, and Barsheba Brown, Monmouth 1761 

Morrell, William, Burlington, and Mary Feanimore, Burlington 1730 

Morress, Steven, Gloucester, and Jemime Ireland 1774 

Morrill, William, Staten Island, and Abigail Jones, Staten Island .... 1743 

Morrhi, Robert, Princeton, and Anna Jones, Princeton 1768 

Morris, Adam, Cape May, and Hannah Eldridge 1764 

Morris, Asa, Middlesex, and Susannah Heard, Middlesex. ...:'. 1764 

Morris, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Mary Robins % . . 1763 

Morris, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Lydia Cumton, Monmouth 1767 

Morris, Christopher, Monmouth, and Rebecca Layton, Monmouth . . 1742 

Morris, David, Middlesex, and Mary Shotwell 1769 

Morris, George, Burlington, and Rebecca Decow, Burlington. ........ 1731 

Morris, George, Burlington, and Elie Fegans 1783 

Morris, Isaac, Burliugton, and Jemimah Applegate, Burlington 1759 

Morris, Jacob, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Ausley, Monmouth 1765 

Morris, Jacob, Monmouth, and Mersibah Leming. 1772 

Morris, James, Monmouth, and Leah White, Monmouth 1753 

Morris, Job, Monmouth, and Mary Ansley, Monmouth 1760 

Morris, John, Chester, Pa., and Elizabeth Taylor, Chester, Pa 1742 

Morris, John, Burlington, and Rose Ridge, Burlington 1746 

Morris, John, Middlesex, and Bebecah Cox 1763 

Morris, Johu, Monmouth, and Euphame Brindley, Monmouth 1763 

Morris, John, Essex, and Rhoda Alstone, Middlesex 1763 

Morris, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Woodruff, Monmouth 1765 

Morris, John, Morris, and Keziah Cook 1779 

Morris, Joseph, Burlington, and Hanuah Asson, Monmouth. . 1744 

Morris, Joseph, Monmouth, and Johaunah Hulit, Monmouth .1755 

Morris, Joseph, Burlington, and Lydia Wilson, Burlington 1767 

Morris, Lewis, Middlesex, and Sarah Britton, Middlesex 1750 



Nov. 


30 


Aug. 


'J 3 


Sept. 


13 


April 


10 


April 


24 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


6 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


10 


Sept. 


4 


May 


20 


Aug. 


18 


Mar. 


28 


Nov. 


29 


May 


4 




28 


Feb. 


21 


April 


24 


Oct. 


28 


Oct. 


13 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


29 


Dec. 


15 


Jan. 


2 


Dec. 


2 


June 


1 


May 


1 


Dec. 


6 


Oct. 


14 


Dec. 


17 


April 


14 


Feb. 


13 


Jan. 


18 


July 


18 


May 


17 


Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


13 


Feb. 


24 


April 


29 


Nov. 


26 


June 


23 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


21 


Aug. 


2 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



269 



Morris, Lewis, Monmouth, and Lidy Hoffnrire, Monmouth 1763 

Morris, Morris, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Gwin, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Morris, Nathaniel, Gloucester, and Thankfull Williams, Gloucester. . .1747 

Morris, Richard, Monmouth, and Mary Porter, Monmouth 1741 

Morris, Richard, Jr., Monmouth, and Joannah Patterson, Monmouth 1749 

Morris, Robert, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Ellison, Monmouth 1762 

Morris, Robert, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Cain, Bucks. Pa 1765 

Morris, Samuel, Monmouth, and Hester Fatterson, Monmouth 1740 

Morris, Stephen, Gloucester, and Barbara Adams, Gloucester 1731 

Morris, Thomas, Middlesex, and Hannah Charliston, Essex 1753 

Morris, Thomas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Freeman, Middlesex 1755 

Morris, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Chandler, Monmouth 1767 

Morris, Thomas, Burlington, and Ann Ward 1779 

Morris, William, Burlington, and Mary Wills 1768 

Morris, William, Monmouth, and Maitha Vaughn, Monmouth 1768 

Morris, Zephaniah, Monmouth, and Mary Dans, Monmouth 1765 

Morrison, Samuel, Morristown, and Mary Johnson, Morristown 1779 

Morrow, David, Burlington, and Mary Loveland. 1784 

Morrow, James, Sussex, and Jane Gardner 1770 

Morrow, John, Cumberland, and Jane Randolph, Cumberland 1771 

Morrow, Samuel, Burlington, and Anne Pharo. ... 1764 

Morse, Jonas, Gloucester, and Abigail Smith 17S4 

Morton, Andrew, Gloucester, and Emy Lorens. 1735 

Morton, Hezekiah, Burlington, and Margaret Goldy 1781 

Morton, John, Burlington, and Ann Weaver 1763 

Morton, Restore, Burlington, and Rachel Arey 1779 

Morton, Samuel, Gloucester, aud Lydia Cock, Gloucester 1736 

Mott, Gershom, New Jersey, and Deborah Carman 175 1 

Mott, James, Monmouth, and Amey Herbert, Monmouth ... 1752 

Mott, John, Bm-lington, and Phebe Cramer 1738 

Mott, John, Burlington, and Patience Austin, Burlington 1771 

Mott, John, Trenton, and Eleaner Alexander 1784 

Mott, Joshua, Hunterdon, and Mary Kitchen, Hunterdon 1773 

Mound, Enoch, Burlington, and Lydia Mills 1778 

Mounson, Peter, Salem, aud Hannah Rumsey, Salem 1764 

Mount, Francis, Monmouth, and Ann Reynolds, Monmouth 1758 

Mount, Francis, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Reed, Monmouth 1764 

Mount, George, Monmouth, and Amy Chambers, Monmouth 1744-5 

Mount, George, Monmouth, and Adrea Woolley, Monmouth 1748-9 

Mount, Hezekiah, Monmouth, and Mary Paterson '. . 1778 

Mount, James, Monmouth, and Patience Price, Monmouth 1757 

Mount, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Cimiris, Monmouth. .... . 1748 

Mount, John, Jr., Monmouth, and Elizabeth Briuley 1745 

Mount, Joseph, Somerset, and Alice Van Wykel, Somerset 1741 

Mouut Joseph, Monmouth, and Anne Stillwell, Monmouth 1761 

Mount, Joseph, Middlesex, and Hannah Lougstreet 1780 



Ma 7 


30 


Aug. 


6 


June 


23 


June 


19 


July 


3 


Feb. 


10 


April 


20 


May 


14 


April 


24 


A pril 


7 


June 


'2 


June 


19 


Mar. 


29 


May 


7 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


25 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


6 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


28 


Mar. 


20 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


2 


Sept. 


1 


April 


23 


May 


8 


Aug. 


7 


Sept. 


15 


June 


15 


Sept. 


22 


Mar. 


17 


June 


30 


Jan. 


4 


Feb. 


8 


Jan. 


18 


Mar. 


4 


June 


30 


Nov. 


30 


Feb. 


8 


Aug. 


27 


Sept. 


28 


Mir. 


7 


Dec. 


4 



270 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Mount, Matthias, Burlington, and Elizabeth Keeler 1771 

Mount, Moses, Monmouth, and Lydia Bills, Monmouth 1739 

Mount, Nisbit, Middlesex, and Mary Hay, Middlesex 1744 

Mount, Samuel, Monmouth, and Frances Cook 1755 

Mount, Thomas, Monmouth, and Hannah Wilson, Monmouth 1754 

Mount, William, Monmouth, and Sarah Starkey, New Hanover 1746 

Mount, William, Middlesex, and Anna Ferine, Middlesex 1761 

Mount, William, Monmouth, and Bebeckah Chandler, Monmouth . . 1763 

Mount, William, Monmouth, and Bebekah Cox 1775 

Mounten, John, Salem, and Mareyann Muckelroy 1759 

Muirheid, Jonathan, Hunterdon, and Mary Lott 1779 

Mulford, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Mary Sbeppard, Cumberland. . 1760 
Mulford, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Hepsebeth Wheaton, Cumber'd 1770 
Mulford, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Hannah Barker, Cumberland. . 1771 

Mulford, Ephraim, Cumberland, and Bebeckah Weilding 1778 

Mulford, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Mary Edwards, Cape May 1762 

Mulford, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Jemima Nicholson 1770 

Mulford, Furman, Cumberland, and Bhoda Johnson 1780 

Mulford, John, Cumberland, and Clemons Maskell, Cumberland 1776 

Mulford, John, Cumberland, and Levice Waithman .' 1781 

Mulford, Lewis, Cumberland, and Mary Barker, Cumberland 1773 

Mulford, Moses, Cumberland, and Bachel Moore, Cumberland 1758 

Mulford, William, Cumberland, and Prudence Maskell, Cumberland. .1762 
Mulford, William, Cumberland, and Sarah Coningham, Cumberland. .1768 

Mullen, Edward, Burlington, and Mary Monrow, Burlington 1759 

Mullen, Edward, Burlington, and Anne Shaw 1783 

Mullen, John, Burlington, and Druzilla Prickett, Burlington 1751 

Mullen, John, Burlington, and Hannah Collins, Burlington 1754 

Mullen, Jobn, Burlington, and Jane Kine, Burlington 1761 

Mullen, John, Burlington, and Catharine Haines, Burlington 1776 

Mullen, Joseph, Bridgetown, and Anne Fenimore, Wellingborough. . .1718 

Mullen, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Estell, Burlington 1775 

Mullen, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Atkinson. . . 1784 

Mullin, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Edwards, Burlington 1729 

Mulock, James, Gloucester, and Priscilla Collins, Gloucester 1757 

Mulock, Joseph, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Marpole 1782 

Muuday, Samuel, Middlesex, and Mary Thorp, Middlesex 1755 

Mungou, John, Burlington, and Sarah Cowgill, Burlington 1738 

Munniou, Bobert, Greenwich, and Aune Williams, Greenwich 1748 

Muuro, Harry, and Sarah Morton 1763 

Munrow, George, Burlington, and Sarah Perkins, Burliugtou 1737 

Munyau, Thomas, Gloucester, and Naomi Williams, Gloucester 1761 

Munyon, Jobn, Gloucester, and Rachel Pinyard, Gloucester 176S 

Murphy, Henry, Burlington, and Susannah Fester, Burlington 1775 

Murphy, Isaac, Gloucester, and Saphiah Silver 1783 

Murphy, James, Salem, and Mary Harding, Salem 1765 



Aug. 


5 


May 


15 


Aug. 


9 


June 


20 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


25 


Aug. 


31 


Dec. 


6 


Nov. 


20 


Jan. 


22 


April 


13 


Oct. 


4 


Dec. 


20 


Dec. 


19 


Dec. 


7 


May 


4 


Jan. 


15 


April 


29 


April 


2 


Apiil 


3 


Oct. 


4 


April 


25 


Feb. 


22 


April 


11 


Oct, 


27 


Nov. 


25 


April 


16 


Aug. 


17 


Nov. 


28 


Mar. 


25 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


19 


May 


13 


Sept. 


14 


April 


16 


July 


22 


Mar. 


26 


April 


25 


Dec. 


27 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


28 


April 


26 


Nov. 


7 


Sept. 


25 


Sept. 


2 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 27 I 

Murphy, John, Burlington, and Sarah Jones, Springfield 1749 

Murphy, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Zane 1784 

Murphy, Michael, Burlington, and Jenuy Aimnermon ... 1781 

Murphy, Robert, Cumberland, and Damaris Sayre 1780 

Murphy, Stephen, Burlington, and Esther Fort, Burlington 1729 

Murray, Duncan, Maryland, and Jamima Worth, Barnegat 17-19 

Murrel, Joseph, Burlington, and Anne Ferguson, Burlington. 1758 

Murrell, Gilbert, and Judith Harnock 1691 

Murrell, Levi, Burlington, and Sarah Scattergood, Burlington 1757 

Murrell, Samuel, Burlington, and Rachel Hooper, Burlington 1749 

Murrell, Samuel, Gloucester, and Anne Stokes, Gloucester 1761 

Murrill, William, Burlington, and Sarah Estill, Burlington 1783 

Mursiu, Robert, Hunterdon, and Amiryllis Hays, Hunterdon 1740 

Muscat, Frederick, Burlington, and Mary Thorla 1768 

Musgrove, William, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Mayu, Pennsylvania .. 1764 

Myars, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Andrews, Burlington 1766 

Myer, Andrew, Middlesex, and Mary Smith, Middlesex 1744 

Myer, Jacobes, Bergen, and Elena Brouyn 1765 

Myer, John, Middlesex, and Jane Beaty, Middlesex 1742 

Myers, John, Burlington, and Sarah Shinn, Burlington 1775 

Myers, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Flatt 1783 

Myers, Moses, Burlington, and Michael Smith 1774 

Myller, Joseph, Bridgtown, and Anne Fenimore, Willingborow. ...... 1748 

M 

FEMALES. m 

MacColm, Ann, Middlesex, and William Ford, Middlesex 1762 

Maccoy, Marah, Monmouth, and John Mean, Monmouth 1754 

MacDonald, Mary, and John Page, Monmouth 1780 

Mack, Mary, and Thomas Kean, Cumberland 1777 

Mack Collon, Marthew, and John Smith, Shrewsbury 1754 

Mackdaniel, Jane, Middletown, and Robert Willson, Middletown 1739 

Mack Daniel, Mary, Monmouth, and Edward May, Monmouth 1762 

Mack Dowall, Honor, Perth Amboy, and William Davis, Perth Amboy. 1740 

Mackel, Ann, Monmouth, and William Eagles, New York , 1763 

Mackenuy, Mary, Gloucester, and James Ward, Gloucester 1740 

Mackey, Abigail, and Jacob Willets, Cape May , 1777 

Mackey, Catharine, Cape May, and William Hand, Cape May 1731 

Mackey, Martha, and Darius Corson, Cape May 1778 

Mackey, Phebe, and Joseph Badcock, Cape May 1780 

Mackfenel, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Hankinson, Jr., M'th..l761 

Mackintosh, Margaret, and John Preston, Gloucester 1733 

Mackleas, Comfort, and Job Somers 1763 

Macknish, Hannah, Middlesex, and Philip Van Aersdale. 1750 

Macleane, Catrine, and William Stevens. . . 1742 

Maclure, Elizabeth, and John Stevenson, Hunterdon 1739 

MacPherson, Rachel, Kiugwood, and James Power, Hunterdon 1774 



Aug. 


10 


Dec. 


28 


June 


9 


Mar. 


1 


Sept. 


18 


July 


10 


April 


14 


Dec. 


30 


July 


21 


Mar. 


29 


Mar. 


27 


Dec. 


4 


Mar. 


17 


Dec. 


5 


May 


29 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 1742 


Oct. 


31 


Feb. 


20 


May 


20 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


■>'.) 


May 


15 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


11 


Mar. 


8 


July 


31 


Oct. 


27 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


27 


Mar. 


30 


April 


27 


Jan. 


28 


June 


4 


Feb. 


1 


April 


13 


July 


24 


Sept, 


6 


April 


9 


April 


29 


May 


12 


July 


24 



272 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Mack Eight, Sally, and Isaac Swauger, Hunterdon 1768 Dec. 27 

Maddock, Mary, Hunterdon, and James Abbot, Hunterdon 1749 Nov. 15 

Maddocks, Elizabeth, Burlington, and James Hubbord, Mddleton ...1732 May 13 

Magloughlin, Margaret, Gloucester, and James Hayes, Gloucester 1738 Aug. 2 

Magonnagil, Catherine, and Thomas Rattoone, Perth Amboy 1766 June 18 

Main, Elizabeth, Bergen, and John Gordon, Essex 1742 Aug. 11 

Mairs, Margaret, and Jeremiah Allen, Burlington . . 1760 Jan. 5 

Major, Ann, Hunterdon, and Henry Marshon, Hunterdon 1739 Dec. 11 

Major, Mary, and Richard Francis 1694 July 8 

Malouey, Mary, and Robert Bouynton, Bergen 177- Jan. 10 

Malsby, Auna, Mansfield, and Joseph Renear, Mansfield 1774 Aug. 11 

Malson, Catharine, Gloucester, and Jacob Richman, Salem 1736 Feb. 22 

Mance, Abigail, Burlington, and John Haley, Burlington 1782 Mar. 7 

Mandego, Lenah, Hackensack, and Abraham Peterson, Hackensack. . . 1763 Dec. 2 

Manderviel, Sarah, and Abraham Ryerson, Saddle River 1782 Nov. 22 

Mauderviel, Marretye, Morris, and Henry Laroe, Orange Co., N. Y. . . . 1780 Feb. 24 

Maudevill, Mary, and Michael Dumodt, Morris 1783 July 5 

Manee, Mary, Staten Island, and James Reid, Cranberry 1747 Mar. 16 

Manfort, Sarah, Hunterdon, and William Graham, Somerset 1744 Dec. 7 

Maulees, Catherine, Monmouth, and Jacob Applegate, Monmouth 1763 Aug. 8 

Manley, Mary, and John Carr, Hunterdon 1779 Jan. 1 

Mannary, Hannah, and Daniel Scull, Gloucester 1731 June 14 

Maunering, Mary, and Nathan Stretch, Alloways Creek 1768 May 26 

Mannery, Rachel, Gloucester, and Daniel Scull. ... 1741 Oct. 26 

Manning, Elizabeth, Piscataway, and Phineas Dunn, Piscataway 1755 July 31 

Manning, Grace, Essex, and Daniel Cooper, Morris 1768 Mar. 11 

Manning, Martha, Piscataway, and Peter Wheaton, Woodbridge 1754 April 3 

Mannington, Anne, Philadelphia, and Matthew Maguire, Philadelphia. 1774 April 11 

Manniugton, Joyce, Burlington, and Nathan Allen, Burlington 1776 May 3 

Manson, Elizabeth, Peith Amboy, and Richard Horncastle, P'th Aui'y.1746 Sept. 3 

Manus, Mary, and John Brian, Burlington 1733 Dec. 6 

Mapes, Ruth, Gloucester, and John Wright, Gloucester 1733 Dec. 24 

Maps, Melesent, and John Coats, Gloucester 1774 Jan. 3 

March, Lydia, and Garret Van Vliedt, Reading 1777 May 28 

Marett, Sarah, Burlington, and Abel Butler, Burlington. 1776 Feb. 14 

Margerum, Rebecca, and Thomas Rickey, Jr 1778 Nov. 28 

Marian, Mary, aud John Englehart, Burlington 1779 Sept. 23 

Mariott, Anna, Bucks, Pa., and Billingham Humber 1759 May 16 

Mariott, Margaret, Springfield, and John Berrymau, Springfield 1749 July 3 

MarkKouw, Isabella, and Samuel Roe, Maryland 1784 May 4 

Marlaud, Anne, Gloucester, aud Isaac Tindal, Gloucester 1729 Sept. 10 

Marlat, Catharine, Somerset, and John Goldtrap, Somerset 1750 July 14 

Marlatt, Nolly, and Richard Marlatt, Hunterdon 1772 Nov. 23 

Marlett, Nelly, Middlesex, and George Hall, Somerset 1761 June 13 

Martin, Rebecca, aud Edward Hopkins, Monmouth 1772 Sept. 3 

Marling, Hannah, Burlington, and Thomas Martin, Burlington 1781 Aug. 6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 273 

Marofc, Ann Judith, Bordentown, and Preston V'anlaw, Bordentown. . .1740 April 15 

Marple, Susanna, and Samuel Butcher, Philadelphia 1736 Aug. 12 

Marple, Susannah, Gloucester, and Johu Heritage, Gloucester 1768 Dec. 7 

Marpole, Abigail, and Thomas MeCartey, Gloucester 1773 April 12 

Marpole, Elizabeth, and Joseph Mulock, Gloucester 1782 July 22 

Marpole, Patience, and Joseph Sloan, Gloucester 1778 Nov. 26 

Marpole, Susanna, Philadelphia, and Isaac Hawkins, Philadelphia 1748 July '28 

Marriage, Rachel, and Thomas Chew, Gloucester 1778 Nov. 28 

Marriot, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Marmaduke Fort, Burlington . . 1775 Oct. 23 

Man iott, A une, Burlington, and Joseph Aronson, Burlington 1749 Nov. 20 

Marriott, Hannah, Burlington, and John Fort, Burlington 1731 Nov. 3 

Marriott, Sarah, and William Cony, Philadelphia 1733 July 4 

Marriott, Sarah, Burlington, and John Gibson, Burlington 1749 April 8 

Marrow, Sarah, and Joseph Barker, Burlington 1779 Nov. 29 

Marschalk, Lottie, and Matthew Raynor, Morristown 1777 May 16 

Marselis, Petertie. Bergen, and Aaron Bratt, New York 1760 May 21 

Marsh, Anne, Somerset, and John Fine, Somerset 1747 Nov. 7 

Marsh, Anne, Elizabeth Town, and 'lhomas Woodruff, Elizabeth Town. 1753 Nov. 25 

Marsh, Elizabeth, Essex, and Nathan Cooper, Morris 1749 Jan. 20 

Marsh, Elizabeth, Essex, and Nathaniel Hubbell, Essex 1750 Jan. 10 

Marsh, Francis, Middlesex, and John McComb, New York City 1762 Oct. 9 

Marsh, Jane, Morris, and James Gillispie, Morris 1771 May 9 

Marsh, Mary, Elizabeth Town, and John Bishop, Elizabeth Town . . 1747 Sept. 5 

Marsh, Mary, Cape May, and Jacob Richardson, Cape May 1771 July 26 

Marsh, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and James Bailey, Philadelphia 1759 May 12 

Marshall, Abigail, and Isaac Burrough, Waterford 1771 July 12 

Marshall, Anne, Elizabethtown, and John Davan, New York 1757 Dec. 15 

Marshall, Eleanor, Middlesex, and George Hartwick, Middlesex.. . . 1748 Jan. 7 

Marshall, Elizabeth, and Nathan Cattell, Gloucester 1780 Mar. 14 

Marshal], Jemiah, Kingwood, and Isaac Newman, Kingwood 1768 Dec. 21 

Marshall, Martha, and Joseph Scull, Gloucester 1778 Aug. 29 

Marshall, Rachel, and Jacob Layest, Salem 1775 June 24 

Marshall, Rebecca, and Richard Bacon, Cumberland 1779 Dec. 1 

Marshon, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Joseph Green, Trenton 1738 June 15 

Martin, Ann, Burlington, and William Holloway, Burlington 1756 April 21 

Martin, Ann and Isaac Monday, Middlesex 1774 May 31 

MartiD, Catherine, Piscataway, and William Shreve, Piscataway 1755 Nov. 10 

Martin, Deborah, Woodbridge, and Benjamin Alford, Woodbridge. . . . 1754 May 1 

Martin, Elizabeth, and Robert Greaves, BurliDgtou . 1717 Mar. 17 

Martin, Eunice, Woodbridge, and William Rickey, Woodbridge 1740 Feb. 9 

Martin, Hannah, Burlington, and John Huggin, Burlington 1736 Nov. 30 

Martin. Hester, Middlesex, and Gilbert Molleson, Middlesex 1743 Dec. 13 

Martin, Margaret, Piscataway, and Samuel Willson, Piscataway.. . .1737 Oct. 25 

Martin, Mary, Piscataway, and John Thickston, Piscataway 1743 May 11 

Martin, Rachel, Middlesex, and John Monday, Middlesex 1753 Jan. 19 

Martin, Rachel, and Philip Johnston, Hunterdon 1767 April 13 

18 



2 74 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Martin, Rebecca, and John Kelley, Burlington 1778 Sept. 30 

Martin, Ruth, Middlesex, and Isaac Drake, Essex 1743 Feb. 23 

Martin, Sarab, Middlesex, and Epbraim Maning, Middlesex 1763 Oct. 25 

Martin, S uab, Gloucester, and John Maffett, Gloucester 1765 April 13 

Martin, Sarab, and Francis Silvester, Middlesex 17d9 Mar. 29 

Marts, Elisabetb, ami Jobu Snook, Hunterdon 1779 Dec. 14 

Misb, Aukie, New York, and William Day, Bergen 1762 May 28 

Mash, Sarab, Hunterdon, and Cornelius Huls, Hunterdon 1761 Jan. 11 

Maskell, Abigail, and William Stretcb 1754 June 4 

Maskell, Clemons, Cumberland, and Jobn Mul ford, Cumberland 1776 April 2 

Maskell, Hannab, and Furman Sbyberd, Cumberland 1780 Dec. 20 

Maskell, Prudence, Cumberland, and William Mulford, Cumbeiland. . 1762 Feb. 22 

Masou, Anne, Burlington, and Cbristopber Bosser, Burlington 1774 Oct. 29 

Mason, Estber, Burlington, and Benjamin Naylor, Burlington 1741 Sept. 9 

Mason. Jane, Monmouth, and William Dey, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 16 

Mason, Isabel, Salem, and Thomas Trench, Salem 1 733 J uly 13 

Masou, Lydia, and Jonatbau Borden, Burliugton 1781 Jan. 4 

Masoa, Mary, Philadelphia, and Jobn Chapped, Philadelphia 1730 Dec. 24 

Mason, Mary, Bucks, and fhilip Button, Bucks 1739 Oct. 27 

Mason, Rachel, Burlington, and William Cox. Burlington.. 1761 Dec. 15 

Mason, Sarab, Salem, and Thomas Robinson, Philadelphia 1738 Jan. 29 

Mastery, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Richard Mitchel, Monmouth 1741 Oct. 17 

Mather, Hannah, and William McCorkey 1769 Jan. 2 

Mathew, Sarab, Cape May, and Epbraim Bancroft, Cape May 1760 Dec. 20 

Mathews, Eleshabe, Cape May, and Nathaniel Norton, Cape May 1731 April 19 

Mathews, Lydia, and Elisba Hand, Cape May 1766 Aug. 16 

Mathews, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Ford, Essex 1740 June 23 

Matlack, Amy, Gloucester, and William Ellis, Gloucester 1756 Dec. 30 

Matlack, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jacob Vandegrift, Bucks, Pa . 1746 May 10 

Matlack, Hannah, and Edward Gibbs, Gloucester '. . 1758 Aug. 21 

Matlack, Hepzibah, Evesham, aud Samuel Werner, Evesham 1784 Aug. 3 

Matlack, Lydia, Gloucester, aud Benjamin Graisbury, Gloucester 1767 Dec. 17 

Matlack, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Iuskeep, Burlington 1728 Dec. 19 

Matlack, Mary, Burlington, aud Samuel Cales, Burlington 1767 May 4 

Matlack, Phebe, and Edward Collins, Gloucester 1791 Feb. 10 

Matlack, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Bishop, Burlington 1737 Oct. 22 

Matlack, Rebecca, Burlington, and Morgan Hollingshead, Burlington. 1775 Sept. 30 

Matlack, Sarah, and Thomas Stratton, Evesham 1777 Feb. 23 

Matlock, Amey, and Cumberland Shepherd, Gloucester 1775 Mar. 7 

Matlock, Ruth, Burlington, and John Eudicot, Burlington 1749 Oct. 19 

Matson, Amy, and Abraham Eastwood, Monmouth. . . 1758 July 22 

Matson, Ann, Builington. and Uriah I'itman. Middlesex 1762 Mar. 5 

Matson, Hannah, Burlington, and John Pitman, Burlington 1757 Mar. 12 

Matson, Mary, and Thomas Key, Gloucester 17^2 Sept. 19 

Matson, Rachel, Burlington, and Joseph Bolton, Burlington 1771 Nov. 6 

Matther, Phebe, aud John Forman, Jr., Burlington 1783 Nov. 25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 275 

Matthews, Anne, Monmouth, and Matthias Holsaert, Monmouth 1740 

Matthews, Elizabeth, Little Egg Harbor, and Job Kidgway, Stafford. .1766 

Matthews, Hannah, and Elihu Smith, Cape May 1780 

Matthews. Martha, and Benjamin Crura, Cape May 1780 

Matthews, Mary, Middlesex, aud Henry Kip, Middlesex 1739 

Matthews, Mary, and Stephen Stevens, Cape May 1774 

Matthis, Isabella McKinsey, and Abuer Peacock, Burlington 17o9 

Matthis, Mary, and Reuben Soper, Monmouth 1779 

Matthis, Sarah, and Samuel L j ek, Burlington 1784 

M ittisou, Martha, and Jesse Hart, Hunterdon 1770 

Mattlacke, Mary, Gloucester, and Joab Hillman, Gloucester 1761 

Mattox, Abigail, and Cornelius Vauover, Hardwick 1778 

Mattucks, Rebecca, and 'lhomas Tcwnsend, Cape May 1789 

Mauris, Elizabeth, and Jacob Haley, Burlington 1786 

Maxell, Abigail, and Daniel Sexton, Evesham 1778 

Maxen, Prudence, Middletown, aud John Ashley Monmouth 1765 

Maxfield, Bridget, Burlington, and James Griffin, Burlington 1740 

M axfield, Margaret, Elsenborough, and Joseph Vauuemau, Salem .... 1763 

Maxfield, Sarah, Burlington, and Jchn Toy, Burlington 1780 

Maxfield, Susannah, and .Jonathan Williams, Essex 1768 

May, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and William Farquer 1763 

May, Pheby, and Gedeon Bidcock, Gloucester. 1772 

May, Phebe, and Peter Wells, Great Egg Harbour 1774 

Mayhew, Amey, Pittsgrove, and Clarence Parvin, Cumberland 1775 

Mayhew, Ester, Pittsgrove, and Benjamin '1 homson, Fairfield 1774 

Mayhew, Elizabeth, and Kennedy Dabzell, Somerset 1769 

Mayhew, Mary, Piles Grove, and David Richman, Piles Grove 1769 

Mayer, Hannah, Pennsylvania, and William Musgrave, Bucks Co., Pa 1764 

May pie, Sarah, and Joseph Bower, Monmouth 1769 

McBride, Mary, and Perry Floyd, Hunterdon 1778 

McOabe, Ann, and William Hutchinson, Burlington 1770 

McCafferty, Margaret, and Peter Drayo, Sussex 1768 

McCain, Elsse, Bergen, and William Uvail, Bergen 1753 

McCall, Sarah, Salem, and David Garrison, Salem 1761 

McCallister, Elizabeth, Salem, and George Dickinson, Salem 1762 

McCane, Susannah, Somerset, aud Thomas McConnel, Somerset 1747 

McCarty, Ann, Burlington, and Benjamin Butterworth, Burlington. .. 1736 

McCarty, Deborah, Sussex, and John Farnsworth, Hunterdon 1768 

McCarty, Elenor, and Nicholas Power, Somerset 1745 

M Carty, Elizabeth, aud Jarret Hughes 1774 

McCay, Sarah, Somerset, and Alexander Linn, Somerset. 1 745 

Mel 'lane, Flora, Monmouth, and Anthony King, Monmouth 1736 

MiCleas, Itcha, and Lambert Johnson, Monmouth 1745 

McCliuton, Jemimah, Hunterdon, and Samuel Maxwell, Hunterdon. ..17 71 

McClow, Abigail, aud Jacob Cock, Somerset 1780 

McColloch, Elizabeth, and Henry Crowford, Gloucester 1754 



Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


25 


July 


3 


Oct. 


5 


Oct. 


25 


Sept. 


5 


Mar. 


2 


April 


26 


Mar. 


25 


Jan. 


13 


April 


18 


Jan. 


20 


Aug. 


3 


Mar. 


7 


Feb. 


21 


July 


1 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


3 


Sept. 


3 


May 


14 


July 


25 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


5 


June 


8 


Oct. 


1 


Feb. 


— 


Aug. 


9 


May 


29 


June 


15 


Feb. 


21 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


1 


June 


11 


Aug. 


18 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


18 


Sept. 


14 


Nov. 


2 


June 


29 


April 


27 


Mar. 


23 


July 


22 


Feb. 


25 


May 


15 


April 


6 



276 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

McCullough, Elizabeth, Somerset, and William Hamilton, Somerset. . 1752 

McCollnm, Briggett, and George Tucker, Galloway 1784 

MeCollum, Mary, and Jonathan Johnson, Burlington 1779 

McCnllyr, Jane, Shrewsbury, and Gporge Trour, Shrewsbury 1761 

McOolur, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and James Kilpatrick, Middlesex 17-7 

McConel, Mart hew, Sussex, and Samuel Perry, Northampton, Pa 1771 

McCopping, Elizabeth Cohanzey, and Gabriel Newby, Gloucester... 1741 

McCormack, Martha, Middlesex, and Felix O'Hara, New York 1760 

McCormuck, Catherine, and Matthew Fowler, Sussex 1768 

McCoy, Anne, Perth Amboy, and Francis Hauling, Monmouth 1750 

McCoy, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Joseph Boss, Middlesex 1749 

McCue, Hannah, and Wdliam Trimble, Gloucester. . . . . 1775 

McCulley, Mary, and John Goldy, Burlington 1784 

McCulley, Olivia, Springfield, and Job Whitehouse, Springfield 1773 

McCulloch, Hannah, Salem, and Joseph Inskeep, Salem 17£6 

McCullo.igh, Isabel, Somerset, and John Allen, Somerset . . 1749 

McDannelly, Amy, and Samuel Peterman, Burlington 1783 

McDaunel, Amy, and Daniel Luken, Monmouth 1760 

McDaniel, Catherine, and John Daniel, Hunterdon.. 1778 

McDaniel, Elies, Middlesex, and Alexander Cotheal, Middlesex 1764 

McDaniel, Grace, and Thomas Lucer, Monmouth 1759 

McDaniel, Jannet, Woodbridge, and Neil Campbell, Middlesex 1760 

McDaniel, Mary, Monmouth, and Thomas Newman, Monmouth. ... 1753 
McDaniel, Penelope, Burlington, and Cornelius Kelley, Burlington . .1739 

McDonald, Agues, and Charles Adam Smjth, Allentown 1778 

McDonald, Catherine, and Richard Lanen, Sussex 1781 

McDonald, Mary, Burlington, and Alexander Burk, Burlington 1765 

McDonald, Phebe, and Jacob Van Norstrand, Jr., Bridgewater . 1783 

McDonald, Sarah, and Benjamin Moses Clava, Gloucester 1773 

McEweu, Mary, Somerset, and Daniel Vail, Somerset 1774 

McFagin, Mary, Salem, and Samuel League, Saiem 1764 

McFanlin, Joyce, Burlington, and William Fennimore, Burlington. . . . 1739 

McFarran, Elizabeth, and James Thomson, Middlesex 1751 

McFarreu. Margaret, Monmouth, and Joseph Ferine, Middlesex 1762 

McGallard, Elizabeth, and Samuel Beck, Burlington 1777 

McGinness, Jane, and Philip Liss. Burlington. . . 1756 

McGlaughlin, Elizabeth, and William Peterson, Cumberland 1782 

McGuire. Mary, Burlington, and David Buckhard, Burlington 1749 

McGuire, Susannah, and Jamts Penear, Burlington . 1778 

Mcintosh, Elioner, Mt Holly, and Joseph Parker, Mt. Holly 1761 

Mclntire, Catherine, Middletown Point, and JohnCassey, Middletown. 1747 

Mcllvaine, Ann, and James Dory, Burlington 1778 

Mcllvane, Jane, and Robert Currie, Gloucester 1769 

McKean, Jane, Salem, and Samuel Acorn, Salem 1763 

McKearman, Catharine, and Matthew Topham, Burlington 1731 

McKeen, Mary, Salem, and Joseph 1'ledger, Salem 1762 



Feb. 


11 


Nov. 


14 


May 


29 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


13 


Jan. 


17 


May 


12 


Julv 


28 


Aug. 


6 


June 


25 


Jan. 


25 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


16 


Nov. 


27 


Oct. 


5 


Aug. 


8 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


8 


June 


5 


Oct. 


11 


Aug. 


6 


April 


2 


Mar. 


31 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


19 


May 


26 


Feb. 


6 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


21 


Feb. 


18 


July 


16 


Aug. 


27 


June 


5 


Aug. 


22 


May 


1 


May 


18 


Oct. 


21 


Oct. 


17 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


14 


•Dec. 


9 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


7 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

McKeusey, Christian, and Alexander Forbes, 42cl Regt 17G2 

McKilley, Margaret, and Joseph Hawk, Burlington. 1780 

MeKinney, Autje, and Nehermah Dunham, Hunterdon 1768 

McKinuey, Autje, and Philip Bright, Somerset 1763 

McKissoek, Martha, Staten Island, and Valentine Garrat, St'n Island. . 1746 

McKuight, Anna, and John Thomson, Amboy 1712 

McKuight, Jane, and Charles Campbell, Salem 1732 

McKnight, Jane, and William Laird, Jr., Monmouth 1765 

McKuight, Rachel, Monmouth, and Noah Hart, Hunterdon 1764 

McKoan, Jane, Pilesgrove, and Edward Teat, Pilesgrove 1761 

McLeary, Mary, and Thomas Earl, Burlington 1785 

McLiin, Hannah, Morris, and Jacob Davenport, Morris 1784 

McMin, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Andrew McGallird, Monmouth, . .. 1741 

McMurtrie, Ann, Hunterdon, and Francis Lock, Jr., Hunterdon 1771 

McMurtry, Bridget, and Able Evint, Hunterdon 1781 

McNeil, Elizabeth, and Frederick Blue, Somerset 1784 

McNeil, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Davis, Gloucester 1763 

McNicholes, Hannah, and Reese Kindall, Salem 1773 

McPeters, Sarah, Stow Creek, and David Sneatheu, Cumberland 1763 

McQueen, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and Samuel Leake, Cumberland. . . 1769 

MoVay, Mary, Chesterfield, and John Young, Chesterfield 1768 

MoVay, Rachel, and John Biggins, Burlington 1765 

McVee, Aune, Hunterdon, and Dominick McNeil, Hunterdon 1763 

Mead, Cerstina, and Abraham S. Ackerman, Bergen. ... 1769 

Mead, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Smith, Monmouth 1747 

Mead, Nancy, and Peter Ward, Saddle River 1781 

Mead, Sarah, Burlington, aud John Poole, Burlington 1746 

Meade, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and John Bishop, Bucks, Pa 1737 

Meake, Rachel, and Abraham Sayre, Faiirield 1779 

Mean, Susannah, Monmouth, and Benjamin Clark, Monmouth 1746 

Mechesney, Jane, and Amos Bateman, Cumberland. 1779 

Mecum, Margaret, and Hauce Lambsou, Salem 1758 

Mecum, Sara, aud Robert Clark, Salem 1786 

Mecum, Sarah, and Giles L.imbson, Salem 1777 

Medcalf, Ann, Chestei field, and Charles Burton, Chesterfield 173 1 

Medcalf, Hannah, Gloucester, and Abraham Alberson, Jr., Gloucester. 1737 
Mede. Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Peter Van Home, Middletown, Pa . .1771 

Medless, Sarah, Newark, and George Knox, 9th Regt., Pa 178U 

Meger, Amey, and Daniel Herbert, Monmouth. 1745 

Meickles, Mary, aud John Chambers, Philadelphia 1736 

Melow, Margaret, Somerset, and feter Brewer, Somerset 1780 

Melvin, Elizabeth, aud Roger Jones, Gloucester . . 1735 

Meredith, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Flittcraft, Burlington 1762 

Meilatt, Margaret, Reading, and Jacob Williamson, Amwell. 1772 

Meilet, Ann, and William Davis, Sussex 1772 

Merrell, Elizabeth, and Uri Usborn, Hopewell 1777 



W 



Nov. 


19 


June 


5 


Get. 


25 


Nov. 


26 


May 


21 


Dec. 


30 


Dec. 


1 


Sept. 


18 


Aug. 


17 


Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


19 


Sept. 


3u 


Sept. 


12 


Oct. 


7 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


2 


Feb. 


14 


Mar. 


17 


June 


28 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


2 


Aug. 


19 


May 


27 


May 


12 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


15 


Jan. 


5 


Oct, 


15 


May 


20 


April 


15 


Mar. 


29 


Sept. 


17 


Aug. 


6 


Sept. 


2 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


2 


Dec. 


14 


Mar. 


23 


Dec. 


19 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


30 


Dec. 


31 


July 


26 



278 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Merrey, Perah, Essex, and Noah Ely, Essex 1748 

Merril, Arme, Morristown, and Jolm Stevenson, Philadelphia 1779 

Merril, Elizabeth, and Matthew White, Middlesex 1781 

Merril, Maddalina, Hopewell, and Daniel Smith, Amwell 1774 

Merril, Mary, Staten Island, and Nathaniel Lackerman, New York. . . 1748 

Merill, Abigail, Elizabeth, and Samuel Dehart, Elizabeth 1749 

Merrill, Mary, and Jacob Toy, Burlington 1777 

Merrill, Rachel, and Thomas Harvey, Hunterdon 1784 

Merrill, Rachel, and Ryke Sedan, Middlesex 1785 

Merriot, Auna, and Cuiliss Shinn, Northampton 1777 

Merriott, Elizabeth, Mansfield, and John Proud, Mansfield 1774 

Merriott, Amy, Burdentown, and John Clark, Bucks, Pa 1774 

Merrit, Auna, Burlington, and Joseph Autram, Burlington 1773 

Merrit, Mary, Burlington, and George Blackmore, Burlington 1728 

Merrit, Leviua, and W illiam Kemptcn, Burlington 1783 

Merscillies, Mary, aud David Seely, Deerfield 1781 

Merslmn Mary, and Israel Everett, Somerset 1777 

Mershon, Khoda, and Samuel Breasley, Hunterdon 1783 

Merukon, Effey, and Abram Slaght, Hunterdon 1784 

Meyer, Lydia, Burlington, and William Hayes, Burlington 1740 

Mickell, Hannah, aud Isaac Goldin, Cape May 1772 

Mickle, Mary, Gloucester, and Blackston Ingledew, Philadelphia 1736 

Mickle, Sarah, Gloucester, and Ephraim Norton, Gloucester 1737 

Mickle, Sarah, Newtown, and Joseph Morgan, Gloucester 1745 

Middagh, Margaret, and Wielder Kidder, Somerset 1781 

Middagb, S:irah, and William Bea, Sussex 1774 

Midelton, July, Burlington, and James l'otter, Shrewsbury 1702 

Middletou, Abigail, Gloucester, aud Jacob Evens, Gloucester 1757 

Middleton, Amy, Gloucester, and Peter Brown, Gloucester 1767 

Middleton, Auice, and George Warde, Deptford 1772 

Middleton, Deborah, and Daniel Cooper. . . 1797 

Middleton, Drusilla, and Joseph Haines, Gloucester 1777 

Middleton, Elizabeth, and Peter Howard, Burlington 1784 

Middletou, Hannah, and John Eugle, Burlington 1737 

Middleton, Martha, Gloucester, and Thomas Bryan, Gloucester 1729 

Middletou, Mary, Gloucester, and Daniel Mohan, Gloucester 17o0 

Middleton, Mary, and Joseph Wiley, Gloucester 1779 

Middletou. Mercy, aud James Cattell, Gloucester 1794 

Middleton, Naomi, Burlington, and Francis Hall, Burlington 1740 

Middleton, Rachel, aud Joseph Brackney, Burlington 1782 

Middleton, Rebecca, Burlington, and Michael Baker, Burliugton 17-')8 

Middleton, Huth, Burlington, and William Higbee, Burlinuton 1756 

Middleton, Sarah, Burlington, aud John Shipton, Burlington 1732 

Middletou, Sarah, aud Evan Evans, Burlington 1777 

Middleton, Sarah, and Joel Middleton, Burlington 1780 

Miers, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Gifford, Monmouth 1763 



Sept. 


6 


Dec. 


16 


July 


6 


Api il 


25 


June 


15 


Sept. 


28 


Oct. 


17 


April 


10 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


15 


July 


23 


Dec. 


13 


Nov. 


18 


July 


26 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


20 


May 


8 


Dec. 


8 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


4 


Nov. 


2 


Dec. 


9 


Sept. 


12 


April 


10 


Jan. 


6 


May 


13 


Mar. 


13 


Feb. 


14 


Nov. 


23 


Sept. 


28 


July 


28 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


3 


Nov. 


1 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


12 


May 


31 


Feb. 


26 


June 


9 


May 


6 


May 


•2 2 


June 


21 


May 


18 


June 


30 


Dec. 


23 


Feb. 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 279 

Miles, Rebecca, Salem, and Abel Uiirrith, Salem 1771 

Millard, Aune, Burlington, and John Miller, Burlington 1728 

Millard, Mary, Burlington, and David Silver, Burlington 1754 

Miller, Abigail, Cumberland, and Israel Miller, Cumberland 1779 

Miller, Ann, Burlington, and Samuel Marriott, Burlington 1738 

Miller, Catherine, New Brunswick, and William Gove, New Brunswick. 1739 

Miller, Catherine, Philadelphia, and Conrad Smith, New Jersey 1761 

Miller, Catherine, Burlington, and John Hargrove, Burlington 1763 

Miller, Catherine, Salem, and Nicholas Reese, Salem 1767 

Miller Catherine, Morris, and Moritz Sarpinstein, Roxbury 1770 

Miller, Catharine, Salem, and John Forest, Gloucester 11 71 

Miller, Catherine, and Frederick Freas, Salem 1775 

Miller, Catharine, Pequannock, and Joseph Scott, Tequaunock 1778 

Miller, Elizabeth, and Alexander Howard 1768 

Miller, Elizabeth, and Moses Wood Salem. . . 1775 

Miller, Eunice, and Andrew Richman, Pitts Grove 1772 

Miller, Eve, New Brunswick and Gerardus DtPeyster, New Brunsw'k. 1743 

Miller, Jane, Sussex, and James Moore, Jr., Sussex 1779 

Miller, Julia, and Nathan Shaw, Maurice River 1781 

Miller. Letitia, and Isaiah Johnson, Cumberland 1781 

Miller, Margaret, AUoways Creek, and John Souter, Cumberland 1771 

Miller, Margaret, Morris, and John Dunham, Morris 1780 

Miller, Mary, and Thomas Peacher 1690 

Miller, Mary, Middlesex, aud Daniel Barkelow, Middlesex . . 1752 

Miller, Mary, Cumberland, and Samuel Ewing, Cumberland 1763 

Miller, Mary, Essex, and Ichabod Crane, Morris 1782 

Miller, Phebe, and Cbed. Heedson, Cumberland 17t6 

Miller, Rachel, Manniugton, and Harmon Richmond, Piles Grove. . . .1773 

Miller, hebecca, Salem, and Elwell Moore, Salem 1771 

Milligan, Catherine, aud Miles Dalton 1762 

Millinor, Mary, Philadelphia, and John Miller, Gloucester 1771 

Mills, Ann, and Richard Glew, Burlington 1778 

Mills, Anna, Cumberland, and Annauias Sheppard, Cumberland 1775 

Mills, Bitthiah, S ilem, and William Mathews, Cape May 1740 

Mills. Elizabeth, Cumberland, and Amos Bacon, Cumberland 1769 

Mills, Jemima, Burlington, aud John B iwker, Burlington 1738 

Mills, JoaDna, Monmouth, and Albert Hendrickson, Monmouth 1755 

Mills, Lydia, aud Enoch Maund, Burlington 17 7S 

Mnls, Mary, Cumberland, and Noah Miller, Cumberland 1762 

Mills, Phebe, and Joseph Emley, Burlington 1772 

Mills, Rachel, Cumberland, and Phineas Carll, Cumberland 1760 

Mills, Sarah, Burlington, aud Daniel Coats, Burlington 1766 

Mills, Silvia, Cape May, aud George Hand, Cape May 1773 

Mills, Susannah, and Thomas Peck, Burlington 1769 

Milnor, Mary, aud Samuel Hilleyas 1778 

Mingiu, Aesha, and John Styles, Upper Freehold 1765 



June 


6 


Jan. 


•4 


May 


27 


Nov. 


16 


July 


13 


Jan. 


8 


May 


11 


Sept. 


10 


Oct. 


14 


Oct. 


11 


July 


24 


April 


17 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


23 


June 


24 


April 


28 


Aug. 


31 


Feb. 


10 


July 


2 


Oct. 


4 


Mar. 


9 


Mar. 


7 


Sept. 


3 


Aug. 


11 


Feb. 


19 


April 


17 


May 


23 


Feb. 


6 


June 


18 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


26 


Dec. 


13 


Nov. 


22 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


3 


Mar. 


17 


Nov. 


16 


Nov. 


23 


Oct. 


7 


Nov. 


8 


May 


7 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


16 


May 


4 



280 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

flinging, Anne, Burlington, and James Cubberley, Burlington 1745 

Minion, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Michael Chemeler, Burlington . . . 17G2 

Miuion, Lydia, Burlington, and Nicholas Decker, Burlington 1765 

Minyon, Hester, Burlington, and Barzillas Bowkar, Burlington 1774 

Mires, Hannah, Monmouth, and Henry Dim lofey, Monmouth .. .. 1753 

Misier, Jane, and John Pray, Orange Co., N. Y 1784 

Mitchel, Catharine, Burlington, and Jacob Cot, Burlington 1741 

MitcheJ, Catherine, Monmouth, and Elisha Johnston, Monmouth ... 1759 

Mitchel, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and John Freestone, Bucks, Pa 1769 

Mitchel, Frances, Amwell, and Grover Stout, Amwell 1775 

Mitchel, Rachel, Monmouth, and Philip Denning, Monmouth 

Mitchel, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Joshua Wright, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Mitchell, Ann, and John Nance, Stat en Island 1770 

Mitchell, Catherine, Monmouth, and Adam Brewer, Monmouth 1712 

Mitchell, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and James Barbur, Pennsylvania. . . 1728 

Mitchell, Margaret, and John Monroe, Burlington 1736 

Mitchell, Margaret, Monmouth, and Thomas Ellison, Monmouth. .... 1764 

Mitchell, Mary, and Andrew Cole, Northampton 1773 

Mittiu, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and William Reynolds, Jr., Freehold. 1757 

Mooklaw, Mary, and Simon Brokaw, Somerset 1778 

M sll, Bathsheba, and Zabulon Brown, Burlington 1759 

Molleson, Ruth, Piscataway, and Ephraim Rimyon, Piscataway 1757 

Mollisou, Sarah, and John Juley, Middlesex 1780 

Monanely, Elizabeth, B Tgen, and Mauritius Goetschius, Bergen 1749 

Monear, Abijah, Springfield, aud John Watkinson, Springfield 1745 

Monfort, Tiny, and Cornelius Lane, Hunterdon 1782 

Mongomery, Jane, Monmouth, and Robert English, Monmouth 1761 

Montauges, Mary, and William Ash, New York 1783 

Montgomerie, Ann, Perth Amboy, aud John Curry, New York 1763 

Montgomerie, Anne, Monmouth, aud Stephen Pangburu, M minouth 1754 
Montgomerie, Elizabeth, Monmouth, aud James Hepburn, Middlesex.. 1738 
Montgomerie, Mary, Perth Amboy, aud John Disbrow, Perth Amboy. . 1774 
Montgomery, Isabella, Amwell, and John Reading, Jr., Amwell. ...... 1746 

Montgomery, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and William Tomlinson, Bucks, Pa. .1769 

Mourow, Mary, Burlington, and Elward Mullen, Burlington 1759 

Moode, Margaret, and John Sim, Philadelphia 1732 

Moody, Rebecca, aud Thomas Willis, Egg H irbour 1778 

Moon, Alisa, and William B'evan, Cumberland 1781 

Moon, Jaue, Burlington, and Robert Denton, Burlington 1738 

Moon, Jane, Burlington, and Francis Hickman, Burlington 1742 

Moon, Marthn, aud Thomas Preston, Burlington 1737 

Moon, Sarah, and Daniel West, Bucks, Pa 

Moon, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Charles Edgar, Bucks, Pa 1759 

Mooue, Margaret, aud Joseph Jackson, Burlington 1754 

Moor, Anne, Cumberland, and Isaac Harris, Salem 1772 

Moor, Christian, and Joseph Predmore, Perth Amboy 1746-7 



Oct. 


31 


Feb. 


12 


Nov. 


7 


Mar. 


4 


Dec. 


13 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


20 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


16 




29 


April 


26 


June 


28 


Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


16 


Aug. 


9 


May 


15 


July 


29 


Mar. 


5 


Oct. 


7 


Jan. 


17 


Oct. 


12 


Dec. 


30 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


4 


Aug. 


9 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


19 


Dec. 


27 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


21 


Dec. 


30 


Oct. 


27 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


22 


Mar. 


27 


Feb. 


13 


Nov. 


3 


July 


25 


Mar. 




Oct. 


29 


Aug. 


27 


Mar. 


9 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 28 I 

Elizabeth, Middlesex, arid Benjamin Predmore, Middlesex 1739 Sept. 1 

Mary, Woodbridge, and Daniel Noe, Woodbridge 1741 Mar. 17 

Phebe, and Aaron Butcher, Cumberland 1778 April 2 

Sarah, and Daniel Woodward, Somerset 1784 Eeb. 26 

Abigail, and Samuel Fithian, Cumberland 1750 Oct. 25 

Abigail, Hunterdon, and Jonathan Smith, Hunterdon 1765 Mar. 9 

Anne, Perth Amboy, and James Perdue, Stateu Island 1748 Nov. 19 

Anne, and Lawrence Earle, Bergen ... 1762 Deo. 14 

Bathsheba, and Preston Hannah, Cumberland 1777 Sept. 6 

Dorcas, Cumberland, and Morgan Trent, Cumberland 1762 June 9 

Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Collins, Gloucester 1737 Feb. 27 

Elizabeth, Somerset, and William Riddel, Somerset 1750 Oct. 29 

Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Mason, Burlington 1761 May 21 

Elizabeth, Piles Grove, and Jacob Paullin, Piles Grove 1763 Nov. 7 

Elizabeth, and Joseph Potts, Bordentown 1769 Dec. 28 

Elizabeth, and Jacob Titus. Pennsylvania 1777 July 24 

Elizabeth, and William Alley, New Jersey 1779 April 8 

Elizabeth, and William Oppie, Somerset 1781 Oct. 27 

Grace, Woodbridge, and Jonathan Inslee, Jr., Woodbridge ...1742 Nov. 23 

Grace, Essex, and Joseph DeCamp, Middlesex 1761 Dec. 16 

Hannah, Middlesex, and John Moore, Essex. 1773 Oct. 8 

Judith, Cumberland, and Joseph Ryly, Cumberland 1774 May 26 

Letitia, Burlington, and John Edwards, Burlington. . 1756 Aug. 17 

Marcy, and Elnathan Ware, Greenwich ... 1760 April 30 

Margaret, Monmouth, and Thomas How, Monmouth 1737 May 14 

Margaret, and John Van Emburgh, Middlesex 1779 April 17 

Martha, Essex, and John Dennes, Essex 1748 Jan. 21 

Mary, Burlington, and John Shores, Burlington . 

Mary, Burlington, and Joshua Quicksall, Burlington 1734 Dec. 13 

Mary, Greenwich, and William Waithman, Greenwich 1763 May 22 

Mary, Middlesex, and Joseph Kar, Middlesex 1763 Nov. 16 

Mary, Evesham, and Stephen Sarish, Evesham 1767 Feb. 26 

Mary, and Samuel F. Parker, Middlesex 1769 Feb. 25 

Mary, Alloways Creek, and Samuel Ray, Alloways Creek 1769 Nov. 7 

Mary, Bergen, and William Blakeney, Bergen 1771 Mar. 21 

Mary, and Eiisha Moore, Hunterdon 1779 Nov. 25 

Mary, Burlington, and Michael Mick, Burlington 1783 Dec. 4 

Massey, and Edmund Robarts, Maidenhead 1778 Sept. 18 

Mercy, and Thomas Burrows, Hunterdon 1733 Aug. 9 

Mercy, aud Godfrey Chamberliu, Hunterdon 1779 Aug. 17 

Patience, Burlington,. and John W'aney, Burlington 1775 Sept. 22 

Pelatiah, and Joseph Titus, Hopewell 1 764 Nov. 12 

Phebe, and Barret Christopher, Hunterdon 1 763 Dec. 13 

Rachel Cumberland, aud Moses Mulford. Cumberland 1758 April 25 

Rachel, Deersfield, and Daniel Ogden, Deersfield 1768 July 5 

Rebecca, and Joshua Ballinger, Burlington 1788 Nov. 17 



282 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Moore, Sarah, Burlington, and William Stone, Burlington 1741 May 10 

Moore, Sarah, Gloucester, and Clement Dickson, Gloucester 17G0 July 13 

Moore, Sarah, Bergen, aud David Day, Bergen 1767 Nov. 11 

Moore, Sarah, and John Smith, Hunterdon 1768 Jan. 13 

Moore, Sarah, aud Jost Shaits, Alloways Creek 1773 Mar. 9 

Moore, Valaria, Burlington, aud Joseph Conarro, Burlington 17G1 Oct. 3 

Moorehouse, Hannah, and Elisha Stout, M masqnan 1751 Sept. 30 

Moores, Frances, aud Thomas Brown, Woodbridge 1746 Feb. 12 

Moores, Isabell, Woodbridge, and Stephen Carman, Woodbridge 1748 Aug. 16 

Moores, Margaret, Middlesex, and Samuel Carman, Middlesex 1740 Dec. 12 

Moores. Mary, Middlesex, and Kotert Hude, Middlesex 1746 Aug. 6 

Moran, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Edward England, Burlington 1741 Nov. 4 

More, Ann, Hunterdon, and John Hoffman, Hunterdon 1776 Feb. 6 

Moretou, Ann, Greenwich, and Garrett Vanneman, Jr., Gloucester.. . .1713 Feb. 28 

Moretou, Mary, Chester, and Joun Jackson, Chester 1748 Jan. 10 

Morford, Catherine, Monmouth, and Charles Gordon, Monmouth 1761 Nov. 2 

Morford, Elizabeth, and Joseph B.irbar, Pennsylvania 1772 July 24 

Morford, Hannah, Freehold, and Isaac Coveuhoven, Freehold 1756 Mar. 9 

Morford, Mary, Monmouth, aud Job Throckmorton, Monmouth 1743 April 4 

Morford, Mary, Monmouth, aud David Ketcham, Monmouth 1762 Feb. 10 

Morford, Rebecca, and Jeremiah Homer, Monmouth 1761 Sept. 28 

Morford, Rebecca, Bucks, Pa., and James Barber, Bucks, Pa 1770 May 22 

Morgan, Abigail, Perth Amboy, and Ephraim Donham, Woodbridge. . 1750 Feb. 18 

Morgan, Anuettea, Salem, and Samuel Elwell, Salem 1773 May 17 

Morgan, Esther, Gt. Egg Haib'r. and Elias Steelman, Gt. Egg Harb'r.1760 Feb. 27 

Morgan, Frances, Bucks, Pa., and Wheeler Clark, Bucks, Pa 1759 May 22 

Morgan, Jane, Perth Amboy, and John Slater, Perth Amboy 1761 Sept. 14 

Morgan, Jane, Perth Amboy, and James Fattin, Monmouth 1762 Dec. 3 

Morgan, Leah, Stateu Island, aud Anthony Kempe, Hunterdon 1734 May 15 

Morgan, Margaret, Alloways Creek, aud John Rea, Salem 1762 Mar. 26 

Morgan, Martha, Richmond, and Anthony Du Bui% Hichmond Co. . . . 1747 Aug. 4 

Morgan, Mary, Burlington, and Zachariah Rozell, Burlington 1739 Jan. 11 

Morgan, Mary, Salem, and William Craft, Salem 1739 April 6 

Morgan, Mary, Somerset, and William Steward, Somerset 1745 Oct. 29 

Morgan, Mary, Middlesex, aud Richard Parrit, Morris 1762 Dec. 15 

Morgan, Mary, Piles Grove, and Francis Test, Piles Grove 1762 Mar. 9 

Morgan, Mary, Salem, and Samuel Garrison, Salem 1768 July 28 

Morgan, Mary, aud Isaac Debow, Middlesex 1774 Nov. 12 

Morgau, Sarah, Stateu Island, and Daniel Morgan, Middlesex 1752 Sept. 25 

Morgan, Sarah, Perth Amboy, aud Joseph Burgiu, Cumberland 1761 April 13 

Morgan. Sarah, Middlesex, and John Compton, Middlesex 1763 Jan. 28 

Morgan, Sarah, and Andrew Stont, Hunterdon 1777 June 22 

Morgan, Sarah, and Timothy Milburn, Hunterdon 1779 Jan. 1 

Morin, Deborah, and Thomas Graham, Newtou 1771 Nov. 9 

Morlan, Elizabeth, and William Miltou, Burlington 1760 Jan. 23 

Morrell, Judith, and John Tuelie 16^2 Nov. 2 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



283 



Morrell, Sarah, and Samuel Warner, Middlesex 

Morress, Elizabeth, ami Newlass Belaugey, Gloucester 

Morriee, Aune, Moumouth, aud Job Crawford, Monmouth 

M >rris, Anne, Burlington, aud Jonathan Middleton, Builington 

M uiis, Betsey, and Caleb Wheeler, Jr., Newark 

Morris, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Isaac Smith, Gloucester 

Morris, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Tuoinas Bloomiield, Middlesex 

Morris, Elizabeth, and Robert Small, Evesham 

Morris, Frauces, Monmouth, aud Elazarus Brewer, Monmouth 

Morris, Frena, and Audries Meyer, New Jersey 

Morris, Haunah, Mansfield, and Samuel Rockhill, Burlington 

Morris, Lydia, Burlington, and Augustus MoDoniel, Burlington 

Morris, Margaret, Salem, and Clement Hall, Salem.. 

Morris, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Cox (minor), Monmouth 

Morris, Mary, Salem, and William Goodwin, Salem. . . 

Morris, Mary, Middletown, and Jonatban Burdg, Middletown 

Morris Mary, Middletown, and Johu C >nrey, Middletown 

Morris, Mary, Monmouth, and Asahal Freeman, Monmouth 

Morris, Mary, and Benjamin White, Monmouth 

Morris, Prudence, Salem, and Andrew Bull, Salem 

Morris, Rebecca, Morris, and Timothy Goble, Morris 

Morris, Sarah, VVoodbridge, and Thomas Bloomfield, Woodbridge 

Morris, Sarah, Burlington, and Lewis Willets, Burlington 

Morris, Sarah, and William Laud, Burlington 

Morris, Smia, nnd Philip Grace, Cumberland 

Morris. Tabitha, Philadelphia, and Johu Weitzel, Philadelphia 

Morrison, Elizabeth, Alloways Cr'k, and Philip Wentzel, Alloways C'k 

Morrison, Judith, Salem, aud Patrick Cauady, Salem 

Morrit, Deborah, aud David Suffrins, Burlington 

Morton, Ann, Burlington, and John Gibson, Burlington 

Morton, Aune, Burlington, and Barzilla Endicott, Burlington 

Morton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Edward Arden, Burlington 

Morton, Sarah, aud Harry Munro 

Moses, Mary, Philadelphia, and George Hatfield, Philadelphia 

Moss, Rebecca, Salem, and Joseph Blackwood, Salem 

Matfelt, Martha, aud Thomas Thomson, Gloucester 

Mott, Charity, Morris, and David Wheeler, Morris 

Mott, Huldar, Middletown, and Joseph Saltar, Shrewsbury 

Mott, Jane, Gloucester, and Peter Scull. Gloucester 

Mott, Mary, and James Arnold, Burlington 

Mott, Sarah, Moumouth, aud Joseph Holmes, Monmouth 

M ott, Sarah, and William Biles 

Mott, Sarah, aud Joseph Potts, Kiugwood 

Mott, Anna, and Julius Ewan, Burlington. 

Mottison, Mary, Monmouth, and William Huyan, Monmouth 

Mounson, Ann, Penns Neck, and George Stanton, Penns Neck 



1765 
1777 
1766 
1776 
1778 
1739 
1772 
1778 
1755 
1740 
1774 
1776 
1745 
1769 
1744 
1746 
1751 
1757 
1781 
1745 
1779 
1758 
1768 
1781 
1782 
1771 
,1765 
1771 
1786 
1741 
1775 
1730 
1763 
1739 
1770 
1785 
1739 
.1759 
.1731 
1739 
1752 
.1780 
1781 
.1733 
,1756 
.1760 



Aug. 10 

Dec. 6 

Nov. 25 

Jan. 27 

Feb. 23 

Aug. 12 

Aug. 4 

Dec. 21 

June 25 

Jan. 7 

July 25 

Jan. 10 

Feb. 10 

Oct. 29 

Feb. 13 

Nov. 14 

Sept. 14 

Dec. 7 

April 16 

Jan. 24 

Nov. 15 

Jan. 3 

Feb. 17 

May 9 

Oct. 17 

Dec. 25 

Aug. 3 

Mar. 23 

Jan. 7 

Nov. 23 
April 12 

Sept. 5 

Nov. 1 

July 4 

Aug. 27 

Feb. 15 

Mar. 17 

Oct. 22 

Feb. 20 

Jan. 3 

June 24 

Oct. 4 

June 2 

May 23 

Feb. 6 

Feb. 23 



284 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Mount, Admy, Middletown, and John Chasey, Monmouth 1700 

Mount, Alice, Middletown, and John Porter, Middletown 1746 

Mount, Ann, Burlington, and Samuel W. Hartshorne, Burlington 1779 

Mount, Anne, Burlington, and Levi Bowker, Burlington 1773 

Mount, Elizabeth, Middletowu, and John Van Cleve, Freehold 1767 

Mount Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Jacob Hendrickson, Monmouth. . . 1771 
Mount, Hannah, Middletown, Cornelius Compton, Jr., Middletown. .. 175(5 

Mount, Hannah, Burlington, and Samuel Hoock, Trenton 1764 

Mount, Jane, and Bergun Brokaw, Somerset 1779 

Mount, Katherine, Monmouth, and Joseph Tilton, Monmouth 1739 

Mount, Lydia, and John SUver, Jr., Middlesex 1780 

Mount, Margaret, Middletown, and James Herbert, Middletown 1739 

Mount, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Truax, Middlesex 1743 

Mount, Margaret, Monmouth, and George Woodward, Burlington 1780 

Mount, Mary, Monmouth, and John Bfyon, Monmouth 17G0 

Mount, Patience, Monmouth, and Robert Gordon, Monmouth 1742 

Mount, Phebe, Monmouth, and Silas Telton, Monmouth 1739 

Mount, Phebe, Monmouth, and Walter Herbert, Monmouth 1741 

Mount, Rebeckah, and Jacob Warren, Burlington 1768 

Mountain, Mary, and Richard Parret, Salem 1778 

Moursen, Caty, Sussex, and Daniel Peer, Morris 1 778 

Moyr, Margaret, Salem, and Michael Harp, Salem 1747 

Muckelroy, Mareyann, and John Mouuten, Salem 1759 

Mn jklehany, Mary, Sussex, aud Hugh McCracken, Sussex 1766 

Muckleroy, Mary, and Michael Pope, Northampton 1757 

Mulford, Elizabeth, John, and John Pierson, Cumberland 1783 

Mnlford, Hannah, Cumberland, aud John Soullard, Deerfield 1762 

Mulford, Hannah, Kingwood, and Edward Godley, Kingwood 1770 

Mnlford, Lucia, and John Wood, Stow Creek 1785 

Mulford, Mary, and William Watson, Cumberland 1751 

Mulford, Rachel, Cumberland, and Isaac Sharp, Cumberland 1764 

Mulford, Rhody, and James Whildin, Cape May 1774 

Mulford, Ruth, Cape May, and Richard Stiles, Cape May 1770 

Mulford, Sarah, Cumberland, and Isaac Smith, Deerfield 1768 

Mulford, Sarah, and Jacob Keen, Cumberland 1779 

Mulford, Sarah, aud George Fithian, Cumberland 1782 

Mullady, Charity, and Stephen Burrows, Hunterdon 1771 

Mullen, Mary, Northampton, and Joseph Burr, Jr., Northampton 1749 

Mullen, Mary, Burlington, and Hugh Holliushead, Jr., Burlington 1782 

Mullicka, Auicka, and Abraham Lord, Salem 1736 

Mullikan, Rachel, Burlington, and Thomas Esdall, Burlington 1764 

Mulliu, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Thomas Haines, Burlington 1761 

Mullin, Gr ice, Burlington, and James Sheets, Burlington 1758 

Mulliner, Jemima, and Emanuel Pidcock, Amwell 1782 

Mulliuer, Mary, Hunterdon, and John tetillwell, Sussex 1769 

Mulliner, Rebeckah, and Charles Rose, New Jersey 1781 



Mar. 


27 


July 


23 


May 


8 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


3 


May 


2 


Dec. 


23 


June 


25 


Mar. 


29 


June 


13 


Oct. 


19 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


8 


Aug. 


21 


June 


7 


Dec. 


18 


Nov. 


3 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


2 


Sept. 


21 


Nov. 


15 


A pril 


3 


Jan. 


22 


July 


11 


Mar. 


23 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


4 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


18 


Nov. 


11 


April 


9 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


2 


Mar. 


28 


Feb. 


9 


Mar. 


4 


Mar 


15 


Sept. 


11 


April 


2 


June 


28 


Oct, 


10 


April 


18 


June 


10 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



285 



Munde, Mary, Middlesex, and John Drake 1748 9 

Mttndin, Lydia, Middlesex, and Benjamin Doughty, Middlesex. . . . 1747-8 

Mungal, Agnis, and Oswell Goodberlet, Somerset 178G 

Munroe, Anne, Northampton, and William Waters, Burlington 1757 

Munrow, Anne, New Hanover, and Job Stockton 1757 

Munrow, Sarah, Burlington, and Stacy Budd, Burlington 1763 

Munson, Elizabeth, Pequanock, and Nathaniel Fair child, Pequanock. 1779 

Munyon, Tracey, Gloucester, and Aaron Dawson, Gloucester 1771 

Murdoch, Mildreth, Monmouth, and Patrick McHugta, Monmouth 174'.) 

Murfin, Anne, and Joseph Wells 1774 

Murfy, Hannah, Bucks, Pa., and John Fowler, Bucks, Pa 1/54 

Murphy, Jaue, and William Hinchman, Gloucester 1783 

Murphy, Elizabeth, and John Fortenberry 1773 

Murphy, Mary, Salem, and Peter Bilderback, Salem 1761 

Murphy, Rachel, Burlington, and James Hunter, Maryland 1775 

Murphy, Bachael, Burlington, and William Dotey, Burlington 1776 

Murray, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Thomas Carson, Cape May 173U 

Murray, Mary, and John Priestly, Biistol, Pa 1784 

Murrel, Mary, Builiugton, and John Dobbins, Jr., Burlington 1779 

Murrell, Mary, Burlington, and Patrick Byrne, Burlington 1741 

Murrel], Mary, and Benjamin Bartholomew, Burlington 1777 

Murry, Catharine, and James Cronin, Bristol, Pa. . . . , 1787 

Myers, Catherine, Perth Amboy, and James Arven, Perth Amboy. . . 1755 

Myers, Catharine, Monmouth, and Jesse Burton, Monmouth 1772 

Myers, Catharine, and Thomas Dixon, Burlington 1778 

Myers, Hannah, Burlington, and John Rating, Burlington 1764 

Myers, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Nutt, Burlington. 1746 

Myers, Mary, and Zephaniah VVicks, Galloway 1781 

Myers, Rachel, Burlington, and Jonathan Nutt, Burlington 1774 

Myers, Sarah, Burlington, and Samuel Eugle, Burlington 1775 

Myres, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Smith, Monmouth 1767 

Myers, Mary, and James Rambo, Deptford 1780 

MALES. N 

Nafies, Garrit, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Gam 1780 

Nail, Uriah, Greenwich, and Emily Fowler 1779 

Nailer, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Jones 17>^3 

Nailer, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Stockton 1778 

Napier, James, Monmouth, and Mary T<>mpson, Monmouth 1741 

Naptin, William. Hunterdon, and Abigail Welling, Hunterdon 1773 

Nayler, James, Burlington, and Lucretia Kakestraw 1777 

Nayler, James, Burlington, and Susannah Sharp 1787 

Naylor, Benjamin, Burlington, and Esther Mason, Burlington 1741 

Nearie, John, Bergen, and Lena Dey, Bergen 1762 

Neale, 1 Hugh, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Deborah Leeds, Gt. Egg Harbor 1748 

1 Hugh Neale appears in the marriage bond as surety for John Pullen. but 
Shows that the marriage license was issued to Neale. 



Mar. 


8 


Feb. 


13 


May 


31 


Jan. 


31 


June 


9 


May 


20 


June 


24 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


15 


Feb. 


26 


Aug. 


12 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


21 


Jan. 


6 


April 


26 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


23 


Aug. 


13 


Dec. 


10 


June 


12 


April 


4 


June 


2 


April 


28 


May 


21 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


16 


Aug. 


21 


Feb. 


13 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


8 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


14 


April 


13 


Dec. 


10 


Oct. 


25 


Jan. 


9 


Nov. 


28 


Sept. 


9 


June 


18 


Feb. 


1 


the record 



286 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Neeve, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Dinah Newell 1733 

Nefius, John, Somerset, and Surah Bilson 1782 

Negus, John, Burlington, and Mary Shreve, 1779 

Negus, Thomas, Monmouth, and Lavina West, Monmouth 1749 

Neide, John Potts, Cumberland, and Edith Furuiss 1790 

Neilson, Andrew, New Jersey, and Grace Carvill, Monmouth 1743 

Neilson, James, Hunterdon, and Abigail Severns, Hunterdon 1729 

Neilson, James. New Bruuswick. and Gnnuitte Harrison 1768 

Neilson, John (Dr.), New Bruuswick, and Johanna Coeymans, Soni'rs't.1741 

Nelly, John, Burliugton, and Sarah Grimes, Burlington 1712 

Nelson, Daniel, Piles GroVe, Cornelinson, Penus Neck 1762 

Netterville, Charles, Burlington, and Bachel Wilson, Burlington 1736 

Neveos, Tobijas, Monmouth, and Rebecca Polhemus 1747 

Nevill, Johu, Somerset, and Sarah Van Nostrand, Somerset. 1775 

Nevill, Samuel, and Mary Walker, Piscataway 1758 

Nevius, Cornelius, Somerset, and Jenny Hoogland, Somerset 1783 

Nevius, David, Somerset, and Elizabeth Schureman 1781 

Newbeiry, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Raziner 1783 

Newbold, Daniel, Burlington, and Rachel Newbohl 17a0 

Newbold, James, and Elizabeth Powell 1695 

Newburn, David, Bucks, Pa., anct Hannah Ashton 1733 

Newbury, 'lhomas, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Gifford, Monmouth. . . 1748 

Newbury, Wdliam, Monmouth, and Anne Havens, Monmouth 1748 

Newby, Gabriel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth MoCopping, Cohanzey 1741 

Newcomb, Reuben, Fairfield, and Edith Barratt 1779 

Newcoinb, Silas, Cumberland, and Martha Savage 1784 

Newcomb, William, Cumberland, and Pleasant Long, Stow Creek . . 1759 
Newell, James (Dr.), Allentown, Elizabeth Lawrence, Upper Freehold. 1749 

Newell, Robert, Monmouth, and Anne Allen 1759 

Newell, Thomas, Burliugton, and Jane Pettigrew, Burlington 1740 

Newman, Emanuel, Shrewsbury, and Anna Kernes, Middlesex.. .... 1767 

Newman, Isaac, Kingwood, and Jemiah Marshall, Kiugwood ] 768 

Newman, John, Philadelphia, and Hester Heuliugs, Burlington 1738 

Newman, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Haines, Burlington 1740 

Newman, lhomas, Monmouth, and Mary McDaniel, Monmouth 1753 

Newton, Daniel, Sarah, and Sarah Fennimore 1781 

Newton, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Learning, Cape May 1761 

Newton, John, Cape May, and Hannah Hand 1789 

Newton, Joseph, Burliugton, and Elizabeth Ashburu 1775 

Newton, Thomas, Freehold, and Mary Cox, Freehold 1743 

Niblak, Samuel, Somerset, and Agues Aikman, Somerset 1746 

Nicholis Willis, Salem, and Rebecca Shaw, Salem 1774 

Nicholls, William, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Rickey, Gloucester 1775 

Nichols, Joshua, Hunterelon, and Januet Haukins, Middlesex 1751 

Nicholson, Abel, Gloucester, and Mary LIHs 1786 

Nicholson, Joseph, Gloucester, and Rachel Liuzey, Gloucester 1748 



May 


26 


Apiil 


9 


Feb. 


15 


July 


27 


Jan. 


26 


Mar. 


28 


June 


26 


July 


19 


Mar. 


9 


Aug. 


19 


Nov. 


21 


May 


1 


May 


13 


Dec. 


20 


Oct. 


.21 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. J 


1 2 


Jan. 


8 


July 


27 


Jan. 


16 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


29 


April 


25 


May 


12 


June 


9 


Oct. 


22 


May 


31 


Dec. 


12 


July 


5 


Jan. 


20 


Feb. 


21 


Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


12 


Mar. 


23 


Mar. 


31 


June 


5 


June 


25 


Aug. 


22 


Nov. 


29 


May 


20 


May 


8 


Feb. 


22 


Mar. 


12 


July 


7 


Jan. 


23 



May 10 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



287 



Nicholson, Neheruiah, Gloucester, and Sarah Badcock, Gloucester 1739 June 1 

Nicholson, Nehemiah, Great Egg Harbor, and Deborah Ireland 1737 Sept. 3 

Nicholson, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Hams, Gloucester 1770 Aug. 29 

Nicholson, John, Cape May, and Martha Stiles, Cape May 1763 Oct. 25 

Nickerson, John, Monmouth, and Hannah Beers, Monmouth . . 1747 June 11 

Nickinson, John, Philadelphia, and Sarah Roads, Philadelphia 1730 Nov. 1G 

Nicoll, William, Bergen, and Rachel Fine 1788 Dec. 27 

Nicolls, George, Elizabethtown, and Elizabeth Fullerton, Elizabethan. 1740 April 3 

Niel, James, Springfield, and Abigail Peteis 1778 Sept. 1 

Nieukirk, Abraham, Salem, and Sarah Van Metre, Salem 1702 June 23 

Nightengale, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wild, Burlington. 1747 April 17 

Nightingale, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Champion, lhiladelp'a. 1749 April 10 

Niles, John, Monmouth, and Mary Taylor, Monmouth 1750 Jan. 23 

Nisbett, Jonathan, and Temperance Gilbert, Perth Amboy 1741 July 9 

Nix, Edmond, S-dern, and Mary Dickey. Salem'. 1728 Dec. 7 

Nixon, James, Middlesex, and Anne Davison, Monmouth 1740 Aug. 18 

Nixon, William, Middlesex, and Sarah Guest, New Brunswick 1746 Jan. 27 

Nixson, Jacob, Salem, and Margaret Dickey . . 1776 Mar. 26 

Nixsou, Jeremiah, Fail field, and Hannah Jones, Fairfield 1763 Aug. 8 

Noarth, George, Philadelphia, and Ruth Burden, Philadelphia 1737 May 14 

Noble, George, Burlington, and Katherine Smith, Burlington. ........ 1730 Nov. 16 

Noble, Josiah, and Mary Stretch 1774 Feb. 24 

Noe, Asher, Somerset, and Rachel Lemontis, Somerset 1751 May 24 

Noe, Daniel, Woodbridge, and Mary Moor, Woodbridge 1741 Mar. 17 

Noe, John, Woodbridge, and C itharine Trimley, Elizabethtown 1748 Dec. 27 

Noe, Samuel, Perth Amboy, and Anna Inglis, Perth Amboy 1761 Oct. 3 

Nold, Phillip, Burlington, and Margaret Dyer, Burlington 1774 July 25 

Noniman, Jacob, Salem, and Ann Senecks 1740 Jan. 16 

Norcross, John, Burlington, and Anne Stevenson, Burlington 17£6 Oct. 4 

Norcross, John, Burlington, and Rachel King 1765 Sept. 18 

Norcross, John, New Hanover, and Mary Herbert, Northampton 1776 Jan. 2 

Norcross, Joseph, Monmouth, and Rebekah Cox, Monmouth 1748 Aug. 8 

Norcross, Joseph, New Jersey, and Amy Beck, New Jersey. 1778 May 23 

Norcross, Joshua, Burlington, and Jane Strattan, Burlington 1754 April 10 

Norcross, Joshua, Northampton, and Theodosia King, Northampton. . 1767 April 14 

Norcross, Samuel, Burlington, and H innah Autram 1789 Mar. 2 

Norcross, William, Bergen, and Effe Henniou, Bergen 1778 Nov. 16 

Nordyke, Henry, Burlington, and Rebecca Perkins, Burlington 1731 Jan. 6 

Norris Eden, Shrewsbury, and Mary Throckmorton, Freehold 1767 Sept. 3 

Norris, John, Burlington, and Sarah Cheshire, Burlington 1746 April 30 

Norris, Richard, Shrewsbury, and Catheriue Throckmorton, Mid'ltowu.1765 Nov. 19 

North, James, Burlington, and Elinor Quiu 1778 Feb. 5 

North, Joseph, New York, and Peggy Seamens, Staten Island 1746 Sept. 19 

North, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Wernchey Worthley 1766 Oct. 14 

Northrop, Enoch, and Elizabeth Hunt 1 769 Oct. 9 

Norton, Ephraim, Gloucester, and Sarah Mickle, Gloucester 1737 Sept. 12 



288 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Norton, George, Cape May, and Deborah Fox, Cape May 1764 

Norton, Johu, Gloucester, and Hannah Estlack, Gloucester 1737 

Norton, Jobn, Springfield, and Grace Gillum, Springfield 1749 

Norton, Joseph, Burlington, and Anne Cuzens, Burlington 1727 

Norton, Nathaniel, Cape May, and Elesha Mathews, Cape May 1731 

Norton, Nathaniel, Cape May, and Eunice Hand, Cape May 1733 

Norwood, Henry, New York, and Margery Thomson, Perth Atnboy .. 1759 
Nowland, James, Middletown, and Deborah Disbrow, South Amboy. .1758 
Nowland, Marmaduke, Monmouth, and Margaret Wright, Allentown. .1715 

Nuff, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Fanny Kline 1781 

Nugen, Thomas, Burlington, and Abigail Brittain, Burlington 1772 

Nutt, John, Mansfield, and Mary Alexander 1781 

Nutt, Jonathan, Burlington, and llachel Myers, Burliugton 1774 

Nutt, Joseph, Mansfield, and Venah Bioadhome, Springfield 1750 

Nutt, Levy, Mansfield, and Anne Ivins, Mansfield 1748 

Nutt, Moses, Mansfield, and Anne Buffiu, Mansfield 1772 

Nutt, Moses, Mansfield, and Elizabeth Pope 1783 

Nutt, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Myers, Burlington 1746 

Nutt, William, Burlington, and Jane Brown, Burlington 1757 

FEMALES. N 

Naery, Jane, and Robert Hoseir, Hunterdon 1767 

Nail, Mary, Burlington, and Richard Symons, Burlington 1759 

Nailer, Elizabeth, and Thomas Peake, Burlington 1786 

Nailer, Hesther, and Joseph Fort, Burlington 1784 

Nailor, Lydia, Burlington, and Seth Austen, Burlington. ... 1770 

Nailor, Martha, and Joseph Marriott, Burlington 1771 

Nale, Mary, and Moses Cox, Gloucester. 1774 

Nammock, Sarah, and David Craddock, Burlington 1759 

Naugel, Elizabeth, Orange Co., N. Y., and Peter Lozier, Bergen. . . . 1764 

Nearie, Sarah, and David Dey, Bergen 1789 

Neal, Elizabeth, Northampton, and John Siduel, Northampton 1775 

Neale, Jannet, and Jonathan Lawrence, Orange Co., N. Y 1784 

Neale, Tenuel, and George Hulme, Burlington 1781 

Nealson, Ellonor, and Joshua Tagart, Pilesgrove 1756 

Nealson, Eleanor, and Andrew Lock, Salem 1773 

Nefies, Jannetie, Somerset, and Abraham Chrissoriw, Long Island. . . 1747 

Neilson, Christina, Salem, and Richard Merideth, Salem .... 1772 

Neilson, Mary, Middlesex, and John Lott, Middlesex ... 1761 

Nephews, Anna, S mierset, and Henry Monfort, Somerset 1769 

Nephews, Mary, and James Throckmorton, Middlesex 1780 

Nephews, Nelly, and Albart Stoothoff, Somerset 1784 

Neven, Amelia, Burlington, and Cornelius Brannin, Burlington 1773 

Nevill, Martha, Middlesex, and Samuel Iselstine. Middlesex 1763 

Nevill, Sarah, Middlesex, and John Lay ton, Monmouth 1761 

Nevius, Phebe, Somerset, and Jacob Kline, Hunterdon 1 778 



Mar. 


26 


July 


23 


Aug. 


29 


Feb. 


3 


April 


19 


Nov. 


20 


June 


8 


A pril 


3 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


25 


April 


29 


May 


31 


Aug. 


16 


Sept. 


25 


Sept. 


19 


Feb. 


3 


Oct. 


28 


Sept. 


27 


Mar. 


1 


Oct. 


1 


Dec. 


11 


Dec. 


21 


Jan. 


2 


Mar. 


7 


July 


31 


Mar. 


10 


Dec. 


17 


May 


25 


Feb. 


21 


Aug. 


14 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


8 


July 


31 


Mar. 


11 


May 


1 


April 


29 


Dec. 


16 


Feb. 


16 


April 


17 


Feb. 


9 


Nov. 


30 


July 


23 


Dec. 


26 


July 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Newbury, Ann, ami Joseph Symmonds, Philadelphia 1730 

Newberry, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joseph Field, Burlington 1741 

Newberry, Hannah, Burlington, and John Roberts, Burlington 1732 

Newberry, Mary, and John Parker, Burlington. 1734 

Newbold, Edith, and Thomas Howard, Philadelphia 1786 

Xewbold, Lettice, and John Woolston, Jr., Burlington 1683 

Newbold, Lydia, and John Block, Burlington 1784 

Xewbold, Margaret, and Daniel Wills, Jr., Burlington 1686 

X. wbold, Mary, Burlington, aud Jodia Higgins, Burlington 1684 

Newbold, Rachel, and Daniel Newbold, Burlington 1780 

Newbold, Sarah, and William Bowne, New York 1791 

Newbould, Elizabeth, and Jacob Decow 1699 

Newbury, Elizabeth, and Richard Cox, Burlington 1730 

Newbury, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Hall, Burlington 1746 

Newcomb, Mary, Cumberland, and John Daniels, Cumberland 1770 

Newell, Catharine, Middlesex, and John McChesney, Middlesex .... 1753 

Newell, Dinah, and Thomas Neeve, Philadelphia 1733 

Newfll, Elinor, Monmouth, and Robert English, Monmouth 1739 

Newell, Gertye, Hunterdon, and Martin Wickoff, Jr., Hunterdon 1770 

Newell, Jane, Burlington, and Samuel Bradshaw, Burlington 1777 

Newell, Margaret, and David Hay, Monmouth 1781 

Newell, Mary, Monmouth, aud Charles Gordon, Monmouth 1739 

Newell, Polly, and Joel Miller, Cumberland 1787 

Newell, Rebecca, Gloucester, and William Aldridge, Gloucester 1739 

Newell, Sarah, Burlington, and Richard Fennimore, Burlington 1736 

Newell, Violet. Middlesex, and John Dunken, Middlesex 1753 

Newkark, Catharine, Salem, and William Garrison, Salem 1758 

Newkirk, Elizabeth, and Robert Patterson, Salem 1774 

Newkirk, Mary, and William Thompson, Pilesgrove 1772 

Newkirk, Sarah, Piles Grove, and William Robinson, PennsNeck 1767 

Newkirk, Elizabeth, Piles Grove, and Ezekiel Rose, Piles Grove 1769 

Newman, Catherine, Monmouth, and James Allen, Monmouth 1747-8 

Newman, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Pearce, Monmouth. . 1749-50 

Newman, Sarah, and William Cheeseman, Salem 1772 

New Port, Hannah, Monmouth, and Peter Vandeventer, Monmouth . 1746 
Newton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Abraham Woolman, Burlington. ..1765 

Newton, Hannah, Cape May, and Cornelius Kuyper, Jr., Phila 1769 

Newton, Margaret, Cape May, and John Ware, Cumberland 1783 

Newton, Sarah, Cape May, and John Hand, Jr., Cape May 1774 

Nicholsou, Rebecca, Gloucester, aud Isaac Burroughs, Gloucester 1767 

Nicholas, Anna Mary, Essex, and Abraham Monee, Staten Island . . 1744 

Nicholas, Lydia, and Shadrack Farguson, Burlington 1786 

Nicholas, Catharine, Staten Island, and Peter Audrovet, Staten Island lT'C 

Nichols, Pheby, and Andrew Hugh, Burlington 1783 

Nichols, Sarah, Monmouth, and Daniel Halsted, Monmouth 1719 

Nicholson, Ann, and Hill Smith, Salem . 1775 

19 



289 

April 23 
Nov. 24 
Nov. 24 
April 2 
Dec. 13 
Dec. 6 
Feb. 10 
Dec. 30 
May 12 
July 27 
May 11 
Dec. 21 
June 18 
April 29 
Jan. 30 
Aug. 10 
May 26 
Dec. 8 
May 5 
Mar. 26 
Jan. 16 
Dec. 4 
April 10 
June 23 
Nov. 2 
Feb. 23 
Jan. 16 
Aug. 8 
Jan. 2 
Mar. 16 
Feb. 22 
Feb. 2 
Mar. 24 
Aug. 12 
April 19 
Nov. 23 
June 20 
May 22 
May 5 
Oct, 2 
Feb. 19 
Nov. 3 
Nov. 30 
June 25 
May 3 
April 25 






290 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Nicholson, Jemima, and Ezekiel Mulford, Cape May 1770 

Nicholson, Mary, and Richard Smyth, Philadelphia 1773 

N icholson, Sarah, and Benjamin Smith 176G 

Nickason, Rachel, and Lewis ( loodwin, Salem .... 1779 

Nickerson, Elizabeth, and David Hacket, Salem. 1779 

Nickerson, Marget, and Richard Tomson. Cape May 1764 

Nickson, Mary. Salem, aDd William Wilkinson, Salem 1689 

Xicoll, Frances, and Albert Zabriskie, Bergen 1789 

Nicolson, Mary, and William Davit, New York 1766 

Nilson, Lyddy, Salem, and Richard Worth, Salem 1772 

Nixon, Balthis, and Jonathan Page, Cumberland 1773 

Nixon, Margaret, Hunterdon, and David Johnston, Hunterdon 1772 

Nixon, Mary, and John Bouye, I Horn-ester 1731 

Nixon Tabitha, Cumberland, and Stephen Clark, Cumberland 1761 

Noah, Margaret, Salem, and James Parker, Salem 1763 

Noah, Sarah, Salem, and Thomas Clark, Salem 1773 

Noble, Mary. Monmouth, and Robert Camming, Monmouth 1764 

Noblight, Letitia, and William Craig, Salem 1773 

Noblitt, Latitia, Salem, and Joseph Hogbiu, Salem 1767 

Noe, Aletta, and Isaac Vredenburgh, New Brunswick. ... 1784 

Noe, Damavis, Middlesex, and Thomas JohnsoD, Perth Amboy 1747 

Noe, Maryan, and John Clarkson, Middlesex 1768 

Noe, Susannah, Middlesex, and Robert Lackey, Middlesex. 1771 

Noline, Autey, Burlington, and Benjamin Owen, Burlington. 1757 

Xouen, Joanna, Monmouth, and James MeGibbons, Monmouth .... 1741 

Norcross, Abigail, and John Bavis, Burlington 1777 

Norcross, Anne, New Hanover, and John Rogers, Northampton 1784 

Norcross, Bathsheba, Burlington, and Elnathan Stevenson, Burlington. 1767 

Norcross, Jane, Burlington, and Thomas Meredith, Burlington 1740 

Norcross, Elizabeth, Springfield, and Michael Brannin, Burlington. . ..1730 

Norcross, Mary, Burlington, and John Brown, Burlington 1775 

Norcross, Mercy, Burlington, and Lewis Mingen, Burlington. ... 1773 

Nordyke, Ann, Burlington, and John Kitchens, Burlington 1758 

Norris, Hannah, and William Martin, Burlington 1771 

Norton, Ann, Gloucester, and Edward Castle, Gloucester 1746 

Norton, Jean, and John Young, Maidenhead 1779 

Norton, Margaret, Burlington, and James Walsh, Burlington 1739 

Norton, Mariam, and Samuel Atkinson, Burlington 1779 

Norton, Martha, Burlington, and William Flowers, Burlington 1739 

Norton, Mary, Cape .May, and Job Young, Cape May 1757 

Norton, Mary, and John Shiun, Springfield 1770 

Norton, Phebe, Cape May, and Henry Young, Cape May 1757 

Norton, Sarah, and Jonathan Mason, Gloucester 1773 

Norton, Sarah, and Joseph Wilkins, Evesham L784 

Nortwick, Rachel, Monmouth, and Torep Martin, Monmouth 1758 

Norwood, Mary, and Thomas Sickles, Princeton. . . , 1777 



Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


16 


Mar. 


20 


April 


20 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


31 


June 


4 


April 


27 


June 


21 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


15 


Feb. 


24 


June 


19 


Oct. 


28 


Oct. 


20 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


9 


April 


14 


April 


7 


Feb. 


24 


May 


28 


Oct. 


12 


Sept. 


21 


July 


1 


Oct. 


3 


Oct, 


26 


Oct, 


24 


April 


8 


Nov. 


24 


July 


25 


Feb. 


19 


Feb. 


23 


Aug. 


10 


July 


7 


April 


6 


June 


16 


May 


25 


Feb. 


26 


April 


26 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


28 


June 


12 


Jan. 


18 


June 


21 


July 


3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 29 1 

Norwood, Surah, and Joseph Lynn, Philadelphia 1737 

Nott, Anne, Burlington, and Peter Jennings, Burlington 1683 4 

Nott, Catherine, Monmouth, and William Stillwell, Monmouth 1756 

N [ox, Jemima, Somerset, and Timothy Baker, Hunterdon ...1764 

Noxe, Katheren, Salem, and Charles Angelo, Salem 1690 

Nugent, Catharine, and ( reorge Tucker, Trenton 1764 

Nut, Ann, and Martin Thomas 1779 

Nut, Elizabeth, and Smith Hill, Hunterdon 1780 

Nuton, Priscilla, < 'ape May, and Jacob Richardson, Cape May 1761 

Nutt, Abigail, and Aaron Taylor, Chesterfield 176S 

Nutt, Amy, and Joshua Bunting, Burlington 1768 

Nutt, Ann, and Hugh Hutching, Burlington 1769 

Nutt, Mary, Pennsylvania, and Peter Wood, Bucks, Pa 1730 

Nutt, Susannah, Bucks, and Joseph Ashton, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Nuttman, Hannah, Morris, and Junia Lindsly, Morris 1752 



May 


26 


.Mar. 


20 


Sept. 


18 


Sept. 


19 


Oct. 


8 


Oct. 


18 


April 


26 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


31 


July 


25 


Sept. 


23 


Jan. 


23 


Oct. 


1 


Jan. 


26 


Oct. 


6 



MALES. 



o 



Oakeley, George, Salem, and Jane Sims, Salem 1766 

Oakford, John, Salem, and Rebecca Pittman .... 1732 

Oakley, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Clayton, Burlington , 1773 

Oat, John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Fielding, Philadelphia 1751 

O'Brien, Daniel, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Ratton, Perth Amboy. . . 1749 

O'Biyau, Darby, Salem, and Elizabeth Shears 1766 

Ockarman, Garline, ' Middlesex, and Jane Combs 1786 

Ogborn, Johu, Burlington, and Hannah Warner 1769 

Ogboru, Samuel, Middletown, and Anna Van Vrackel, Middletown.. . . 1765 

Ogborn, William, and Mary Cole 1698 

OgdeD, Charles, Sussex, and Hannah Governeur, Sussex 1779 

Ogden, Daniel, Deerfield, and P.achel Moore, Deerfield ... 1768 

Ogden, David, Salem, and Hannah Daton, Salem 1745 

Ogden, David, Fairfield, and Mary Bateman, Fairfield 1759 

Ogden, David, Middlesex, and Mary Cornelly 1768 

Ogden, Gabriel, Morris, and Mary Sbotwell, Woodbridge 1753 

Ogden, James, Middlesex, and Catharine Pitt 1780 

Ogden, Joseph, Morris, and Mary Thomson, Morris 1751 

Ogden, Moses, Essex, and Mary Cousins, Essex 1746 

Ogden, Nathaniel, Elizabethtown, and Judith Bouquett, New Bruns'k.1740 

Ogden, Nathaniel, Fairfield, and Jane Hand, Cape May 1761 

Ogden, Thomas, Fairfield, and Violetta Harris, Fairfield 1760 

Ogden. Thomas, Fairfield, and Sarah Westcote, Fairfield 1761 

Ogg, John, Burlington, and Abigail Sullivan, Burlington 1746 

Ogle, Peter, Springfield, and Miriam King, Springfield 1772 

Oglee, Henry, New Hanover, and Charity Waters 1782 

O'Hara, Felix, New York, and Martha MeCormack, Middlesex 1760 

1 Query: Online Aekerman. 



Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


6 


Sept. 


1 


June 


26 


Oct. 


11 


Dec. 


25 


July 


3 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


5 


Nov. 


17 


July 


23 


July 


5 


June 


13 


Sept. 


13 


Mar. 


28 


May 


26 


Nov. 


6 


Aug. 


31 


Oct. 


29 


Dec. 


24 


April 


24 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


1 


Nov. 


19 


Aug. 


10 


July 


25 


July 


28 



292 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ohara, John, Somerset, and Sarah Armstrong, Essex 1752 Oct. 13 

Okeson, Daniel, New Jersey, and Angee Alberson, Bethlehem 1748 Feb. 11 

Okison, Thomas, Upper Freehold, and Deborah Clayton 1768 Sept. 1 

Oldacres, Henry, Burlington, and Elinor Borden 1732 Oct. 11 

( )ldaker, William, Cumberland, and Prudence Powell 1784 Oct. 1 

( Mdden, James, Middlesex, and Catharine Gardner, Middlesex 1746 April 3 

Oldham, Thomas, Pennsylvania, and Mary White, Pennsylvania 1727 Sept. 11 

Oliphant, John, Piscataway, and Elizabeth Lucas, Piscataway 1760 Oct. 21 

Oliphant, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Shinn, Burlington 1764 June 25 

Oliphant, Shinn, Burlington, and Hope Eyre •. 1787 Nov. 12 

Oliver, David, Essex, and Sofiah Higgius, Essex 1760 April 19 

Oliver, John, Elizabethtowu, and Susanna Brant, Elizabethtown 1748 Dec. 8 

( Uiver, John, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Cherry, Bucks, Pa 1756 Oct. 18 

Oliver, John, Bordentown, and Mary Carman 1771 April 21 

O'Neale, Joseph, and Mary Bayless 1777 July 23 

O'Xeale, William. Trenton, and Margaret Yard 1779 Aug. 23 

Opdike, John, Burlington, and S uah Farnsvvorth, Bordentown 1744 Oct. 7 

Opdyke, Joshua, Hunterdon, and Mary Dusenbery 1782 Feb. 10 

Opdycke, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Susannah Robertson, Hunterdon. . 1775 Dec. 7 

Opd} ke, Hope, Hunterdon, and Cathrine Wilson 1787 Dec. 20 

Oppie, Benjamin, Somerset, and Hannah Disbrow, Maiden Head. . . 1764 Jan. 9 

Oppie, William, Somerset, and Elizabeth Moore 1781 Oct, 27 

Oram, Samuel, Cape May, and Martha Garitson 1778 Nov. 16 

Ord, James, Cumberland, and Htnnah Genkins, Gloucester 1754 Oct. 30 

Oriu, Azariah, aud Rebecca Hewett , 1776 April 17 

( hiii, John, Greenwich, aud Mary Hutchinson, Greenwich 1742 May 2 

Ormston, Thomas, Somerset, and Anna Coon, Somerset 1751 Nov. 11 

Orr, James, Burlington, and Anne Smith, Burlington 1757 May 19 

Orrason, Ashfordby, Hunterdon, and Mary Curtis 1784 Sept. 7 

Osbom, John, Philadelphia, and Rhoda Rogers 1779 April 14 

Osborn, Samuel, Monmouth, and Keziah Bringley 1751 May 18 

Osborn, Samuel, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Cook, Shrewsbury 1764 Mar. 16 

Osborn, Samuel, Jr., Monmouth, and Anne Longstreet, Monmouth. .. 1740 July 3 

Osborn, Uri, Hopewell, and Elisabeth Merrell 1777 July 26 

Osborne, Auanias, Cape May, and L3'dia Buck 1738 June 9 

Osborne, Kichard, Cape May, and Hanna Smith, Cape May 1762 May 3 

( >sgood, Thomas, Burlington, aud Catherine Steward 1732 June 17 

Osier, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Launiug. . 1783 Aug. 7 

Ott, Johannes, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Fielding, Philadelphia .. 1751 June 25 

Ouke, Abraham, New Brunswick, and Mary Young, New Brunswick. . 1758 Oct. 12 

Outgelt, John, New Jersey, and Sarah Handley 1781 Feb. 24 

Outterbergh, Peter, Bergen, and Autje Ridenaar 1762 Sept. 15 

( Mitwater, Guilliam, Bergen, and Aunatje Van Wagene, Bergen 1773 June 26 

Outwater, John, Bergen, and Haukey Luzeer 1768 Oct. 4 

Outwater, Hackensack, and Deborah Smith, Bergen 1768 May 16 

Outwater, Thomas, Orange, N. Y., aud Elizabeth Earl, Bergen 1774 July 23 



MARRIAGE LICENCES. 



293 



( ivniield, Peter, Hunterdon, and Susanah Ruckman, Kingwood 17G9 June 27 

( >wen, Abraham, Burlington, and Rachel Bunn 17t<4 Jan. 14 

( hven, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Autey Noline, Burlington 1757 Sept. 21 

( (wen, David, Salem, and Jane Vandike, Salem 17(55 July 13 

Owen, Humphrey, Gloucester, aud Ruth Flewelling. 1756 Dec. 8 

( >wen, John, Salem, and Grace Craven, Salem 1758 April 2G 

Owen, William, Middletown, aud Deliverance Holmes, Middletown. . . 1759 April ('. 

Owens, Owen, Sussex, and Desiah Doud, Sussex 1768 Nov. 8 

Oxford, Abraham, Sussex, aud Sarah Beavers, Sussex 1762 June 29 

FEMALES. ^ 

Oakey, Catharine, aud John Mecum, Middlesex 1765 

Oakford, Elizabeth, and Erasmus Kent, Salem 1764 

( >akford, Esther, Salem, and Samuel Pedrick, Philadelphia 1750 

( hikford, Mary, Salem, and John Acton, Salem 1772 

Oar, Nancy, aud Levi Clark 1776 

Oathout, Mary, Middlesex, and Emestus Vau Harlingen, Middlesex. .1760 

( >atman, Mary, and Henry Shoudy, Trenton ... 1781 

( )brian, Elleanor, aud James Bland 1760 

Ockey, Susanna, Salem, aud William Phillips, Salem 1762 

O'Dauiel, Mary, Monmouth, and John Craddock, Monmouth 1745 

O'Donely, Bridget, and William Garwood, Burlington 1787 

Odouoghue, Mary, aud Thomas Dugles 1 795 

Ogbom, Abigail, Middletown, aud Edward Taylor, Freehold 1757 

Ogborn, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Humphrey Wall, Middletown 1765 

Ogborn, Sarah, Monmouth, and Obadiah Holmes, Monmouth 1747 

Ogborne, Elizabeth, Middletown, and William Applegate, Middletown. 1758 

Ogborne, Mary, Middletown, and Joseph Stillwell, Middletown 1761 

Ogbourn, Sarah, and John Warner, Middlesex 1769 

Ogburn, Anna, Burlington, and Job Lippiucott, Burlington 1728 

Ogburn, Anne, Burlington, and Benjamin Butterworth, Burlington. . .1729 

( >gden, Abigail, aud Arney Biddle 1754 

Ogden, Abigail, Cumberland, and Ephraim Buck, Cumberland 1769 

Ogden, Bathenthleoth, and Thomas Brown, Cumberland 1760 

Ogden, Catharine, Essex, and Isaac Longworth, Essex 1761 

Ogden, Catherine, and Joseph Beach 1779 

Ogden, Jane, Burlington, and Benjamin Dunham, Burlington 1772 

Ogden, Martha, Cumberland, and Daniel Harris, Cumberland 1770 

Ogden, Phebe, Woodbridge. and Peter Yaupelt, Staten Island 1756 

Ogden, Sarah, Salem, and Ephraim Dayton, Salem 1747 

Ogden, Sarah, Cumberland, and Reuben Cheeseman, Gloucester 1759 

Ogden, Sarah, Cumberland, aud James Clark, Cumbeilaud 1769 

Ogden, Theodosia, Fairfield, and John Trenchard, Cumberland 1770 

O'Hara, Elizabeth, aud William Dilmore, Salem 1772 

Ohara, Margaret, Somerset, and William Baird, Somerset 1751 

Oldale, Grace, Burlington, and Edward Browning, Gloucester 1751 



Sept. 


11 


Oct. 


15 


Aug. 


17 


Jan. 


30 


Mar. 


13 


July 


8 


Feb. 


6 


Dec. 


13 


Mar. 


18 


Dec. 


21 


Aug. 


7 


June 


6 


Oct. 


17 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


2 


Mar. 


6 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


18 


June 


25 


Sept. 


11 


Jan. 


3 


Sept, 


27 


April 


17 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


15 


June 


27 


Feb. 


28 


Jan. 


2 


Mav 


9 


Nov. 


29 


Juue 


20 


June 


25 


June 


4 


Oct. 


14 


July 


8 



294 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



( Udale, Sarah, BurlingtoD, and Nathan Addams, Burlington 1715 Oct. 1G 

Olden, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and John Hutchins, Middlesex 17-18 July 22 

Olden, Keziah, and John Givin, Trenton 1784 Aug. 21 

Oldman, Ann, and James Kirk, Burlington 1732 Sept. 19 

Oldcuan, Mary, and John Crammer 1756 Dec. 8 

Old water, Mary, New Barbadoes, and Henry Volk, New Barbadoes. . . 17G6 Nov. 7 

Oliphant, Jerusha, Burlington, and Benjamin Hollinshead, Burlington. 1759 Nov. 27 

Olliver, Sarah, and John Meeker, Middlesex 1775 Jan. 12 

O'Neal, Tabitha, Burlington, and Josiah Alcott, Burlington . . 1782 Oct. 29 

Ong, Anne, and John Archer, Gloucester. . , 1785 May 26 

Ong, Esther, Burlington, and Joseph Duckworth, Burlington 1737 June 1 

Ong, Ester, and Jeuston Morgan, Monmouth 1755 Sept. 13 

Ong, Hannah, and David Briggs, Burlington 1759 Dec. 14 

Ong, Mary, and Martin Long, Burlington 1760 April 24 

Ong, Rachel, Burlington, and Elias Brass, Burlington. . . . . v 1742 Jan. 24 

Ong, Sarah, and Edward Andrews 1694 Feb. 8 

Dug, Susannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Pettit, Monmouth 1742 Nov. 9 

Onge, Phebe, Burlington, and James Laiug, Middlesex 1731 July 22 

Opdike, Hannah, and John Biittan, Kingwood ... 1781 June 2 

Opdike, Mary, and William Biles, Hunterdon 1768 Nov. 25 

Oppie, Mary, and John Veghte, Somerset 1778 July 15 

Orchard, Sarah, Middletown, aud Benaj ah Beadle, Middletown 1750 July 21 

Orchard, Susanna, Perth Aniboy, and Nehemiah Bolton, Bucks 1754 April 12 

Orsborn, Jane, Monmouth, and Peter Knott, Monmouth 1764 May 25 

Orsborn, Rebeckah, Shrewsbury, aud Daniel Swain, Shrewsbury. ...1756 Jan. 22 

Osbom, Phebe, aud Jonathan Edwards, Cape May 1766 May 31 

( (shorn, Anne, Cape May, and Walter Milton, Cape May 1746 April 19 

( )sborn, Mally, and Jacobus Springs! in, Orange Co., N. Y 1763 Feb. 20 

Osbom, Martha, Monmouth, and James Journey, Monmouth .......1764 Mar. 16 

( >sborn, Mary, Cape May, aud Daniel Garretson, Cape May. 1761 June 19 

Osbom, Moike, Monmouth, and Richard Yan Mater, Monmouth 1749 Nov. 14 

Osbom, Naomi, and Joshua Smith, Cape May 1762 Feb. 16 

Osborn, Phebe, Trenton, and Joseph Wright, Monmouth 1745 Mar. 17 

Osborn, Ruth, Cape May, and Philip Godfrey, Cape May 1748 Oct. 19 

Osborne, Hannah, Monmouth, aud Joseph Maxson, Monmouth 1774 Oct. 14 

Osburn, Hanah, aud David Townsend, Cape May 1767 Mar. 26 

Osburn, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Yandike, Burlington 1770 June 18 

Osier, Bathsheba, Gloucester, aud Thomas Parsons, Gloucester 1770 Sept. 13 

Otway, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Robert Domivard, Burlington 1767 Oct. 5 

Ouke, Mary, New Brunswick, Meriue Van Voorhies, New Brunswick. 1743 Jan. 11 

Ouke, Mary, Middlesex, aud Abraham Heyer, Middlesex 1748 May 25 

Oukee, Anne, and William Porter, Hunterdon 1768 Oct. 3 

Ouster, Katherine, Gloucester, and James Sleetmou, Gloucester 1730 June 13 

Outcalt, Margaret, and Jacob Stolts, Middlesex 1780 Dec. 20 

Outhout, CatherinHe, New B'nswick, Henry Dumout, Raritan Lauding. 1749 Nov. 25 

Outhout, Elizabeth, New Brunswick, John Tenbrook, NewBrunsw'k. .1745 July 27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



295 



Outwater, Anuatie, Bergen, and George Campbell, Bergen 1707 

Outwater, Henkye, Bergen, and Cornelius T. Banta, Bergen 1763 

Oweu, Grace, Salem, and Daniel Hendely, Salem 1776 

Owen, Martha, Burlington, and William Boston, Burlington 1760 

Owen, Mary, Burlington, and Henry Burr, Burlington 1736 

Owen, Sarah, Egg Harbour, and Micajah Smith, Egg Harbour 1763 

Owen, Susanna, Burlington, and Thomas Chubb, Burlington 1758 

P 
MALES. i 

Packer, Daniel, Greenwich, and Catharine Fight 1771 

Packer, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Kay, Gloucester 1759 

Packer, Samuel, Haddonfield, and Elizabeth Hawke, Haddonfield . . . 1748 

Packsten, Henry, Gloucester, and Johannah Carter, Gloucester 1763 

Padfield, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Lodge, Burlington 1759 

Padgett, David, Cumberland, and Priscilla Bead, Fairfield 1752 

Padgett, Thomas, Salem, and Nancy Westcote 1778 

Padgett, Thomas, Cumberland, and Annie Lupton, Cumberland 1761 

Padgitt, Aaron, Cumberland, and Hope Smith 1768 

Page, Abner, Burlington, ami Elizabeth Folwell ... 1782 

Page, Ambrose, Cumberland, and Sarah Shaw 1784 

Page, Asa, Mansfield, and Amy Eviugh'am, Mansfield 1773 

Page, David, Fairfield, and Mary Bead, Fairfield 1763 

Page, Edward, Chesterfield, and Elizabeth Groom, Chesterfield 1741 

Page, Edward, Junr., Burlington, and Rebekah Warreck, Burlington. 1764 

Page, Francis, Burlington, and Elizabeth Warner 1758 

Page, Henry, Burlington, and Susanna Stevenson 1776 

Page, James, Burlington, and Ann Haselton, Burlington 1754 

Page, James, Salem, and Mary Prindle 1774 

Page, John, Burlington, and Hannah Irwin, Burlington. 1741 

Page, John, Burlington, and Annah Shreve 1760 

Page, John, Monmouth, and Mary McDonald 1780 

Page, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Bathier Nixon 1773 

Page, Joseph, Monmouth, and Margret Robins, Monmouth. . 1761 

Page, Moses, Philadelphia, and Ann Johnson 1785 

Page, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Tool, Burlington 1761 

Page, Thomas, Burlington, and Alice Scott, Mansfield 1767 

Page, William, Burlington, and Mary Williams 1742 

Page, William, Burlington, and Phebe Richardson 1756 

Paget, Andrew, Salem, and Elizabeth Craford, Salem 1727 

Paige, Thomas, Cape May, and Lydia Church, Cape May 1766 

Paige, Thomas, Cape May, and Rachel Parsons, Cape May 1773 

Pain, Azariah, Cape May, and Ledy Conniway 1768 

Pain, John, Woodbridge, and Mary Freeman, Woodbridge 1758 

Pain, John, Morris Town, and Elizabeth Peterson, Morris Town 1778 

Pain, Phillip, Elizabeth Town, and Hester Stillwell, Woodbridge 1769 

Paine, John, Salem, and Elizabeth Wolten, Salem 1768 



Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


26 


Sept. 


23 


April 


7 


Jan. 


10 


June 


27 


April 


12 


Sept. 


21 


Oct. 


29 


Dec. 


7 


Feb. 


3 


Oct. 


8 


Jan. 


16 


Nov. 


13 


April 


7 


Mar. 


15 


Sept. 


9 


Jan. 


20 


Jan. 


20 


July 


30 


May 


11 


Sept. 


15 


July 


26 


Nov. 


4 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


12 


April 


6 


Mar. 


6 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


26 


Mar. 


28 


May 


5 


April 


20 


Mar. 


17 


April 


13 


June 


10 


Aug. 


7 


April 


12 


Sept. 


29 


Sept. 


30 


June 


22 


May 


8 


Jan. 


19 



2g6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Paine, John, Jr., ami Abigail Curtis 1699 

Painter, Conrad, Bnrlingtou, ami Elizabeth Woolston, Burlington... 1754 

Painter, George, Burlington, ami Margaret Ferguson 1785 

Painter, George, Burlington, and Jannet Ferguson 1789 

Painter, John, Burlington, and Hannah Braddock, Burlington 1735 

Painter, Richard, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Busby 1732 

Palmer, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Vanhorne, Bucks, Pa. . . . .1764 

Palmer, Edmond, Hunterdon, and Pamela Anderson 17f2 

Palmer, Francis, Philadelphia, and Eleanor Hollingshead, Salem 1742 

Palmer, John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Fairman 1743 

Palmer, Joshua, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Cornith 1766 

Palmer, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Catherine Palmer, Philadelphia. . 1749 

Palmer, William, Maidenhead, and Nancy Smith 1782 

Pancoast, Aaron, Burlington, and Hannah Cheed, Burlington 1764 

Pancoast, Adiu, Burlington, and Diadama Curtis, Burlington 1762 

Pancoast, Edward, Burlington, and Hannah King, Burlington 1761 

Pancoast, Joseph, Mansfield, and Unity Shinn, Springfield 1767 

Pancoast, William, Burlington, and Sarah Lishman 1784 

Pangborn, Lires, Monmouth, and Anne Hazleton, Monmouth 1761 

Pangborn, Stephen, Middlesex, and Rebecka Emley, Upper Freehold. 1742 
Pangborn Stephen, Monmouth, and Anne Montgomerie, Monmouth. 1754 

Panton, Francis, New York, and Mary Cambel, Shrewsbury 1761 

Pape, Michael, Northampton, and Mary Mackleroy 1757 

Par, Matthias, Morris, and Amy Coleman ... 1779 

Parades, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Anthony 1778 

Parent, John, Upper Freehold, and Elizabeth Woodruff. ... 1761 

Parent, Robert, Monmouth, and Lucy Robins, Monmouth 1771 

Paringer, Peter, Burlington, and Margaret Bleth, Burlington 1763 

Parke, Daniel, Burliugton, and Bathsheba Perkins, Burlington 1739 

Parke, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Ridgeway, Burlington 1746 

Parker, Adam, Burlington, and Margaret Adare, Burlington 1757 

Parker, Adam, Burlington, and Elizabeth Pierson 1783 

Parker, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Catura Heddy, Monmouth 1760 

Parker, Benjamin, Maurice River, and Elnor Grace, Maurice River. . . 1775 

Parker, David, Monmouth, and Rebeckah French, Monmouth 1761 

Parker, Jacob, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Jackson, Shrewsbury 1764 

Parker, James, Monmouth, and Johannah Leonard, Monmouth 1748 

Parker, James, Perth Amboy, and Gertrude Skinner, Perth Amboy. . ..1763 

Parker, James, Salem, and Margaret Noah, Salem 1763 

Parker, James, Burlington, and Catherine Rue, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Parker, John, Burlington, and Mary Newberry 1734 

Parker, John, Monmouth, and Mary Parker, Monmouth 1740 

Parker, John, Burlington, and Ann Lawrence 1789 Feb. 24-25 

Parker, Joseph, Northampton, and Susannah Clifton 1759 May 31 

Parker, Joseph, Little Egg Harbor, and Abigail Sieman 1761 May 21 

Parker, Joseph, Mount Holly, and Elionar Mcintosh, Mount Holly. . . 1761 Sept. 24 



Aug. 


8 


Oct. 


24 


Oct. 


5 


Aug. 


13 


June 


9 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


15 


April 


20 


Feb. 


10 


June 


7 


Nov. 


26 


Oct, 


16 


Oct. 


5 


June 


9 


April 


22 


Aug. 


15 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


29 


Mar. 


18 


Aug. 


3 


Mar. 


23 


Feb. 


3 


Aug. 


25 


May 


14 


JaD. 


10 


Aug. 


31 


Feb. 


1 


July 


5 


Dec, 


6 


Feb. 


22 


July 


16 


Feb. 


4 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


11 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


12 


Oct. 


20 


Mar. 


28 


April 


2 


Jan. 


1 



Marriage licenses. 

Parker, Joshua, Burlington, and Agnes Allen, Burlington 1750 

Parker, Joshua, Shrewsbury, ami Elizabeth Russel, Shrewsbury 1758 

Parker, Marcus, Burlington, and Mary Parker 1772 

Parker, Miln, Shrewsbury, and Abigail White, Shrewsbury L7C6 

Parker, Nathaniel, Philadelphia, and Mary French, Burliugton 1773 

Parker, Nicholas, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Jenny 1732 

Parker, Peter, Monmouth, ami Phebe Willis. Monmouth 1743 

Parker, Peter, Shrewsbury, and Lydia Ward, Shrewsbury 1754 

Parker, Richard, Monmouth, and Charity Hadden, Monmouth 1742 

Parker, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Goldby 1741 

Parker, Samuel, Northampton, and Sibilla Atkinson, Northampton. .. 1772 

Parker, Samuel, Woodbridge, and Sarah Ford, Woodbridge 1764 

Parker, Samuel F., Middlesex, and Mary Moore 1769 

Parker, William, Gloucester, and Ann Briant, Gloucester 1766 

Parker, William, Freehold, and Jerusha James, Freehold 1766 

Parkes, George, Northampton, and Elizabeth Johnston 1772 

Parmar, Patou, Richmond, N. Y., and Mary Wood, Richmond, N. Y. .1763 
Parmer, Nathaniel, Richmond, N. Y., and Mary States, Middlesex. . . 1764 

Parr, John, Burlington, and Leah Sleeper 1788 

Parr, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Burroughs, Gloucester 1733 

Parret, Richard, Salem, and Mary Mountain 1778 

Parrit, Richard, Morris, and Mary Morgan, Middlesex 1762 

Parry, John, Sussex, and Mary Ayres, New York 1778 

Parsons, Benjamin, Maurice River, and Phebe Yeal 17^0 

Parsons, John, Trenton, and Hittabel Ruckman 1733 

Parsons, John, Cape May, and Louisa Edmunds 1775 

Parsons, Thomas, Gloucester, and Bathsheba Osier, Gloucester 1770 

Parvin, Clarence, Cumberland, and Amy Mayhew, Pittsgrove 1775 

Pasco, George, Jamaica, W. Indies, and Mary Howell 1773 

Passmon, Benjamin, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Mary Williams 1757 

Paterson, Alexander, Sussex, and Margret Paterson, Sussex 1765 

Paterson, James, Salem, and Mary Pascall 1779 

Paterson, Oliver, Somerset, and Catherine Galligher 1781 

Paterson, Richard, Somerset, and Susanna Phillips 1779 

Paton, David, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Anne Frances, Gt. Egg Harb'r. .1760 

Patten, James, Perth Amboy, and Ruthy Pregmore 1764 

Patton, John, Freehold, and Catrinah Crawford 1766 

Patterson, James, Middletown, and Rachel Stout, Middletown 1764 

Patterson, John, Philadelphia, and Ann Pairy, Philadelphia. 1736. 

Patterson, John, Monmouth, and Deborah Boune, Monmouth 1744 

Patterson, Joseph, Middletown, and Priscilla Race, Middletown 1746 

Patterson, Peter, Monmouth, and Mary Willson, Monmouth 1742 

Patterson, Robert, Bristol, Pa., and Rebecca Edgar, Bristol, Pa 1765 

Patterson, Robert, Salem, and Elizabeth Newkirk 1772 

Pattin, James, Monmouth, and Jane Morgau, Perth Amboy 1762 

Pattison, Josiah, Trenton, and Catharine Brucar, Somerset 1728 



297 



Sept. 


5 


April 


12 


May 


11 


April 


24 


June 


1 


Nov. 


7 


July 


1 


Dec. 


5 


July 


6 


Mar 


11 


April 


15 


Mar. 


1 


Feb. 


25 


June 


30 


July 


9 


April 


20 


May 


10 


Dec. 


20 


June 


5 


July 


16 


Sept. 


21 


Dec. 


15 


Nov. 


26 


June 


16 


Nov. 


26 


May 


30 


Sept. 


13 


June 


8 


July 


5 


April 


29 


June 


20 


June 


14 


Feb. 


26 


Aug. 


21 


June 


5 


Mar. 


10 


June 


5 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


21 


Oct. 


31 


Sept. 


16 


Sept. 


13 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


8 


Dec. 


3 


May 


21 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Pattison, William. Maidenhead, and Sarah Ford 1780 

Paul, David, Gloucester, and Anne Chew, Gloucester 1765 

PauL John, Gloucester, and Rachel Weatherington 1775 

Paul. Nathan, Gloucester, and Deborah Yinnenian, Gloucester 1710 

Paul, Nathan, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Finley, Gloucester 1761 

Paul, Nathan, Gloucester, and Jamsen Finley 17>4 

Paul, Samuel, Gloucester, and Isabel English, Gloucester 1757 

Paul, Samuel. Gloucester, and Rebecca DeLavoe. 1753 

Paulen, Whitlock, Cumberland, and Sarah Ireland, Cumberland. . . 1778 

Paullin, Jacob, Salem, and Rebecah Ware 1760 

Paullin, Jacob, Salem, and Elizabeth Moore, Salem . . 1763 

Paxson, Thomas, Mount Holly, and Martha Haywood, Mount Holly. . 1704 

Paxton, Anthony, Esses, and Antje Kip, Essex 176 1 

Paydag, William, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Crawford, Gloucester . . 

Payday, William, Cumberland, and Abigail Bishop 1751 

Payday, William, Cumberland, and Mary Tyler 1785 

Payne, Anthony. Burlington, and Sarah Deacon 1768 

Payne, James, Hunterdon, and Sarah Early 1779 

Peace, Adam, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Boice 1769 

Peachee. Thomas, and Mary Miller 169U 

Peachee, William, Burlington, and Bridget Addiss 1733 

Peacock, Abner, Burlington, and Isabella McK. Matthis 1789 

Peacock, Adonijah, Burlington, and Sarah Yoorhees 1782 

Peacock, Alexander, Burlington, and Mary Sherwin 1759 

Peacock, Alexander, Burlington, and Martha Smith, Burlington 1783 

Peacock, George, Burlington, and Ann French 1788 

Peacock, JohD, Burlington, and Mary Brown 17*1 

Peacock, Melchizedek Burlington, and Abigail Thorne, Burlington. . 1767 

Peacock. Thomas, Northampton, and Mary Chapman 1782 

Peairs, Andrew, Upper Freehold, and Mercy Parent, Upper Freehold. . 1714 

Peak, Aaron, Burlington, and Elizabeth Springer 1779 

Peak, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Batcher, Burlington 1760 

. John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Shafer 1759 

Peake, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Nailer 1786 

Pearce, Jeremiah, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Brewer, Shrewsbury . . 1755 

Pearce, John, Monmouth, and Lydia Pish, Monmouth 1740 

Pearce, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Rhode Sutton, Shrewsbury 1765 

Pear .a Ward, Gloucester 1733 

Pearce, Thomas, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Newman, Monmouth. .1749-50 

Pearce, William, Shrewsbury, and Marah Green, Shrewsbury 1755 

Pearce, William, Shrewsbury, and Lydy Curtis, Shrew-bury 1766 

. Cranberry, and Mary Dey. Cranberry 1759 

Pearse, Andrew, Monmouth, and Mary Parent, Monmouth 1741 

Pearse, William, Monmouth, and Mary Beunet, Monmouth 1712-3 

Pearson, Benjamin, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Parr, Pennsylvania. . 1728 
Pearson, Isaac, Burlington, and Rebecca Scattergood, Burlington 1710 



Mar. 


6 


July 


12 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


16 


June 


20 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


18 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


4 


Sept. 


22 


Nov. 


7 


May 


21 


July 


25 


Oct. 


24 


Aug. 


6 


June 


8 


Aug. 


31 


April 


2 


May 


31 


Sept. 


3 


Dec. 


19 


Mar. 


2 


Aug. 


15 


Mar. 


7 


April 


22 


Feb. 


25 


July 


11 


May 


21 


April 


27 


Feb. 


11 


May 


24 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


15 


Dec. 


21 


Nov. 


25 


Oct. 


17 


Mar. 


13 


May- 


2 


Mar. 


21 


July 


11 


Jan. 


28 


Mar. 


29 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


7 


Sept. 


16 


Oct. 


16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Pearson, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Smith, Burlington 1761 

Pearson, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Arn« 11, Burlington 1707 

Pearson, John, Darby, Pa., and Rachel Hibbard, Blockley, Pa 17^5 

Pearson, John, Burlington, and Sarah Harnot, Gloucester 1736 

Pearson, John, Chester, Pa., and Sarah Wo r, Pa 1746 

Pearson, Joseph, Burlington, and Dorothy Stevenson, Burlington. .. . 1731 

Pearson, Joseph, Mooiestown, and Hannah Bates, Moorestown 1772 

Pearson, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Higbee, Hunterdon 1704 

Pearson, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Hoff, Trenton 1739 

Pearson, Zebnlon, Gloucester, and Mary Siedham, Gloucester 1770 

Peas, Cornelius, Freehold, and Elizabeth Clark, Freehold 1758 

Peas, William, Gloucester, and Mary Zaue 178-1 

Pecket, John, Somerset, and Judah Crawley, S imerset 1712 

Peck, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Martha Powell, Cumberland 1775 

Peck, Joseph, Cumberland, and Ruth Hannah 1773 

Peck, 1 h »mas, Burlington, and Susannah Mills 1769 

Pecock, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Rider 1784 

Pedrick, Caleb, Upper Penns Neck, and Sarah Griffith, Up. Penns N'k.1764 

Pedrick, Michel. Salem, and Elizabeth Harding, Salem 1748 

Pedrick, Samuel, Philadelphia, and Esther Oakford, Salem 1750 

Pedrick, Thomas, Gloucester, and Sarah Handby, Gloucester 1753 

Peel, Oswald, Philadelphia, and Lidia Robinson. Philadelphia 1728 

Peer, Daniel, Morris, and Caty Mowreson, Sussex 1778 

Peirce, Isaac, and Hannah Sellers 1759 

Peirscn, Azel, Cumberland, and Mary Siden, Salem 1762 

Peirson, James, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Field, Bucks. Pa 1749 

Peirson, John, Maidenhead, and Rebeckah Trench 17*2 

Pence, \\ illiam, Burlington, and Elizabeth "Walton 1 77> 

Pendergast, Martin, Elizabethtown, and Abigail Townley, Elizabethan. 1759 
Penington, Nathan. Newark, and Margaret Westcoat, Gloucester.. . . 1783 
Pennington, Thomas, Penns Neck, and Ann Beaman, Penns Neck . . 1719 
Penn, James, Northampton, and Elizabeth Alloways. Northampton. . . 1749 

Penn, William, and Charity Bennet 1785 

Pennington, Joseph, Lt. EggHarb'r, andPhebe Stockham, Lt. Egg H'r. 1750 

Penuock, Nathaniel, Chester, Pa.; and Sarah Bourne, Chester, Pa 1751 

Penquite, Gersham, Burlington, and Mary Zilley, Burlington 1780 

Penrose, Isaac, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Haselton, Philadelphia.. .1708 

Penrose, Jonathan, Pennsylvania, and Ann Roan 1775 

Penten, Philip, Alloways Creek, and Mary Hutchinson, Alloways Cr'k. 1749 

Penton, Abner, Alloways Creek, and Ann Smith, Alloways Creek 1704 

Penton, Daniel, S:dem, and Catherine Hamilton, Saiem 1710 

Penton, Joseph, Salem, and Margarett Penton 1771 

Perine, Henry, Middlesex, and Martha Jobs, Richmond. N. Y 1741 

Perine, Henry. South Amboy, and Abigail Rue, South Amboy 1757 

Perine, Henry, Middlesex, and Anne Hooper 1769 

Perine, James, Middlesex, and Mary Perlier. Middlesex 1739 






Dec. 


7 


Feb. 


9 


July- 


9 


Jan. 


3 


Nov. 


13 


June 


2 


Sept. 


29 


A j ail 


12 


Jan. 


29 


Dec. 


28 


July 


10 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


27 


April 


11 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


26 


July 


24 


Dec. 


27 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


17 


Mar. 


1 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


15 


June 


19 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


30 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


9 


Nov. 


10 


Jan. 


7 


Oct. 


26 


Nov. 


3 


Jan. 


22 


July- 


3 


May 


28 


Nov. 


6 


Oct. 


22 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


16 


Aug. 


25 


Nov. 


1 


Jan. 


8 


May 


15 


Nov. 


8 


April 


19 


June 


13 



300 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENT^ 

Perine. Jobu. Jr.. Perth Amboy, and Mary Rue, Perth Amboy 1750 

Ferine. Joseph. Middlesex, and Margaret McFarran, Monmouth 1762 

Perine, Joseph. Middlesex, and Elizabeth Wikofi 1771 

Periue, Kenneth. Monmouth, and Elizabeth Forman 1769 

Perine. Peter, Hunterdon, and Catherine Conrseu, Hunterdon 1746 

Perine, William. Middlesex, and Eleanor Rue. Monmouth 1763 

Perkins. Abraham. Burlington, and Mary Simons, Burlington 1730 

Perkius. Abraham, Burlington, and Sarah Gardiner 1733 

Perkins. Benjamin, Burlington, and Ellinor Cox, Burlington 1731 

Perkins. Isaac, Hackensack, and Rachel Allen 1769 

Perkins, John, Monmonth, and Jane Hern. Monmouth. . ... 173S 

Perkins, William. Gloucester, and Elizabeth Congal 17S4 

Perrine, James. Somerset, and Neeltje Stotholf, Middlesex. ......... 17-15 

Perrine, James. Staten Island, and Anne Moore, Perth Amboy 1718 

Peniue, Joseph, Perth Amboy, and Martha Perlier Perth Amboy.. 1742-3 

Perrine. Peter, New Jersey, and Sarah Scandlon, Middlesex 1760 

Perry. Pan. Cumberland, and Hannah Hand ... 1780 

Perry. Joseph. Gl racester, and Susannah Hurley 1785 

Perry, Richard, Northampton, and Alice Holms 1757 

Perrv. Samuel, Northampton, Pa., and Marthew McConel, Sussex .. 1771 

Peteman, Daniel, Staten Island, and Hetihiah Sluck 1770 

Peterman, Gasper. Burlington, and Mary Vaughan, Burlington 1761 

Peterman, Samuel, Burlington, and Amy McDanelly 1783 

Peters. James. Mansfield, and Abigail Field. Mansfield 1773 

Peters. John, Burlington, and Hannah Symouds. Barlington 1736 

Petersie. Hassel. Essex, and Fytie Van houten. Bergen 1759 

Peterson. Aaron, Cumberland, and Martha Hollinshead 1779 

Peterson, Abraham. Hackensack, and Lenah Mandego, Hackensack . 1763 

Peterson. Charles. Salem, and Ann Kent, Salem 1691 

Peterson, Daniel. Fairfield, and Priscilla Izard ... 1760 

Peterson, David. Gloucester, and Amy Flaningam 1785 

Peterson. I S ilem, and Sarah Beettle, Salem 1761 

Peterson, George, Gloxicester, and Judah Horn 1781 

Peterson, George, Salem, and Marget Carrey 1782 

Peterson, Hance, Cumberland, and Rachel Simmons, Cape May 1750 

Peterson, Hance. Cape May. and Rebeckah Goff 1773 

PeteTson. Frederick. Cumberland, and Ellener Lore 1775 

Peterson, John, Maurice River, and Jane Shropshire. Maurice River. .1760 

Peterson. Lucas. Salem, and Catharine Peterson, Salem 1715 

Peterson. Samuel, Cape May. and Sarah Armour 1775 

Peterson. William. S ilein. and Elizabeth Hughes 1746 

Peterson, William, Manington, and Rachel Diekery, Maniugton 1765 

Peterson. William, Cumberland, and Elizabeth McGlaughlin 1782 

Pettinger. Abraham, Somerset, and Elizabeth Ganno, Hunterdon. .... 1738 

Pettinger, John, Freehold, and Rachel Liiu, Freehold 1759 

Pettinger, John. Readingtown, and Kenestie Scomp 1707 



June 


1 


June 


5 


Juue 


6 


Feb. 


1 


Aug. 


22 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


25 


Dec. 


4 


June 


13 


July 


21 


June 


5 


Nov. 


11 


May 


13 


Nov. 


19 


Feb. 


14 


July 


7 


Jan. 


6 


Feb. 


24 


Sept. 


14 


Jan. 


17 


April 


20 


Mar. 


5 


Oct. 


7 


Aug. 


26 


May 


24 


Dec. 


27 


Mar. 


25 


Dec. 


2 


Mar. 


18 


June 


30 


Mar. 


14 


Nov. 


20 


Sept. 


29 


June 


19 


Sept 


19 


July 


21 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


24 


Oct. 


17 


July 


5 


June 


12 


Aug. 


10 


May 


18 


Oct. 


•j 


June 


9 


April 


14 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 301 

Pettinger, Jobu, Amwell, and Lea Hogling, Aaiwell 1774 

Pettinger, Richard, Freehold, and Mary Devinney, Freehold 1751 

Pettinger, Richard, Freehold, and Lena Lane, Freehold 1756 

Pettet, William, Shrewsbury, and Rhodes B itl< r, Shrewsbury. . . . 1766 

Pettit, Adam, Lt. Egg Harbor, and Mary Shonrds, Egg H irbor 1747 

Pettit, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Haines, 1? irlington 1746 

Pettit, John, Northampton, and Joanna Simons, Northampton 1768 

Pettit, John, Burlington, and Catharine Chnrmely, Burlington 1774 

Pettit, Jonathan, Mansfield, and Anna Lamb 1779 

Pettit, Moses, Lt. Egg Harbour, and Anne Wainwright, Lt. Egg H'l/r. 1744 

Pettit, William, Burlington, and Charity Stevenson, Burlington 1740 

Pettit, William, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Bnrdsall 1770 

Pettit, Thomas, Monmouth, and Susaunab Oug, Mimniouth.. 1712 

Pevey, Adam, Burlington, and Susanna Shords, Burlington 1742 

Pew, James, Middle town, and Deborah Burge, Middletown 1741 

Pew, James, Middletown, and Roday Hatherway, Middletown 17*54 

Phares, Amariab, Middlesex, and Sarah Van Zandt 1780 

Pbenix, Ralph, Somerset, and Deborah Voorhes, Somerset 1779 

Philips, David, Sussex, and Ann Barber, Sussex 1770 

Philips, Lott, Hunterdon, and Hannah Hart, Hunterdon 1770 

Philips, William, Salem, and Susanna ( >ckey, Salem .... 1762 

Phillips, Henry, Hunterdon, and Sarah Phillips, Maidenhead 1765 

Phillips, Isaac, Amwell, and Anna Sharpe 17 7^ 

Phillips, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Inslee 177? 

Phillips, Job, Hunterdon, and Pheebe Howell, Hunterdon 1764 

Phillips, John, Northampton, and Damaris Parker, Northampton 1762 

Phillips, JoDas, Morristown, and Phebe Arnold, Morristown 

Phillips, Joseph, and Martha Scooley 1785 

Phillips, Pallmer, Hunterdon, and Susannah Hunt ... 1782 

Phillips, Peter, Burlington, and Sarah Sharp, Burlington 1729 

Phillips, Phillip, Hunterdon, and Mary Severens 1769 

Phillips, Ralph, Hunterdon, and Ruth Stout 1778 

Phillips, Samuel, and Hannah Stratton 1769 

Phillips, Simeon, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Titus 1769 

Phillips, Thomas, Maidenhead, and Catherine Phillips . . 1786 

Philpot, Abraham, Penns Neck, and Ann Gilljohnson, Penns Neck .... 1761 

Philpot, Francis, Lower Penns Neck, and Mary Evans 1772 

Philpot, William, Salem, and Margaret Bilderback.. 1774 

Piatt, William, Somerset, and Jemima Quick, Somerset 1774 

Pickle, Baltes, Jr., Hunterdon, and Sophia Vanhorne, Hunterdon. . . .1746 

Pidcock, Emanuel, Amwell, and Jemima Mulliner 1782 

Pidgeon, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Anne Bass, Burlington 1727 

Pidgeon, Robert, Monmouth, and Anne Brown, Burlington 1783 

Pidgeon, William, Trenton, and Sarah Hooper, Kingsbury 1758 

Pierce, Andrew, Cumberland, and Mary Jay 1 7 4 3 

Pierce, Edward, Burlington, and Catherine Talbott, Burlington. . . . 1730 



Oct. 


10 


Nov. 


9 


April 


19 


Dec. 


26 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


3 


Jan. 


2 




5 


Feb. 


22 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


2 


Nov. 


9 


Aug. 


1 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


9 


June 


19 


Nov. 


20 


July 


12 


Jau. 


17 


Mar. 


18 


Dec. 


19 


April 


25 


Sept. 


1 


April 


13 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


- 


Feb. 


11 


May 


21 


Sept. 


11 


July 


29 


Oct. 


16 


April 


3 


Feb. 


8 


Oct. 


7 


Oct, 


29 


April 


9 


N »v. 


24 


June 


27 


Nov. 


10 


June 


10 


June 


26 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


6 


Mar. 


16 


Jan. 


19 



302 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Pierse, Andrew, Newark, and Phebe Davis, Newark 1750 

Pierson, Isaac, Darlington, and Abigail Atkinson 1773 

Pierson, John, Middlesex, and Mary BL omfield, Middlesex 1747 

li rson, John, Burlington, and Sarah Stout, M tnmouth 1766 

Pierson, John, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Mnlford. ... 1783 

PierscD, William. Hunterdon, and Ann Gray, Hunterdon 1703 

Pike, James, Woodbridge, and Mary Harriot, Woodbridge 1717 

Pike, John, Middlesex, and Hannah Phillips, Middlesex 1741 

Tike, Nathaniel, Woodbridge, and Sarah Gach, Woodbridge 1747 

Pilgrim, Godfrey, Burlington, and Martha Batford 1771 

Pindar, John, Pennsylvania, and Mary Webster, Pennsylvania 1732 

Pine, lit njamin, Gloucester, and Priscilla Inskeep 1773 

Pine, Isaac, Salem, and Sarah Haines 1791 

Pine, S mniel. Gloucester, and Mary Eves, Burlington 1775 

Pine, William, Gloucester, and Judith Lippincott, Burlington 1780 

Pinkertom David, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Fitzrandolph, Bucks, Pa 1757 

Pintard, John, Shrewsbury, and Mary Vandyke, Shrewsbury 1761 

Pintard, Samuel, Monmouth, and Mary Burden, Monmouth 1761 

Pintard, William, Shrewsbury, and Hanuar Scott. Shrewsbury 1701 

Pippet, Moses, Burlington, and Sarah Ivins, Burlington 1775 

Pippinger, William, Hunterdon, and Sarah Vanhorne 1767 

Pippit, John, Northampton, and Lucretia Hooper, Northampton 1784 

Pirson, Benjamin, Jr., Morris Town, and Abigail Condict, Morris T'n 1779 

Pitman, John, Burlington, and Hannah Matson, Burlington 1757 

Pitman, John, Burlington, and Theodotia Roberts 1702 

Pitman, Jonathan, Burlington, aud Susannah Bowen 1771 

Pitman, Joshua, Burlington, and Sarah Wiles, Burlington 1741 

Pitman, Uriah, Middlesex, and Ann Matson, Burlington 17»>2 

Pitman, William, Burlington, and Hannah Loker, Burlington 1741 

Pitney, James, Jr., Morris Town, and Elizabeth Carmichael, Morrist'n. 1780 

Pittman, John, Burlington, and Mary Saul, Burlington .1731 

Piatt, Samuel. Gloucester, and Unice linyard, Gloucester 1770 

Piatt, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Dennis, Monmouth 1739 

Flatts, Thomas, Alloways Creek, and Myrtilla Curtis 1781 

Platts, David, Cumberland, and Lettitia Gillman, Cumberland 1763 

Platts, Jonah, and Sarah Stretch 1751 

I 'laskett, John, Philadelphia, and Phebe Biles, Philadelphia 1733 

Pleadwell, Edward, Philadelphia, and Ann Clifton 1733 

I'l. dger, Joseph, Salem, and Mary McK< en, Salem L762 

PL ssent, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Ruth Reed 1778 

Plum, Benjamin, Princetown, and Mary Campbell, Princetown 1763 

Plumly, Jacob, Amwell, and Jean I k>ug< s 1780 

Plummer, John Salem, and Elizabeth Brian 1778 

Plummer, Rol ert, Salem, and Margarett Holston, Salem 1769 

Pocklanton, William, Philadelphia, and Margaret Jones, Philadelphia. 1731 
Pogue, James, Salem, and Margaret Stovelstump 1770 



May 


3 


Dec. 


25 


Dec. 


1 


May 


15 


Nov. 


17 


Oct, 


1 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


10 


Feb. 


2 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


10 


April 


16 


Jan. 


16 


May 


25 


May 


12 


Feb. 


3 


April 


23 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


8 


Aug. 


2 2 


Jan. 


26 


Dec. 


20 


Mar. 


12 


Feb. 


8 


Mar. 


5 


Aug. 


3 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


4 


Mar. 


25 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


1 


May 


3 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


27 


Oct. 


11 


Aug. 


29 


Sept. 


11 


July 


15 


Feb. 


18 


Jan. 


26 


May 


19 


Oct, 


24 


June 


25 


Mar. 


20 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 303 

Pohluian, Daniel, Kensington, Pa., and Sarah Hassam 1788 Feb. 7 

Poinsed, John, Burlington, and Susannah Cross, Burlington 1740 Sept. 28 

Poleinus, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Robens 1759 -lime 7 

Polemus, Tobias, Monmouth, and Partheuia Emley, Burlington 1748 Dec. 7 

Polhamus, Daniel, Raritan, and Willemtje Kipp, Raritan 1750 May 12 

Polbemus. Albert, Middletown, ami Alte Vanmater, Middletown 17<i2 Mar. 23 

Polhemus, John, Monmouth, ami Mary Van Mater, Moninouth 1758 Nov. 11 

Toling. John, Middletown, and Mary Fry, Middletown 1755 Mar. 11 

Poling, Samuel, Middletown, and Elizabeth Fry, Middletown 1755 Mar. 11 

Polhemus Cornelius, Monmouth, and Eleanor Anderson, Hunterdon.. 1741 June 3 

Pool, George, Middletown, and Mary Herbert, Middletown 1760 April 10 

Pool, John, Somerset, and Sarah Field, Middlesex 1748-9 Mar. 9 

Poole, John, Burlington, and Sarah Mead, B irlington 1740 May 12 

Poole, Thomas, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Blakely 1747-8 Jan. 28 

Pope, William, Salem, and Mary Horsley, Salem 1702 Nov. 24 

Porch, Samuel, Gloucester, and Mary Henry 1785 Feb. 23 

Porter, John, Middletown, and Alice Mount, Middletown 1746 July 23 

Porter, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Knight, Mount Holly 1771 May 18 

Porter, Joseph, Mount Holly, and Mary Byrne, Mount Holly 1781 Oct. J 3 

Porter, Richard, Hunterdon, and Catharine Frasier, Monmouth .... 1749 Nov. 17 

Porter, William, Hunterdon, and Anne Oukee 1768 Oct. 3 

Post, Adriaen, Aquacknonck, and Hannah Post. 1753 Oct. 11 

Post, Frans, Essex, and Brechie Heuion 1750 June 1 

Post, Garret, Bergen, and Mary Hannion, Bergen 1759 Oct. 15 

Post, Henry, Pumpton, and Elizabeth Board 1780 June 12 

Post, Jacobus T., Ramapo, and Rachel Alyee 1783 Mar. 11 

Post, Johannis, Bergen, and Catharine Stimers, Bergen 1753 July 11 

Post, John P., Saddle River, and Catherine Kogh 1783 Mar. 18 

Post, Thomas, Essex, and Catherine Freeland 1784 July 23 

Potter, Edward, Woodbridge, and Christian Cutter, Woodbridge 1761 Dec. 28 

Potter, Elis, Middlesex, and Agnes Crowell, Middlesex 1763 Jan. 31 

Potter, Ephraim, Good Luck, and Sarah Whitess, Good Luck 1763 Mar. 2 

Potter, Isaac, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Appleget 1761 Dec. 16 

Potter, James, Shrewsbury, and July Midelton, Burlington 1762 Mar. 13 

Potter, Nicolis, Freehold, and Deborah Leinmou, Freehold 1755 Feb. 15 

Potter, ( )liver, Monmouth, and Constant Woodward 1786 Jan. 7 

Potter, Preserve, Monmouth, and Catherine Cunningham, Monmouth. 1742 July 22 

Potter, Robert, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Brown, Shrewsbury 1765 April 17 

Potter, Thomas, Gloucester, and Rebecca Waiuwright, Gloucester .. . 1735 May 17 

Potts, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary Lee, Burlington 1750 Jan. 1 

Potts, Daniel, Kiugwood, and Rebecca Emley, Kingwood 1766 Aug. 8 

Potts, George, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Pearce, Shrewsbury 1758 Mar. 29 

Potts, John, Cumberland, and Hannah Tyler 1782 Oct. 19 

Potts, Joseph, Bordentown, and Elizabeth Moore 1769 Dec. 28 

Potts, Joseph, Kingwood, and Sarah Mott 1781 June 2 

Potts, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Susanna Kallam, Burlington 1741 Nov. 30 



304 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Potts, Samuel, Cranberry, and Amy Bayles 1770 

I Yitts, Thomas, and Mary Records 1G98 

l\ tts, Thomas, Bucks. Pa., and Rebecca Wright, Burlington 

Potts, Thomas, New Hanover, and Sarah Ashton 1777 

Potts, Thomas, Mansfield, and Rebecca King 1777 

Poulding, Cornelius, Orange, N. Y, and Elisabet Vandervoord 1763 

Pound, Elisha, Piscataway, and Elizabeth Laing, Somerset 1741 

Towel, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Perdue, Burlington 1729 

Towel, James, Kingwood, and Mary Reider 1780 

Towel, Richard, Gloucester, and Ann Cheesrnan ... 1783 

Powell, James, Philadelphia, and Mary Kille, Burlington 1740 

Powell, James. Northampton, and Susannah Lovett 1779 

Powell, Jonathan, Pennsylvania, and Margaret Callahan, Penna 1763 

Powell, John, Northampton, and Susannah Parker 1781 

Powell, Joseph, Northampton, and Anne Bishop, Northampton 1765 

Powell. Nathaniel, Northampton, and Rebecca Southwick, N'tkainpt'n. 1774 

Powell, Robert, and Mary Perkins 1696 

Powell, Robert, Burlington, and Mary Roads, Chester, Pa 1730 

Powell, Thomas, Bordentown, and Sarah Sickells 1770 

Powell, Thomas, and Rebecca Stow 1776 

Powell, William, Philadelphia, and Ruth Lippincott, Greenwich 1748 

Powell, William, Bucks. Pa., and Elizabeth Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa. ..17-1 

Powelsen, Henry, Burlington, and Mary Lippincott, Burlington 1760 

Tower, James, Hunterdon, and Rachel MacPherscn, Kingwood 1774 

Power, Nicholas, Somerset, and Elenor McCarty 1745 

Prall, Abraham, Amwell, and Rachel Huff 1772 

Trail, Isaac, Staten Island, and Charity Disosway, Staten Island 1775 

Prall, John, Amwell, and Amelia Coryell 1785 

Pratten, Thomas, Cape May, and Hannah Simpkins 1766 

Pratten, Thomas, < !ape May, and Hannah Cresse, Cape May. . . 1769 

Tray, John, Orange, N. Y., and Jane Misier 1784 

Predmore, Benjamin, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Moore, Middlesex . . 1739 

Predmore, John, Burlington, and Mary Hull, Middlesex 1767 

Predmore, Joseph, berth Ainboy, and Christian Moor 1746-7 

Preston, Abel, Philadelphia, and Hannah Hudson, Philadelphia 1731 

Preston, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Mackintosh 1733 

Preston, Joseph, Freehold, and Susannah Jones, Freehold 1759 

Preston, Thomas, Burlington, and Martha Moon 1737 

Preston, Thomas, Somerset, and Jane Clandennin 1750 

Tie-ton. William, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Gebeson, Shrewsbury. .. 1767 

Preston, W illiain, Jr., Freehold, and Rachel Compton 1745 

Price, David, Burlington, and Rebecca Ballenger 1777 

Price, Edward, New York, and Jane Webb, Woodbridge 1757 

Price. Ezekil, Mansfield, and Martha Adams 1781 

Price, Henry. Philadelphia, and Sarah Tompson, Philadelphia 1735 

Price, James, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Ely, Trenton 1737 



April 


23 


June 


20 


Nov. 


20 


Sept. 


13 


Aug. 


14 


July 


27 


Aug. 


10 


Oct. 


7 


Dec. 


1 


Sept. 


5 


Jan. 


4 


May 


23 


Oct. 


21 


Nov. 


9 


Sept. 


10 


Dec. 


10 


Nov. 


18 


Aug. 


21 


June 


9 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


12 


July 


24 


Nov. 


2 


Sept. 


9 


Oct. 


12 


Feb. 


7 


Aug. 


27 


June 


21 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


1 


Jan. 


20 


Mar. 


9 


Sept. 


29 


July 


24 


April 


4 


July 


25 


Feb. 


28 


April 


11 


June 


18 


May 


23 


June 


14 


Feb. 


14 


July 


9 


April 


19 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 305 

Price, James, South Amboy, and Margaret Cranford, South Amboy...l760 

Price, John, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Carril, Pennsylvania 1728 

Price, Johu, Bnrliugton, and Sarah Sonthwick, Burlington 1731 

■Price, John, Burlington, and Mary Burne, Gloucester 1737 

Price, Joseph, Bunterdon, and M irgaret Gifting 1756 

Pric ■. Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Abigail Halstead, Shrewsbury 17(52 

Price, Joseph, Burlington, and Trie idocia Etockhill 1779 

Price, Joseph, WilliDgborcugh, and Catharine Johnson 1782 

Price, Michael, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Cutis, Shrewsbury 1760 

Price, Reese, Burlington, and Mary Reeves 1747 

Price, Robert P., I New Jersey, and Lizy Hugg, New Jersey 1766 

Price, Robert Fr'd,2 Haddonfield, and Mary Tliorne, Gloucester 1761 

Price, Robert Fr'd,3 Gloucester, and Mary Briant 1784 

Price, Samuel, Sussex, and Sarah Burges 1773 

Price, Stephen, Monmouth, and Anne Lewis, Burlington 1768 

Price, Thomas, Hauover, and Edith Hort, Burlington 1747 

Price, William, Salem, and Ann Crocker, Salem 1686-7 

Price, William, Burlington, and Ruth Reylius, Burlington 17 — 

Price, William, Burlington, and Mary Lining, Burlington 1730 

Price, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Harrison, Philadelphia 1731 

Price, William, Burlington, and Rebecca Church.. . . . 1736 

Pricket, John, Burlington, and Mary Erwin 1768 

Pricket, Stephen, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Butler, Perth Amboy. .1768 

Prickett, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Brookfield, Burlington 1739 

Prickett, Isaac, Burlington, and Hannah Phillips. . . 1786 

Prickett, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Parker, Burlington 1728 

Prickett, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Bishop. 1733 

Prickett, Jacob, Evesham, and Dorothy Springer 1745 

Prickett, John, Burlington, and Jane Garwood, Burlington 1750 

Prickett, Levi, Evesham, and Zilpha Austin, Evesham 1775 

Prickett, Paul, Gloucester, and Rachel String 1785 

Prickett, Zachariah, Northampton, and Agnes Stackhouse 1783 

Prickitt, Jacob, Northampton, and Mary Peacock 1784 

Prickitt, Johu, Evesham, and Jane Garwood, Evesham 1750 

Prickitt, John, Northampton, and Sybilla Hammit 1784 

Prickitt, Richard, Burlington, and Margaret Crispin, Burlington. ... 1756 

Pridmore, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Zuly Cramer. ^_. 1778 

Prier, Jacob, Staten Island, and Rachel Reckhow, Staten Island 1746 

Prier, Jacob, Bergen, and Sarah Van Houten 1792 

Priest, Johu Pleadwell, Gloucester, and Ann Thomas 1773 

Priest, Robert, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Robinson 1783 

Priestly, John, Bristol. Pa., and Mary Murray 1784 

Priugle, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Kint-an, Perth Amboy. 1759 

1 Robert Friend Price— his second marriage. 

2 Robert Friend Price— his first marria 
;1 Robert Friend Price. Jr. 

20 



Se|,t. 


2 


Sept. 


9 


Jan. 


29 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


16 


Dec. 


9 


May 


21 


May 


16 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


14 


Oct. 


13 


Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


4 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


23 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


7 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


14 


Jan. 


11 


Feb. 


21 


Dec. 


16 


July 


19 


Sept. 


20 


May 


11 


July 


12 


Feb. 


27 


Aug. 


5 


Oct. 


6 


May 


31 


July 


12 


Jan. 


7 


April 


9 


Oct. 


8 


Jan. 


16 


Oct. 


15 


June 


21 


Aug. 


18 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


27 



306 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Prinn, Joseph, Hackensack, and Hester Banta, Hackensack 1750 

Prise, John, Evesham, ami Elisabeth Hillier, Burlington 1770 

Pritchard, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth King, Philadelphia. . . . 1774 
Probasco, Abraham, Shrewsbury, and Ellenor Vaudorn, Freehold . . 1761 

Probasco, John, Somerset, and Dinah Van Wicklow, Somerset 1753 

Prosser, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Richards, Gloucester 1737 

Prost, Philip, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hoffman 1778 

Proud, Abraham, Evesham, and Lucretia Shinu, Evesham 1784 

Proud, John, Mansfield, and Elizabeth Merriot, Mansfield 1774 

Prudden, Amos, Newark, and Dameras HarisoD, Newark 17G7 

Prudden, Joseph, Morris, and Easter Ay res, Somerset. 1770 

Pryer, John, Staten Island, and Eliah Woglum .... 1771 

Pryer, Samuel, Staten Island, and Anne Van Gilder, Staten Island . 1748-9 

Pugh, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Shawcross, Bucks, Pa 

Pulishfalt, i John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Ackerman ... 1780 

Pullen, 2 John, Egg Harbor, and Deborah Leeds, Egg Harbor 1748 

Puueo, Gabriel, and Mary Hort 1749 

Punner, Gabriel, Burlington, and Martha Stebbius, Burlington 1756 

Purcell, Dennis, Pennsylvania, and Ruth Cooper, Pennsylvania 1728 

Pursell, John, Pennsylvania, and Aune W. Coone, Pennsylvania 1761 

Pursell, John, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Logan, Bucks, Pa 1765 



KKMALES. 



P 



Packer, Bethenis, Gloucester, and William Loper, Jr., Salem 1759 

Packer, Rebecca, Burlington, and Joseph Buddha, Burlington 1741 

Packer, Rhoda, Burlington, and George Hammett, Burlington 1731 

Pacock, Priscilla, Burlington, and Francis Boswick, Burlington 1682 

Page, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Heury Hand, Cape May 1759 

Page, Lydia, Burlington, and Job Rainier, Burlington 1770 

Page, Lydia, and Thomas Hughes, Cape May 1788 

Page, Mary, Burlington, and Benjamin Wright, Burlington 1732 

Page, Mary, Cape May, and Elias Hand, Cape May 1762 

Page, Mary, Burlington, and John Brown, Burlington 1780 

Page, Prisilla, Burlington, and William Ivins, Burlington 1767 

Page, Sarah. Burlington, and Thomas Jones, Burlington. 1738 

Page, Sarah, Salem, and James Hewes, Salem 1770 

Page, Zermiah, Burlington, and Mahlon Thorn, Burlington 1761 

Pain, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and James Freeman, Woodbridge 1759 

Paine, Rachel, Woodbridge, and Daniel Compton, Woodbridge 1758 

Paine, Sarah, and Abraham Vail, Perth Amboy 1772 

Paine, Susannah, and William Stockain, Burlington 1778 

Pairpoint, Sarah, and Jesse Bacon, Salem 1773 

Palmer, Ann, Burlington, and Thomas Kilpatrick. Burlington , 1761 

1 Usually written Pulisfelt; now commonly contracted to Pulis. 

2 See Neale. Hugh. 



Aug. 


8 


Dec. 


6 


June 


25 


Nov. 


9 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


9 


Feb. 


24 


Oct. 


4 


July 


23 


May 


15 


Nov. 


26 


April 


27 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


1 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


3 


Sept. 


18 


May 


21 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


26 


Mar. 


27 


Feb. 


21 


Feb. 


19 


Dec. 


26 


April 


25 


Dec. 


3 


May 


10 


May 


3 


Mar. 


27 


Aug. 


1 


April 


17 


July 


18 


Feb. 


23 


May 


16 


Aug. 


11 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


20 


Sept. 


9 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 307 

Palmer, Catherine, Philadelphia, and Samuel Palmer, Philadelphia. .. 1749 

Palmer, Elizabeth, Burlington, ami Thomas Esdall, Burlington 1738 

Palmer, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Lias Brewer, Monmouth.. 1753 

Palmer, Eleanor, Somerset, and Benjamin Hunt, Somerset 1748 

Palmer, Ester, New Jersey, ami Uobert McMasters, Pennsylvania.... 1777 

Palmer, Hannah, and Philip Hart, Hunterdon 1780 

Palmer, Mary 

Palmer, Mary, Shrewsbury, and John Statesir, Shrewsbury 1757 

Palmer, Sarah, Staten Island, and Abraham Nickhow, Staten Island .1756 

Palmer. Thomasine, Philadelphia, and Alexander Keith, Delaware 1731 

Palmmar, Anna, Monmouth, and Christen Graten, Monmouth 1762 

Pancoast, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Josiuh Hillman, Gloucester 1761 

Pancoast, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Bryan, Burlington 1764 

Pancoast, Mary, Gloucester, and Joser.h Garwood, Burlington 1766 

Pancost, Elizabeth, Salem, and Joseph Bacon, Salem 1693 

Pancost, Hannah, Hanover, and Samuel Wardell, Hanover 1763 

Pangborn, Susannah, Middlesex, and Andrew Willson, Middlesex. ...1759 

Panics, Thomasin, Gloucester, and Uobert Roberts, Gloucester 1762 

Parol man, Catherine, and James Kint, Bergen , 1780 

Parent, Easter, Monmouth, and David Gordon, Monmouth 1767 

Parent, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Benjamin Applegate, Middlesex. . . . 1729 

Parent, Lydia, Middlesex, and Joseph Cheesemau, Middlesex 1740 

Parent, Mary, Monmouth, aud Andrew Pearce, Monmouth 1744 

Parent, Mercy, Upper Freehold, aud Andrew Peairs, Upper Freehold . 1744 

Parent, Rebecca, Monmouth, and James Reynolds. Monmouth 1729 

Parent, Rebecka, and Amos Lloyd, Hunterdon 1780 

Parent, Sarah, and William Lock, Cumberland 1778 

Parigan, Rehaner, Pennsylvania, and Samuel Herbert, Monmouth .... 1752 

Parke, Mary, and John Jerrard, Sussex. ... 1785 

Parker, Ann, Burlington, and Thomas Savage, Somerset. 1767 

Parker, Anne, and Aser Homer, Monmouth 1770 

Parker, Catharine, Monmouth, and Giles Williams, Monmouth 1761 

Parker, Charity, Burlington, aud Japhet Fennimore, Burlington 1780 

Parker, Damaris, Northampton, and John Phillips, Northampton 1762 

Parker, Dorothy, aud Matthias Johnson, Burlington 1779 

Parker, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Josiah Southwick, Burlington 1728 

Parker, Elizabeth, aud John Frohock, Bucks 1732 

Parker, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Valentine Ayrs, Burlington 1749 

Parker, Elizabeth, Somerset, and James McColum, Somerset 1750 

Parker, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Ebeuezer Wardell, Shrewsbury. 1756 

Parker, Elizabeth, and David Carmack, Monmouth 1773 

Parker, Elizabeth, and David Brooks, Cumberland 1778 

Parker, Elizabeth, Burliugton, and Jesse Leech, Burlington 1780 

Parker, Haunab, Burlington, and Maham Southwick, Burlington. .. 1737 
Parker, Hannah, Monmouth, and John Mitchell, Monmouth. ... ... 1762 

Parker, Hannah, Burlington, and John Andrews, Burlington 1776 



Oct. 


16 


July 


1 


Jan. 


27 


Jan. 


16 


Oct. 


11 


April 


16 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


15 


July 


19 


April 


18 


Dec. 


18 


June 


9 


Aug. 


7 


May 


23 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


22 


April 


13 


July 


18 


Mar. 


11 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


11 


June 


23 


May 


20 


Dec. 


1 


April 


2 


Feb. 


15 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


26 


Alar. 


16 


Oct, 


28 


Mar. 


5 


Feb. 


18 


April 


23 


July 


4 


April 


3 


Feb. 


28 


May 


22 


July 


3 


Dec. 


11 


June 


21 


June 


7 


April 


13 


Feb. 


7 



308 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Parker, Johanna, Monrnoutb, and Robert Harbert, Monmouth 1759 April 19 

Parker, Johannah, Monrnoutb, and Thomas Lippincott, Monmouth. .. 1700 April 19 

Parker, Lydia, Monmouth, and George Allen, Monmouth 1718-9 Mar. 21 

Parker, Lydia, Monmouth, aud Stephen Mersereau, Staten Island ...1765 Oct. 11 

Parker, Margaret, aud Isaac Brooks, Burlington 1778 Nov. 25 

Parker, Martha, Burlington, and John Gaskill, Burlington 1764 June 7 

Parker, Martha, aud John Shinn, Northampton 1775 Oct. 1 

Parker, Mary, Burlington, and Jacob Prickett, Burlington 1728 July 19 

Parker, Mary, Monmouth, and John Parker, Monmouth 1740 Jan. 1 

Parker, Mary. Burlington, and Adam Akly. Burlington 176G Feb. 17 

Parker, Mary, and Marcus Parker, Burlington 1772 May 11 

Parker, Mary, Burlington, aud Samuel Brooks, Burlington 1782 Bee. 7 

Parker, Mary, aud Clement Cordery, Gloucester 1781 June 14 

Parker, Naomi, Monmouth, and Jabez Treadwell, Monmouth 1744 Nov. 5 

Parker, Prudence, Monrnoutb, and Richard Longstreet, Monmouth. .. 17G3 July 27 

Parker, Rebecca, Burlington, and Roger Heartley, Pennsylvania 1727 June 21 

Parker, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Robert Jewel, Philadelphia 1735 Nov. 8 

Parker, Sarah, and Beriah West, Shrewsbury 1761 Oct. 2 

Parker, Sarah, and Jacob Brown, Monmouth 1777 Oct. 16 

Parker, Susannah, and John Powell, Northampton 1784 Oct. 21 

Parkisou. Esther, and William Boyd, Somerset 1775 June 27 

Parks, Anne, Hunterdon, and William Chamberlin, Hunterdon 1771 Mar. (5 

Parks, Jerusba, New Jersey, and John Eastlack, New Jersey 1770 May 22 

Parks, Ursula, Hopewell, and John Vankirk, Hopewell 1770 July 4 

Parks, Rosanna, Burlington, and Gilbert Green, Burlington. . . . 1771 Oct. 9 

Parlman, Elisabeth, and Peter Stukel, Orange, N. Y 1763 Feb. 19 

Parlmen, Elizabeth, and Isaac Storms, Bergen 1790 Feb. 27 

Parmer, Elizabeth, and ^ illiam Barber, Middlesex 1766 July 21 

Parn, Elizabeth, Pennsylvania, and Benjamin Pearson, Pennsylvania. .1728 Sept. 16 

Parrent, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Abraham Smith, Monmouth 1745 Sept. 25 

Parrison, Elizabeth, and William Luke, Monmouth 1762 Apiil 12 

Parrock, Priscilla, Philadelphia, and Peter Brown, Philadelphia 1738 April 7 

Parrott, Elizabeth, Morris, aud lieury Howell, Morris 1769 May 20 

Parrott, Isabel, and Robert Walker, Alloways Creek 1760 April 16 

Parry, Ann, Philadelphia, and John Patterson, Philadelphia 1736 Aug. 21 

Parsall, Elenor, Orange Co., N. Y., aud Jacob Mace, Orange Co., N. Y.1764 May 24 

Parsell, Esther, Somerset, and Conrad Converse (Lamerson) Somerset. 1750 Oct. 27 

Parsons, Ann, Gloucester, and James Coulter, Gloucester 1771 Nov. 1 

Parsons, Rachel, Cape May, and Thomas Paige, Cape May 1773 April 12 

Parvin, Phebe, Cumberland, and Adam Hoskel, Cumberland 1763 Oct. 6 

Pascall, Mary, and James Paterson, Salem 1779 June 14 

Paschall, Sarah, and George Wills, Burlington 1787 April 3 

Passell, Mary, Somerset, and Samuel Tiltou, Monmouth 1749 Jan. 6 

Paterson, Elizabeth, and Joseph Smith, Redingtown 1782 April 13 

Paterson, Frances, Princeton, aud Thomas Iiwin, Princeton 1768 Aug. 30 

Paterson, Margaret, Sussex, aud Alexander Paterson, Sussex 1765 June 20 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



309 



Paterson, Mary, and Hezekiah Mount, Monmouth 1778 June 20 

Paton, Elizabeth, and John Brown, Philadelphia 1777 Nov. '21 

Patten, Charity, Monmouth, and John Chambers, Monmouth 1750 April 12 

Patten, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Peter Ackerman, Middletown ...1760 Nov. 3 

Patten, Johanna, and John Armstrong, Middlesex 1768 Feb. 15 

Fatten, Margaret, Middlesex, and Robert Martin, Middlesex 1761 May 1 

Patterson, Esther, Monmouth, and William Hodson, Monmouth 1713 Jan. 7 

Patterson, Hannah, and Jacob Swiyer, Burlington . . 1758 Sept. 18 

Patterson, Hester, Monmouth, and Samuel Morris, Monmouth 1710 May 11 

Patterson, Joannah, Monmouth, and Richard Morris, Jr., Monmouth 1719 July 3 

Patterson, Lydia, Phila., and George Howell, Phila 1736 Aug. 21 

Patterson, Mary, Freehold, and Joseph Tiltou, Freehold 17-19 Mar. '23 

Patterson, Nancy, and Benjamin Leeds, Gloucester 1775 Aug 23 

Pattison. Bobotta, Burlington, and George Sitterthwaite, Burlington. 1727 June 20 

Pattison, Johannah, Freehold, and John Bhinoles, Shrewsbury 1766 Nov. 13 

Pattison, Mary, Evesham, and James Inskeep, Waterford, Gloucester. . 1747 Sept. 22 

Pattou, Susannah, Monmouth, and James Maybee 1757 April 25 

Paul, Debora, and Samuel Janney, Gloucester 1785 Nov. 12 

Paul, Sarah, Greenwich, and Henry Weatherby, Deptford 1754 May 1 

Paul, Susannah, Gloucester, and Robert McCall, Gloucester. ..... .1735-6 Mar. 11 

Paulin, Prudence, Burlington, and Josiah Wright, Burlington 1730 Feb. '23 

Paulison, Mary, Essex, and Adrian Jacobson, Essex . 1761 Sept. 8 

Paullin, Esther, and Jekiel Derwin, Salem 1750 Feb. 4 

Paulling, Rebecca, and Daniel Taylor, Cape May 1760 Sept. 3 

Paxton, Martha, Bucks, Pa., and Samuel Doau, Bucks, Pa 1757 May 21 

Paxton, Mary, and Henry Hartley, His Majesties 47 Reg. Foot 1773 Sept. 14 

Payday, Judith, and John Shaw, Cumberland 1786 Oct. 8 

Payne, Mary, and John Tatom, Gloucester 1784 May 27 

Peace, Mary, Trenton, and William Yard, Trenton 1746 Sept. 11 

Peace, Sarah, Trenton, and Voicall Chubb, Phila 1715 Sept. 5 

Peachee, Mary, and John Baker 1696 Nov. 16 

Peachee, Charity, Burlington, and Edward Tuckett, Hunterdon 1732 June 19 

Peachee, Mary, and John Whitehead, Burlington 1733 July 27 

Peacock, Ann, and William Lowden, Burlington 1785 Oct. 13 

Peacock, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Sharp, Burlington 1754 May 2 

Peacock, Elizabeth, and James Peed, Burlington 1778 June 16 

Peacock, Hannah, and Samuel Taylor, Evesham ... 1779 Aug. 23 

Peacock, Lydia, and Barzillai Sharp, Evesham 1785 Feb. 15 

Peacock, Mary, and Jacob Prickitt, Northampton 1784 May 31 

Peacock, Susannah, and Isaac Sharp, Evesham 1779 Aug. 23 

Peak, Susannah, Gloucester, and Lott Ridgway, Springfield 1750 Dec. 3 

Peake, Jane, and Daniel Stockton, Burlington 1780 Jan. 8 

Pearce, Elizabeth Ann, and Abraham Cottnam, Hunterdon 1764 June 11 

Pearce, Hester, Elizabeth Town, and George Fitchet, Long Island. . .1759 Jan. 5 

Pearce, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and George Potts, Shrewsbury 1758 Mar, 29 

Pearse, Catharine, Monmouth, and Thomas Roberson, Monmouth. . . . 1749 July 18 



3io NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Pearson, Ann, Arawell, and Joseph Smith, Am well 1773 

Pearson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Hutchinson, Middlesex 1730 

Pearson, Ezabel, and Zebulou Webb, Hanover 1762 

Pearson, Hannah, Bucks, Pa., and Ephraim Fenton, Bucks, Pa .... 1736 

Pearsou, Katheriue, and Archibald Wm. Yard, Trenton .1768 

Pearson, Mary, and Philip Quigley, Burlington 1733 

Pearson. Rachel, Burlington, and John Douglass, Burlington 1739 

Pearson, Theodosia, Burlington, and Abram Hunt, Hunterdon 1764 

Peas, Anne, and John Dilks, Gloucester 1780 

Peasner, Hannah, and Thomas French, Cape May 1774 

Peck, Hannah, Salem, and Robert Boner, Salem 1761 

Peck, Martha, Cumberland, and Thomas - Brown, Cumberland 1762 

Peck, Rachel, and Michael Hoskel, Cumberland 1773 

Peck, Rebecka, and Francis Brewster, Cumberland 1758 

Peck, Ruth, and David Dare, Cumberland . 1778 

Pederick, Grace, Burlington, and Robert Gillam, Burlington 1745 

Pederick, Sarah, Salem, and Samuel Lerich, Salem 1730 

Pedric, Bachel, and Jacob Stanton, Upper Penns Neck 1785 

Pedrick, Elizabeth, and Judah Townsend, Lower Penns Neck 1771 

Pedrick, Kesiah, aud Jacob Ridgway, Woolwich 1789 

Pedrick. Mary, and Thomas Hughes, Salem 1727 

Pees, Kebecca, and Rulef Voorhees, Monmouth 1768 

Peirce, Catharine, aud Jeremiah Dilks, Gloucester 1780 

Peirce, Mary, and Coleman Combs, Hunterdon. . 1770 

Peirce, Mercy, Middlesex, and Stephen Warue, Middlesex 1729 

Peirson, Elizabeth, and Edmund Cain, Hunterdon 1780 

Peirson, Mary, and John Jaquett, Pennsylvania 1782 

Pelton, Elizabeth, Hopewell, and Charles Saxton, Amwell 1775 

Pelton, Rebekah, Monmouth, and Edward White, Monmouth 1742 

Penquite, Hester, Evesham, and Samuel Stackhouse, Springfield 1779 

Penrow, Mary, Springfield, and Isaac Webb, Springfield 1783 

Pensiler, Elisabeth, and Alexander Fleming. Hunterdon .... 1765 

Penton, Elizabeth, and Samuel King, Salem 1761 

Penton, Margarett, and Joseph Penton, Salem 1771 

Pepert, Rose, Gloucester, aud Nicholas Fye, Gloucester 1761 

Pepper, Mary, Philadelphia, and George Broadwater, Philadelphia. .. 1738 

Peppitt, Rachel, Burlington, and Jacob Cooper, Burlington 1767 

Perce, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Bennet, Monmouth 1763 

Perdue, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Isaac Powel, Burlington 1729 

Perine, Abigail, Middlesex, and John Abraham, Middlesex 1759 

Perine, Anna, Middlesex, and William Mount, Middlesex 1761 

Perine, Anne, Matdeponix, and James Abrahams, Jr., Matdeponix . . . 1755 

Perine, Hannah, South Amboy, and William Dey, South Amboy 1756 

Perine, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and William Johnson, Perth Amboy. 1775 
Perine, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and James Willson, Jr., P'th Amboy. 1743 
Perine, Margaret, Monmouth, aud David Lee, Monmouth 1761 



Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


24 


July 


4 


April 


12 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


28 


Sept. 


24 


Feb. 


21 


Feb. 


1 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


28 


May 


14 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


15 


Mar. 


21 


Sept. 


10 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


15 


May 


11 


Jan. 


9 


Dec. 


25 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


13 


Feb. 


14 


Oct. 


10 


April 


24 


Sept. 


18 


Jan. 


4 


Feb. 


15 


July 


17 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


8 


Aug. 


4 


July 


1 


Mar. 


10 


July 


29 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


11 


Aug. 


31 


June 


! 17 


July 


1 


Aug. 


5 


Mar. 


3 


Aug. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 3 I I 

Ferine, Rebeoka, Perth Amboy, andJoseph Story, Perth Amboy 1750 Juue 4 

Perkins, Ann, Burlington, andJoseph Fenriimore, Burlington 1766 July 22 

Perkins, Bathasheba, Burlington, and Daniel Parke, Burlington 1739 Feb. 1 

Perkins, Elizabeth, and Isaac Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1777 April 12 

Perkins, Hannah, and George Hancock, Burlington 1779 Oct. 12 

Perkins, Mary, and Robert Powell 1696 Dec. 10 

Perkins, Mary, Middlesex, and Jonathan Freeman, Jr., Middlesex 17C0 April 12 

Perkins, Rebecca, Burlington, and Henry Nordyke, Burlington 1731 Jan. 6 

Perkins, Sarah, Burlington, and George Munrow, Burlington 1737 Nov. 23 

Perkins, Sarah, and Abraham Herdings, Burlington 1757 Aug. 18 

Perkins, Sarah, Burlington, and Richard Cramer, Burlington 1757 Oct. 10 

Perkins, Susannah, and Reuben Eldridge 1735 Dec. 7 

Perlee, Martha, Stat en Island, and Michael Moore 1750 Nov. 12 

Perlier, Martha, Perth Amboy, and Joseph Perriue, Perth Amboy. . 1742-3 Feb. 14 

Perlier, Mary, Middlesex, and James Perine, Middlesex ... 1739 June 13 

Perrine, Eva, and Johannes Stryker, Somerset 1782 Nov. 25 

Perrine, Margaret, Monmouth, and James Dye, Jr., Monmouth. .. 1749-50 Jan. 17 

Perry, Sarah, Burlington, and John George, Burlington 1772 Dec. 31 

Person, Anne, and William Tawger, Hunterdon 1778 May 22 

Person, Joanna, and Zemus Condict, Moiris 1779 Feb. G 

Person, Mary, and Ichabod Spinning, Hanover 1779 Mar. 2 

Pertron, Rebecca, and Gilbert Lane, Somerset 1783 Nov. 25 

Petenger, Euphemia, Hunterdon, and Ashford Arrison, Hunterdon . . . 1769 May 9 

Peters, Abigail, and James Niel, Springfield 1778 Sept. 1 

Peters. Elizabeth, and Benajah Tomson 1778 Dec. 4 

Peters, Hannah, Northampton, and Amos Shreve, Northampton 1750 Aug. 2 

Peters, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and George Spofford, Philadelphia . . . 1728 Oct. 23 

Peterson, Ann, and Henry Congleton, Salem 1777 May 15 

Peterson, Catharine, Salem, and Lucas Peterson, Salem . . 1745 Oct. 17 

Peterson, Christiana, Bergen, and John Ackerman, Bergen 1760 Feb. 1 

Peterson, Elinor, and John Hand, Cape May 1737 Oct. 29 

Peterson, Elizabeth, Amwell, and Peter Rockafellow, Amwell 1774 Dec. 26 

Peterson, Elizabeth, Morristown, and John Pain, Morris Town 1778 June 22 

Peterson, Elizabeth, and William Dolbrow, Salem 1781 Nov. 10 

Peterson, Hannah, Freehold, and John Swiirn, Upper Freehold 1745 Dec. 23 

Peterson, Hannah, and John Cassidey, Bergen 1781 Feb. 10 

Peterson, Lydia, Cumberland, and Joshua Brick, Cumberland ... 1771 Aug. 5 

Peterson, Margaret, Salem, and Cornelius Copner 1732 June 15 

Peterson, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and James Hamilton, Perth Amboy. 1762 Nov. 20 

Peterson, Mary, Salem, and Israel Helmes, Salem 1729 Dec. 14 

Peterson, Mary, Salem, and David Edmiston, Salem 1765 Mar. 26 

Peterson, Mary, and William Bartleson, Salem 1773 June 15 

Peterson, Rebecca, Salem, and ( iharles Dent, Salem 1762 Dec. 18 

Peterson, Ruth, and Abraham Adams, Gloucester 1764 Jan. 27 

Peterson, Sarah, Egg Harbor, and Jeremiah Foster, Burlington. ..... 1782 Nov. 16 

Peterson, Susannah, and Jasper Clear 1784 Nov. 24 



312 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Pettet, Sarab, Hunterdon, and John Barton, Hunterdon 1775 

Pettet, Sarab, Cumberland, and Moses Ayar, Cumberland 1777 

Pettigrew, Jane, Burlington, and Thomas Newell, Burlington 1740 

Pettinger, Susanah, Somerset, and Roelef Vauduyn, Somerset 1752 

Pettit. Elizabeth, and Thomas Smith, Springfield 1773 

Pettit, Jean, and Abraham Stout, Hunterdon 1777 

Pettit, M.ary, Burlington, and Cornelius Maccleese, Burlington 1748 

Pettit, Mercy, Burlington, and Henry Peed, Burlington 1780 

Pettit, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Kirby, Burlington 1776 

Pettitt, Judith, Burlington, and John Adams, Burlington 1737 

Pettit, Lucretia, Burlington, and Thomas Haines, Burlington 1767 

Pettitt, Sarah, Middlesex, and John Applegate, Middlesex 1736 

Petty, Lydia, Monmouth, and Ichabod Bowrnian, Monmouth 1744 

Pevan, Naomi, aud Isaac Bozby 1776 

Pew, Abigail, and Jesse Darmou, Gloucester. 1783 

Pew, Catherine, Monmouth, aud Andrew Davison, Monmouth 1741 

Pew, Susannah, Middletown, and William Truax, Middletown 1753 

Phagens, Elizabeth, and William Gibbs, Burlington 1781 

Phares, Mary, Burlington, and Eliakim Stoops, Burlington. . 1754 

Pharo, Anne, and Samuel Morrow, Burlington 1764 

Phifer, Anne, and Jonathan Alcott, Gloucester. 1782 

Philips, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and James Grant, Philadelphia 1730 

Philips, Frances, and John Bainbridge, Hunterdon 1745 

Philips, Jane, and David Davis, Burlington 1759 

Philips, Rebecca, Maidenhead, and Robert Stockdon, Somerset 1740 

Phillips, Catharine, and Thomas Phillips, Maidenhead 1786 

Phillips, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Robert Hunt, Hunterdon 1768 

Phillips, Elizabeth, aud William Troth, Evesham 1787 

Phillips, Frances, Maiden Head, and Jonathan Deano, Perth Amboy. 1775 

Phillips, Frauky, Hunterdon, aud Joseph Hart, Hunterdon 1764 

Phillips, Hannah, Middlesex, and Johu Pike, Middlesex 1744 

Phillips, Hannah, Burlingtou, aud James Allen, Burlington 1754 Jan. 

Phillips, Hannah, aud Richard Hunt, Hunterdon 1783 

Phillips, Hannah, and Isaac Prickett, Evesham 1786 

Phillips, Kesiah, and Gershom Lott, Hunterdon 1768 

Phillips, Mary, Hunterdon, and Nathaniel Hunt, Hunterdon 1763 

Phillips, Sarah, Monmouth, aud George Lofetra, Monmouth 1746 

Phillips, Sarah, Maidenhead, and Henry Phillips, Hunterdon 1765 

Phillips, Sarah, aud Jonathan Stout, Hopewell 1775 

Phillips, Sarah, and Joseph Davis, Hunterdon 1779 

Phillips, Sarah, Northampton, and Henry Kabson, Philadelphia 1782 

Phillips, Susannah, Pennsylvania, and Amall Hancock, Pennsylvania. .1727 

Philips, Susanna, and Richard Paterson, Somerset 1779 

Phillpot, Margaret, Salem, and Samuel Elwell, Salem 1761 

Philpot, Catherine, and Samuel Lummus, Salem 1784 

Philpot, Mary, Penus Neck, aud Sinneck Sinnickson, Penns Neck 1762 



Nov. 


25 


July 


16 


Jan. 


20 


April 


4 


Mar. 


23 


May 


10 


Oct. 


4 


Nov. 


8 


May 


20 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


23 


Oct- 


6 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


15 


May 


7 


July 


27 


Sept. 


17 


Jan. 


16 


Sept. 


27 


Mar. 


20 


July 


13 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


18 


Sept. 


14 


Mar. 


5 


Oct. 


7 


May 


7 


Feb. 


6 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


28 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


1 


May 


21 


Dec. 


16 


Mar. 


19 


Sept. 


26 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


19 


April 


1 


Aug. 


25 


Oct. 


17 


July 


31 


Aug. 


31 


Dec. 


31 


April 


6 


Sept. 


2 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



3IJ 



Philpot, Pbebe, Buck?, Pa., and David Spear, Backs, P;l 1765 Sept. 7 

Philpot, Susannah, Salem, and Joseph Corbett, Salem 1769 Dec. 28 

Phipps, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Charles Vandike, Burlington. .. .1752 Juue 27 

Piatt, Jaue, and Johu Sedam, Middlesex 1785 Mar. 24 

Pickle, Eve, Hunterdon, and Abraham Vanhorne, Hunterdou 1770 Dec. 21 

Pickle, Eetrina, aud Johu Bachman, Huuterdou 1775 Aug. 30 

Pickle, Margaret, and David Trimmer, Morris 1778 June 13 

Pickle, Mary, and Abram Bloom, Huuterdou 1780 Sept. 20 

Pickle, Sophia, aud James Kiggin, Philadelphia 1780 Dec. 2 

Pier, Gatherin, Essex, aud Garrabrant Garrabrants, Essex 1747 Oct. 28 

Pierce, Elizabeth, aud Johu Cleverley, Gloucester 1730 May 28 

Pierce, Elizabeth, and Job Crane, Essex 1786 Aug. 25 

Piersou, Abigail, Middlesex, aud John Grave 1744 Oct. 15 

Pierson, Elizabeth, aud Adam Parker, Burlington 1783 Feb. 22 

Piersou, Jane, Morris, aud Andrew Durham, Somerset 177!) Dec. 21 

Pierson, Martha, Middlesex, and David Leforge, Middlesex 1757 June 4 

Pierscn, Sarah, Morris, and Uzal Crane, Morris 1778 Nov. 3 

Pike, Sarah, and John Elstou, Middlesex 1768 Nov. 17 

Pileon, Mary, Middlesex, and John Cox, Middlesex 1757 April 28 

Piles, Elizabeth, Gloucester, aud Joshua Lord, Gloucester 1772 Aug. 5 

Pimne, Sarah, aud George Elkiutou, Burlington 1748 Feb. 18 

Pine, Rachel, and David Davis, Gloucester 1781 Sept. 29 

Pinkerton, Sarah, and John Moore, Hunterdon 1783 Jan. 22 

Pintard, Abigail, Shrewsbury, and John Tiltus, Shrewsbury 1754 Jan. 12 

Pintard, Abigail, Monmouth, aud Jouathan Lewis, Richm'd Co., N. Y.1756 Aug. 28 

Pinyard, Rachel, Gloucester, aud John Munyon, Gloucester 1768 April 26 

Pinyard, Uuice, Gloucester, and Samuel Piatt, Gloucester 1770 Dec. 17 

Pipiuger, Mary, Readington, and Uriah Chamberlin, Amwell 1773 Jan. 2 

Pippeuger, Leua, and Deverick Demott, Hunterdon 1782 Oct. 14 

Pitcock, Susauuah, and Samuel Doughton, Gloucester 1773 July 12 

Pitman, Bethena, Monmouth, aud Elias Trueaxe, Monmouth 1761 Jan. 26 

Pitmau, Jaue, New Hanover, and Robert Kindle, Chesterfield 1748 , Oct. 22 

Pitmau, Mary, aud Abraham Clevenger, Monmouth 1760 Mar. 9 

Pitmau, Sarah, Burliugton, and Abraham Allen, Burlington 1782 Oct. 28 

Pitt, Catharine, and James Ogdeu, Middlesex 1780 Nov. 6 

Pittenger, Rachel, Monmouth, and Joseph Bonuel, Monmouth 1767 May 9 

Pittman, Isabella, Burlington, and James Condon, Burlington 1762 Jan. 21 

Pittman, Rebecca, and John Oakford, Salem 1732 Oct. 6 

Place, Rachel, Woodbridge, and Reuben Buun 1744 Juue 18 

Piatt, Ann, Gloucester, and Joseph Roberts, Woolwich 1770 Feb. 12 

Piatt, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Nathan Starkey, Burlington 1736 Nov. 1 

Piatt, Elizabeth, and Lawrence Minor, Burlington 1761 Dec. 8 

Piatt, Jane, Burliugton, and Abraham Clevinger, Burlington . 1742 July 26 

Piatt, Judith, Cumberland, aud Ephraim Tarry, Cumberland 1761 Sept. 9 

Piatt, Mary, and William Assou, Burlington 1746 Feb. 9 

Piatt, Sarah, aud Samuel Ivins, Burlington 1766 Dec. 20 



314 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Platts, Rhodi, Cumberland, and Daniel Bishop, Cumberland 17(52 

Pledger, Dorothy, Maunington, and Brothwait Tuft, Salem 1762 

Pledger, Mary, Salem, and John Ewen, Salem 1745 

Plomer, Elizabeth, Alloways Creek, and Jacob Thompson, Allo'ys C'k 1775 

Plummer, Rachel, Salem, and Job Hilmau, Salem 1778 

Plumley, Jemimah, and Alexander McDonald, Bucks, Pa 1781 

Plumley, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and John Gale, Pennsylvania 1732 

Plunkett, Mary, Penns Neck, and Gustavus Leeb, Upper Penns Neck. 1760 

Poest, Mary, and Isaac Van Houten, Bergen 1770 

Pointset, Ann, and Joseph Gaskill, Burlington 1777 

Poinsett, Susanna, and Richard Fordham, Philadelphia 1733 

Pointsway, Sarah, Burlington, and Bernard Grandon, Burlington 17-10 

Pointzett, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Benjamin Bianiin, Burlington . . 1741 

Polhemus, Jane, and William Johnston, Monmouth 1782 

Polhemus, Altie, Somerset, and Volkert Douw, Somerset 1743 

Polhemus, Hannah, Hopewell, and Joseph Van Kirk, Amwell 1767 

Polhemus, Pathena, and Jacob Lowrence, Monmouth 1779 

Polhemus, Rebecca, and Tobeijas Neveos, Monmouth 1747 

Polhemus, Rebecca, and David Barcalow, Monmouth 1779 

Polk, Eleanor, and Robert Lough, Somerset 1768 

Pomroy, Elizabeth, and Andrew White, Philadelphia 1779 

Ponarso, Sarah, Burlington, and Abel Jusman, Burlington 1750 

Pongard, Sarah, Gloucester, and Levi Eldridge, Gloucester 1763 

Ponton, Grace, and Daniel Fogg, Salem 1769 

Pool, Mary, and Israel Beach, Essex 1781 

Pool, Mary, and Winfield Claypool, Burliugton 1782 

Pooles, Priseilla, and Aaron Stathem, Greenwich 1760 

Pope, Elizabeth, and Moses Nntt, Mansfield 1783 

Porch, Mary, Gloucester, and John Gayard, Gloucester 1735 

Porch, Mary, and Joseph Venneman, Gloucester 1783 

Porter, Anne, and Allen Wilkenson, Middlesex 1747-8 

Porter, Anne, and James McCray, Hunterdon 1769 

Porter, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Morris, Monmouth 1741 

Porter, Sarah, Amwell, and John Webb, Pennsylvania 1765 

Post, Abigel, Saddle River, and George Ryersou, Saddle River 1773 

Post, Anne, Essex, and John Van Voghte, Essex 1750 

Post, Catherine, Bergen, and Jacob Garretson, Bergen 1761 

Post, Elizabeth, and John Van Aleu, Bergen 1782 

Post, Elizabeth, and Jacob Berdan, Bergen 1788 

Post, Hannah, and Adriaen Post, Aquacknonck. 1753 

Post, Hannah, Sussex, and Jacobus Edsall, Sussex 1777 

Post, Jane, Essex, and Henry Garrison, Essex 1761 

Post, Jane, and Bernard Spring 1779 

Post, Jane, and Phillip Dey, Bergen 1780 

Post, Lybetie, Bergen, and Mindert Garrebrance, Bergen 1769 

Post, Margaret, and Combs Westervelt, Bergen 1788 



Feb. 


9 


Oct, 


11 


Aug. 


21 


April 


5 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


18 


July 


4 


Dec. 


18 


May 


28 


Jan. 


4 


Mar. 


6 


Dec. 


29 


Sept. 


14 


June 


5 


May 


7 


Dec. 


12 


May 


29 


May 


13 


June 


24 


June 


27 


Nov. 


8 


July 


23 


July 


26 


Nov. 


4 


Nov. 


3 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


13 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


22 


April 


1 


Jan. 


27 


Mar. 


22 


June 


19 


July 


13 


Dec. 


17 


Aug. 


7 


Jan. 


21 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


18 


Oct. 


11 


May 


28 


Mar. 


11 


June 


4 


Sept. 


7 


Dec. 


19 


Jan. 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



315 



Post, Margaret, and Jacob Mead, Bergen 1791 

Post, Yonacy, Essex, and John E. Vreland, Essex. 1754 

Potter, Ann, and John Copperthwaite, Monmouth 1758 

Potter. Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Tilton, Shrewsbury 1767 

Potter, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Samuel Crow, Middlesex 1764 

Potter, Hannah, Monmouth, and William Applegate, Monmouth 1717 

Potter, Jane, and David Boweu, Jr., Cumberland 1788 

Potter, Jemima, and Abraham Eastwood, Middlesex 1738 

Potter, Mary, and Ezra Taylor, Chesterfield 1768 

Potter; Parthenia, Burlington, and Thomas Broderick, Burlington 1756 

Potts, Amy. and Lawrence Taylor, Princetowu 1767 

Potts, Anne, Burlington, and William Follwell, Burlington 1727 

Potts, Lydia, and Samuel Shaw, Chester 1786 

Potts, Mary, Middletown, and Jacob Ute, Middletown 17-49 

Potts, Rebecca, and Aaron Ferman, Morris 1780 

Poulese, Rachel, Bergen, and Gan'it Hoppe, Bergen 1770 

Poulisse, Yanachey, Essex, and Hendrick Vanes?, Morris 1759 

Powel, Elizabeth, and John Stidham, Cumberland 1779 

Powell, Ann, Salem, and John Moor, Salem 1772 

Powell, Dorothy, and Samuel Edman, Burlington 1779 

Powell, Elizabeth, and James Newbold 1695 

Powell, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Richard Challener, Burlington . . . 1728 
Powell, Elizabeth, Burlington City, and Isaac Gale, Bristoll, Bucks.. . . 1747 

Powell. Elizabeth, Greenwich, and Isaac Watson, Greenwich 1760 

Powell, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and William Garrison, Salem 1769 

Powell, Elizabeth, Mount Holly, and Henry Reves, Burlington 1782 

Powell, Elizabeth, and Moses Atkinson, Burlington 1784 

Powell, Hannah, and James Sauthwick, Burlington 1778 

Powell, Lydia, Burlington, and Levi Gaskell, Burlington 1767 

Powell, Martha, Cumberland, and Benjamin Peck, Cumberland 1775 

Powell, Mary, and Abraham Kille, Burlington 1768 

Powell, Mary, and Amos Stackhouse, Mount Holly 1779 

Powell, Prudence, and William Oldaker, Cumberland 1784 

Powell, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Richardson, Jr., Burlington. . 1740 

Powell, Sarah, Gloucester, and William Kent, Gloucester 1733 

Powell, Sarah, Burlington, and Henry Lishman, Burlington 1771 

Powell, Theodosia, and Thomas Lee, Burlington 1759 

Powelse, Leah, Hackensack, and Nicasie Terhnne, Hackensack 1762 

Power, Mary, Burlington, and Melchesidec Abelea, Burlington 1780 

Powin, Martha, and Henry Rutherford, Salem 1733 

Powliug, Anne, Middletown, and Lambert Willson, Middletown 1757 

Powling, Mary, Middleton, and Thomas Roberts, Middleton 1756 

Pi-aal, Altie, Staten Island, and David Cannon, Staten Island 1749 

Praal, Hester, Staten Island, and John Buckalew, Middlesex 1762 

Prague, Elizabeth, and Bernard Hodge, Salem 1688 

Prall, Mary, and George Garrison, Hunterdon 1754 



June 10 
Jan. 2 
Aug. 23 
July 28 
Mar. 5 
Oct. 28 
Dec. 5 
Nov. 8 
Dec. 19 
Nov. 12 
Jan. 5 
Dec. 6 
April 29 
Sept. 18 
Jan. 26 
Dec. 5 
Nov. 19 
May 19 
Feb. 8 
Aug. 12 
Jan. 16 
Nov. 12 
Nov. 4 
Oct. 2 
Jan. 28 
Sept. 10 
Oct. 21 
May 4 
Dec. 11 
April 11 
Dec. 20 
Jan. 13 
Oct. 1 
Aug. 14 
Nov. 1 
May 13 
Nov. 6 
Dec. 15 
Oct. 30 
Aug. 13 
June 30 
Nov. 29 
Nov. 14 
April 14 
Jan. 1 
Sept. 26 



3 l6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Prall, Mary, Stateu Island, and Thomas Warne, Middlesex 1751) 

Frail, Sarah, and John Williamson, Ainwell 1770 

Pratt, Jane, Burlington, and Heron Bryan, Burlington 1758 

Pratt, Lydia, and Daniel Hillman, Gloucester 1774 

Pratt, Mary, Burlington, and Jonas Cattell, Burlington 1740 

Predmore, Lydia, Middlesex, and John Covenhoven, Middlesex 1752 

Predmore, Rachel, Middlesex, and Ichabod Dear), Middlesex >. 1745 

Pregmore, Ruthy, and James Patten, Perth Amboy. ^1764 

Presgrove, Christian, and Thomas Crowell, Middlesex 1746 

Presmeal, Margaret, Middlesex, and James Carman, Middlesex 1742 

Preston, Elizabeth, and Jehiel Wheeler, Fairfield 1751 

Preston, Elizabeth, Cumberland, and Abraham DnBois, Salem 1761 

Preston, Mary, Philadelphia, and Samuel Harrison, Gloucester 1730 

Preston, Priscilla, and Jeremiah Foster, Jr., Cumberland 1784 

Preston, Susannah, Monmouth, and John Jones, Monmouth 1739 

Preston, Susannah, Mansfield, and George Bliss, Bordentown. 1751 

Price, Elionar, Bucks, Pa., and Benjamin Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa. . . . 1761 

Price, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Richard Jones, Burlington 

Price, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and James Sleight, Hunterdon 1732 

Price, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and David Curtis, Monmouth 1766 

Price, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Lewis Ellison, Monmouth 1766 

Price, Elizabeth, Evesham, and Samuel Stratton, Evesham 1771 

Price, Elizabeth, Kingwood, and Dennis Reiley, Kingwood 1771 

Price, Elizabeth, and Abraham English, Burlington 1774 

Price, Elizabeth, and John Ireland, Gloucester. 1778 

Price, Grace, Evesham, and Isaac Stiles, Evesham 1776 

Price, Hannah, and John Baker, Burlington 1779 

Price, Katharine, Philadelphia, and William Cotter, Philadelphia 1737 

Price, Martha, Burlington, and Johann Miller, Burlington 1761 

Price, Mary, Monmouth, and Robert White, Jr., Monmouth . 1742 

Price, Mary, and Thomas Kiusey, Gloucester 1758 

Price, Mary, and William Benson, Hunterdon 1778 

Price, Mary, and James Sweatman, Cumberland 1787 

Price, Patience, Monmouth, and James Mount, Monmouth 1757 

Price, Phebe, Monmouth, and George Hullitt, Monmouth .... 1 760 

Price, Polly, Elizabethtowu, and John Vance, Hackensack 17.. 

Price, Rebecca, Burlington, and Obadiah Jones, Burlington 1780 

Price, Ruth, Burlington, and Samuel Davenport, Burlington 1765 

Price, Sarah, and Thomas Davis, Hunterdon 1733 

Pricket, Drusilla, and John Walliugs, Evesham 1779 

Prickett, Ann, Burlington, and Dennis Springer, Burlington 1736 

Prickett, Ann, Chester, and John Stratton, Evesham 1744 

Prickett, Druzillai, Burlington, and John Mullen, Burlington 1751 

Prickett, Elipha, Burlington, and Thomas Bishop, Burlington 1733 

Prickett, Hannah, Burlington, and Jacob Early, Burlington 1757 

Prickett, Hannah, and Amaziah Lippincott 1768 



Feb. 


19 


April 


9 


July 


24 


Jan. 


25 


.1:111. 


10 


Aug. 


14 


April 


16 


Mar. 


10 


Feb. 


14 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


1 


May 


30 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


17 


June 


26 


Dec. 


9 


May 


31 


Jan. 


8 


Jan. 


27 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


18 


Sept. 


24 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


28 


Feb. 


10 


Aug. 


20 


May 


20 


Sept. 


25 


Mar. 


25 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


30 


July 


21 


Oct, 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Jan. 


10 


Jan. 


16 


Aug. 


23 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


13 


April 


16 


Dec. 


20 


April 


16 


Oct. 


29 



.MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



317 



Prickett, L >is, and Job < 5-askill, Burlington 1768 June 9 

Prickett, Mary, Burlington, and Amariab Foster, Springfield 1748 July 15 

Prickett, Mary, Northampton, and George Meirs, Evesham 1751 May 20 

Prickett, Mary, and Isaac Stratton, Burlington 1778 Mar. 4 

Prickett, Mary, and Thomas Allen. Burlington 1783 Jan. 14 

Prickett, Patience, Burlington, and Joseph Haines, Burlington 1740 Aug. 25 

Prickett, Priscilla, and Philip Scull, E.ve&ham ." 1777 April 1 

Prickett, Sarah, Northampton, and John Simons, Northampton . ..1745 Dec. 17 

Priest, Catherine, and Joseph Lane, Jr., Middlesex 1781 Nov. 8 

Priestly, Mary, Bristol, Pa., and John Dowdney, Bristol, Fa 1705 Feb. 11 

1'] indie, Mary, and James Page, Upper Penns Neck 1774 Jan. 12 

Prior, Hannah, Salem, and Thomas Junes, Salem 1087 April 12 

Prise, Amy, Shrewsbury, and John West, Shrewsbury 1754 Dec. 28 

Prise, Margaret, Monmouth, and Jacob Dennis, Monmouth 1755 Feb. 22 

Probasco, Anne, and Thomas Davis, Somerset 1779 Oct. 10 

Probasco, Maritie, Somerset, and George Bergen, Somerset 1744 Sept. 10 

Probasco, Mary, and Joshua Cushun, Somerset 1779 June 21 

Probosco, Aylle, and Abraham Gulick, Somerset 1781 Mar. 3 

Probosco, Mary, and Abraham Hoagland, Somerset 1781 Feb. 22 

Proctor, Ruth, and John Green, Salem 1778 Mar. 27 

Prosser, Eleonora, and Joseph Wood, I hiladelphia. 1777 Oct. 24 

Prossor, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Jones, Gloucester 1703 June 11 

Prost, Charity, Hunterdon, and William Minor, Somerset 1777 Dec. 11 

Proud, Elizabeth, and Daniel Gethens, Burlington 1784 Mar. 25 

Provoost, Catherine, Bergen, and Samuel B. Lydekka, Bereen 1764 Jan. 5 

Provoost, Theodosia, and Aaron Burr 1782 July 4 

Pugh, Anne, Philadelphia, and Daniel Bryan, Philadelphia 1748 July 25 

Pugh, Elizabeth, Bordeutown, and James Robeson, Bordentown. .... 1704 May 21 

Pulliner, Sarah, and Isaac Holloway, Middlesex 1779 Sept. 29 

Pumme, Anne, and Ephraim Vautine, Middlesex 1782 Nov. 20 

Pummer, Elizabeth, and William Clark, Burlington 1778 April 10 

Purdy, Sarah, Gloucester, and Clement Russell, Gloucester 1740 Sept. 23 

Purkins, Rachel, and James Spray, Barnegat 1762 Nov. 26 

Pyle, Elizabeth, Salem, and William Hall, Salem. 1084 May 21 

MALES. Q 

Quackenbos, Abram, Hackensack, and Reynshe De Gray, Orange, N. Y. 1771 April 20 

Quackenbos, Rynier, Hackensack, and Sarah Durye 1765 Mar. 20 

Quackenbush, Jacob, Shrewsbury, Experience Willkinson, Freehold. . 1063 Nov. 16 

Quarrier, Alexander, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Duuneberger 1783 Jan. 1 

Queckenbush, Peter, Burlington, and Rachel Starkey 1757 Aug. 1 

Quick, Cornelius, Amwell. and Mary Williamson, Amwell 1770 Oct. 13 

Quick, Cornelius, Amwell, and Anne Covenhoven 1771 Dec. 11 

Quick, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Quimby . 1772 July 2 

Quick, Cornelius, New Jersey, aud Eleanor Sch&nck. 1779 June 20 

Quick, Jacob, Amwell, and Jerusa Rose, Hopewell 1772 Oct. 28 



3 l8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Quicksall, Jonathan, Burlington, aud Anne Taylor, Burlington 17-14 

Quicksall Joshua, Burlington, and Mary Moon, Burlington 1734 

Quicksall, Thomas, Chesterfield, and Phebe Fenton, Chesterfield ... 1748 

Quigg, Patrick, Mount Holly, and Mary House, Mount Holly 1772 

Quigley, Robert, Nottingham, and Mercy Coleman 1767 

Quigley, Philip, Burlington, and Mary Pearson 1733 

Quin, Patrick, Philadelphia, and Hannah Beaver, Philadelphia 1736 



FKMALF,S. 



Q 



Quackinbos, Suckey, and Samuel Van Blisheni, l Bergen 1780 

Quest, Dinah, Burlington, and John Jolly, Bucks, Pa 1746 

Quick, AuDa, and Christopher Kockfellar, Amwell 1780 

Quick, Canzaday, Kiugwood, and William Retlinghousen, Amwell ...1772 

Quick, Hannah, and Derrick Anter, Morris 1778 

Quick, Jemimt, Somerset, and William Piatt, Somerset. 1774 

Quick, Mary, and Henry Kannady, Somerset 178u 

Quick, Nellie, Somerset, and John Sticker, Somerset 1744 

Quick-ell, Sarah, Burlington, and Major Tucker, Burlington 1754 

Quicksell, Sarah, Chesterfield, and John Taylor, Chesterfield 1748 

Quigly, Mary, Burlington, and James Fagen, Burlington 1772 

Quigley, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Rickey, Burlington 1775 

Quigley, Martha, and John Welsh, Burlington 1780 

Quimby, Mary, Amwell, and Isaac t-tout, Amwell 1765 

Quin, Eleanor, and James North, Burlington 1778 

Quinby, Elizabeth, and Cornelius Quick, Hunterdon . 1772 

Quiuton, Elizabeth, Alloways Creek v and James Talbott, Cape May. . ..17C0 

Quiuton, Prudence, Salem, and Edward Keasby, Salem 1746 

Quiuton, Rachel, Salem, and Henry Sparks, Deptford. . . 1766 

Quiuton, Sarah, Salem, and E Iward Keasby, Silem 1765 

MALES. k 

Rabson, Henry, Philadelphia, and Sarah Phillips, Northampton 1782 

Race, John, Middletown, and Catherine Burk, Shrewsbury 1766 

Race, Thomas, Bristol, Pa., and Rebecca Barwis 1779 

Race, William, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Grey, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Rackhow, Daniel, Barnegat, and Abigail Hadley . . .... 1762 

Radford, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Baylis, Burlington 1730 

Radfoid, Samuel, BurlingtoD, and Ann Buttei field 1768 

Rain, John, Gloucester, and Mary Woniman 1735 

Raiuee, William, Northampton, aud Elizabeth Wills, Northampton. ..1747 

Rainier, Edmod, Burlington, and Betsy Butler ... 1781 

Rainier, Job, Burlington, and Lydia Page, Burlington. . . 1770 

Raines, Robert, Salem, and Christian Chaudler, Salem 1720 

Rakestraw, Thomas, Burlington, and Elizabeth Zones 1757 

1 Query: Van Blerkem, 



Sept. 


17 


Dec. 


13 


Oct. 


15 


May 


28 


June 


18 


Sept. 


28 


July 


15 


Jan. 


1 


Aug. 


28 


Oct. 


21 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


16 


June 


27 


Feb. 


7 


July 


24 


June 


6 


May 


10 


June 


27 


Aug'. 


16 


July 


5 


Sept. 


30 


Feb. 


5 


July 


2 


April 


9 


Oct. 


8 


Oct. 


8 


May 


4 


Oct. 


17 


April 


23 


Oct. 


26 


Aug. 


1 


Oct. 


4 


May 


11 


Feb. 


24 


Sept. 


8 


Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


4 


April 


25 


Dec. 


25 


July 


4 



f 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 3 19 

Ralph, Frauds, Burlington, uud Mary Stevenson 17CG Sept. 25 

Rambo, Benjamin, Deptford, and Appikaris Sparks, Deptford L766 May 21 

Rambo, James, Deptford, and Mary Myres. ... . 1780 Jan. 8 

Rnmsen, Jacob, Senr., New York, Katharine Hendrickson, Monmoutb.1749 Aug. 11 

Ramsey, William, Fairfield, and Sarah Seeley, Deerfield 1759 Feb. 20 

Randall, Heline, Burlington, and Mary Hunloke ...173-1 July 18 

Randolph see Fitz Randolph. 

Randolph, Samuel, Woodbridge, and Martha Gach, Woodbridge 1750 Oct. 20 

Randolph, Benjamin, Piscataway, aud Elizabeth Hay wood, Piscataway. 1750 May 26 

Randolph, David, Cumberland, and Darkis Ayars, Cumberland 1775 Nov. 8 

Randolph, George F., Perth Arnboy, and Sarah Robinson 1764 Jan. 31 

Randolph, Hull, Stafford, aud Isabella Haywood, Stafford 1767 Oct. 26 

Randolph, James, Monmouth, and Deliverance Coward 1760 Mar. 15 

Randolph, Jeremiah, Woodbridge, aud Jennet Edgar, Woodbridge. ... 1755 July 10 

Randolph, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Haywood, Burlington 1761 Oct. 10 

Randolph, Samuel, Somerset, aud Amy Edwards 1762 Mar. 5 

Raueier, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Warwick 1780 May 24 

Rauiear, Joseph, Mansfield, and Sarah Wood, Mansfield 1751 May 8 

Rauue, Peter, Bergen, and Caterine Tice 1780 July 13 

Rapes, Christopher, Gloucester, and Patience S lyres 1766 Jan. 4 

Rappalja, Cornelius, Somerset, and Mary Anderson 1743 Oct. 17 

Rappelyea, Jeroinus, Somerset, and Susan Van Nest 1781 Mar. 24 

Unsure, George Adam, Cumberland, aud Katharine Ward, Fairfield. . 1760 Mar. 6 

Rathbone, Ewbaueks, and Mary Bloodgood, South Amboy 1758 April 1 

Rattoone, Johu, New York, aud Isabella Dunham 176S June 14 

Rattoone, 1 homas, Perth Amboy, and Catherine Magonnagil 1766 June 18 

Ray, Samuel, Alloways Creek, and Mary Moore, Alloways Creek 1769 Nov. 7 

Raynolds, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Bryan 1769 Jan. 4 

Raynor, Matthew, Morris Town, and Lottie Marschalk 1777 May 16 

Rea, John, Salem, and Margaret Morgan, Salem 1762 Mar. 26 

Rea, William, Sussex, and Sarah Middagh 1774 May 13 

Read, Charles, Cumberland, and Esther Eldridge 1788 Jan. 14 

Read, Elisha, Willingborough, aud Elizabeth Cox, Willingborough. . . . 1765 July 3 

Read, Israel, Middlesex, aud Mary Campbell, New York 

Read, Israel, Cumberland, and Sarah Reeves 1787 Jan. 29 

Read, John, Philadelphia, and Michael Hoyle, Philadelphia 1737 July 30 

Read, Jonathan, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Dinah Engersol 1764 ' Sept. 26 

Read, Obadiah, Egg Harbor, and Catharine Steelman 1764 Sept. 26 

Read, Samuel, Salem, and Elizabeth Eglintou, Salem 1727 May 4 

Read, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Mary Field 1779 Aug. 27 

Reading, Daniel, and Euphcmia Reid, Monmouth 1755 Feb. 26 

Reading, John, Amwell, and Elizabeth Hankinsou 1772 April 7 

Reading. John, Jr., Amwell, and Isabella Montgomery, Amwell 1746 Nov. 21 

Reading, William, Amwell, aud Ann Early, Amwell 1775 Dec. 6 

Reagain, Gabiiel, Cape May, and Susannah Gindy 1749 July 8 

Recklys, John, Mansfield, and Mary Talhnau . . 1781 June 12 



320 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMEN'IS. 

Redcap, Francis, Gloucester, aud Abalonia Spiriar, Gloucester 1762 

Redecker, Hannes Jacob, Shrewsbury, and iVlary Hoffenes, Shrewsb'ry.1751 

Reece, David Evan, Burlington, and Mary Bennett, Burlington 1733 

Reed, Andrew, Trenton, and Theodocia Bowes, Trenton 1740 

Reed, Andrew, Freehold, and Sarah Brown, Freehold ... 17G7 

Reed, George, Hunterdon, and Sarah Hixson 1781 

Reed, Henry, Fairfield, and Phebe Ludlarn, Cape May 1765 

Reed, Henry, Burlington, and Mercy Pettit, Burlington 1780 

Reed, James, Monmouth, and Moieca Longstreet, Middlesex 1754 

Reed, James, Freehold, and Sarah Lawrance, Shrewsbury .... 1762 

Reed, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Peacock 1778 

Reed, John, Hunterdon, and Susanna Lanniug 1733 

Reed, John, New Brunswick, and Mary Linni-son, New Brunswick . . 1751 

Reed, John, Freehold, and Sarah Wetherill, Middlesex 1751 

Reed, Noah, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Hoff 1780 

Reed, Stephen, Hunterdon, and Else Bonhnm 1782 

Reeder, John, Trenton, and Hannah Heudrickson 1783 

Reeve, John, aud Anne Bradgate 1695 

Reeve, Johu, Northampton, and Esther Riggents, Northampton 1779 

Reeve, Mark, Salem, aud Ann Hunt, Salem .1686 

Reeve, Micajah, Burlington, and Hannah Lee, Burlington 1754 

Reeve, Moses, Northampton, aud Aune Reeve, Northampton. 1776 

Reeve, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wright, Burlington 1778 

Reeve, Walter, and Anne Howell. . . 1682 

Reeves, Abraham, Gloucester, and Mary Ward, Deptford 1769 

Reeves, Abraham, Cape May, and Margaret Burch 1769 

Reeves, Abraham, Cape May, and Ruth Crowell, Cape May 1775 

Reeves, Abraham, Cumberland, and Christina ShvkeL. . 1787 

Reeves, Adonijah, Cape May, and Mary Bellanger, Cape May 1781 

Reeves, Amariah, Salem, and Susanna Hays. Salem 1762 

Reeves, Henry, Burlington, and Abigal Shinn, Burlington 1728 

Reeves, Henry, Northampton, and Rachel Jess, Northampton 1765 

Reeves, James, Deptford, aud Marget Solmon. 1785 

Reeves, Jonathan, Burlington, and Hannah Budd, Burlington 1736 

Reeves, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Huber, Burlington 1770 

Reeves, John, Cumberland, and Marthew Austin 1777 

Reeves, Johnson, Cumberland, and Sevia Bereman 1777 

Reeves, Joseph, Northampton, and Elizabeth Toy 1782 

Reeves, Samuel, and Mary Hill 1 735 

Reeves, Samuel, Northampton, and Hannah Hewstice, Evesham 1747 

Reeves, Samuel, Burlington, and Lydia Tanner 1779 

Reeves, Solomon, Northampton, and Hope Harbur. 1784 

Reeves, Thomas, Gloucester, and Keziah Brown .• 1777 

Reeves, Walter, Burlington, and Tabitha Garwood, Burlington 1765 

Reeves, William, Northampton, and Sarah Bunu, Northampton.. . . 1747 
Ruichards, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bostede 1756 



Mar. 


23 


Dec. 


10 


Mar. 


21 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


29 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


8 


May 


28 


Feb. 


2 


June 


16 


Mar. 


21 


Oct. 


25 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


9 


May 


, 4 


May 


19 


July 


22 


Mar. 


31 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


2 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


16 


Nov. 


11 


Feb. 


24 


Nov. 


25 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


20 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


4 


Feb. 


26 


Mar. 


2 


May 


26 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


29 


Nov. 


19 


Dec. 


8 


Aug. 


8 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


12 


May 


31 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


9 


Nov. 


21 


April 


17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



321 



Reid, Augustine, Monmouth, and Sarah Heading, Hunterdon 1756 July G 

Reid, Charles, Freehold, and Mary Copper, Freehold 17G7 Aug. 29 

Reid, George, Jr., Monmouth, and Tainche Covert, Monmouth 1743 July 18 

Reid, James, Crauhery, and Mary Manee, Staten Island 1717-8 Mar. 16 

Reid, John, Burlington, and Jane Gofogy, Burlington 1764 April 4 

Reid, Martin, Shrewsbury, and Anue Dramme, Shrewsbury 1759 April 21 

Reid, Samuel, Freehold, and Maria D. Garrison, New York 1775 Dec. 29 

Reilly, Dennis, Kingwood, Elizabeth Price, Kingwood 1771 Nov. 18 

Reily, John, Burlington, and Mary French, Burlington 1771 April 4 

Rementon, Moses, Cumberland, and Sarah Walling, Cumberland 1763 Feb. 5 

Remington, Moses, Cumberland, and Theodocia Sayre . . 1778 July 30 

Remington, Thomas, Cumberland, and Sarah Shoppard 1778 Sept. 30 

Remington, William, Salem, and Mary Woodhouse, Salem 1693 April 13 

Renear, James, Burlington, and Susannah McGuire. ... 1778 Oct. 17 

Renear, Joseph, Mansfield, and Anna Malsby, Mansfield 1774 Aug. 11 

Reney, James, Cape May, and Presila Eldridge, Cape May 1751 April 12 

Renier, John, Burlington, and Margaret Craft 1734 Dec. 23 

Renier, Peter, Burlington, and Jemima Draper, Burlington 1741 Feb. 19 

Renshaw, John, Burlington, and Martha Shreve 1759 Aug. 10 

Renshawe, John, and Mary Stacy 1686 April 17 

Rettinghousen, William, Amwell, and Canzaday Quick, Kingwood . . 1772 Aug. 20 

Reute, John, Shrewsbury, and Effy Willis, Shrewsbury ... 1767 Aug. 28 

Reve, Silas, Monmouth, and Alice Wilkins, Monmouth 1746 April 28 

Reves, Beddle, Gloucester, and Anne Clement 1759 Nov. 12 

Reves, Henry, Burlington, and Elizabeth Powell, Mount Holly 1782 Sept. 10 

Rewbart, Vincent, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stanton, Burlington .. 1762 Jan. 21 

Reyneerson, Parent, Hillsborough, and Sarah Thomell 1779 Mar. 6 

Reynolds, James, Monmouth, and Rebecca Parent, Monmouth 1729 June 23 

Reynolds, John, Freehold, and Hannar Cox, Freehold 1762 Jan. 23 

Reynolds, Patrick, Burlington, and Austes Rushford, Burlington 1729 Jan. 29 

Reynolds, Thomas, Northampton, and Elizabeth Budd, Northampton.. 1759 June 23 

Reynolds, William, Newton, and Esther Caiu, Oxford 1769 Jan. 27 

Reynolds, William, Jr., Freehold, and Elizabeth Mittin, Shrewsbury. .1757 Mar. 5 

Rhe, Robert, Monmouth, and Mary Fcrman, Monmouth 1744 Dec. 18 

Rhea, Jonathan, Monmouth, and Lydia Forman, Monmouth 1753 Oct. 8 

Rhine, Daniel, Chesterfield, and Mary Smith 1759 Oct. 20 

Rhinoles, John, Shrewsbury, and Johannah Pattison, Freehold 1766 Nov. 13 

Rhodes. Charles, Town Freehold, and Alice Van Kirk 1750 July 28 

Rhodes, John, Burlington, and Bridget Higgins, Burlington 1733 Oct. 16 

Rhodes, John, Burlington, and Mary Caldwell 1738 Oct. 30 

Rice, James, Monmouth, and Rebecca Hoffmire, Monmouth 1736 Nov. 22 

Rice, Phillip, Salem, and Catharine Swinuey, Salem 1769 Oct. 19 

Richards, Henry, Philadelphia, and Jane Gaunt, Philadelphia 1762 Feb. 4 

Richards, Henry, Perth Aniboy, and Mary Carpenter, Perth Ainboy. . . 1763 Nov. 19 

Richards, Jacob, Cape May, and Rachel Badcock, Cape May 1754 Sept. 26 

Richards, John, Greenwich, and Susannah Hewit, Gloucester 1770 Mar. 7 

21 



322 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Richards, Joseph, Perth Ainboy, and Sarah Gregory, Middlesex 1761 

Richardson, Benjamin, Cape May, Elizabeth Richardson, Cape May. . .1733 

Richardson, Jacob, Cape May, and Temperance Scull, Cape May 1740 

Richardson, Jacob, Cape May, and Pricilla Newton, Cape May 1761 

Richardson, Jacob, Cape May, and Mary Marsh, Cape May 1771 

Richardson, Jeremiah, Cape May, arid Susannah Church 1774 

Richardson, John, Jr., Burlington, and Rebecca Powell, Burlington. . .1740 

Richardson, John, Cape May, and Elizabeth Craford 1756 

Richardson, John, Perth Amboy, and Jemima Gibson, Perth Amboy. .1763 

Richardson, John, Mansfield, and Phebe White, Burlington 1772 

Richardson, John, and Gartery Vausciver 1780 

Richardson, Joseph, Deerfield, and Arabella Seagrave, Deerfield 1751 

Richardson, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Sphes 1785 

Richardson, Joseph, Burlington, and Abigail Ga£kill 1788 

Richardson, Samuel, Cape May, and Elizabeth Carman, Cape May 1731 

Richardson, Samuel, Springfield, and Jane Davis 1770 

Richardson, Thomas, New Port, and Elizabeth Eaton, Shrewsbury 1775 

Richey, William, Woodbridge, and Eunice Martin, Woodbridge 1740 

Richmau, Abraham, Salem, and Sarah Keen, Salem. 1771 

Richman, Andrew, Salem, and Eunice Miller 1772 

Richman, David, Salem, and Mary Mahew, Salem 1769 

Richman, Harmon, Salem, and Rachel Miller, Maniugton 1773 

Richman, Henry, Salem, and Rhoda Elwell, Salem 1770 

Richman, Jacob, Salem, and Catharine Matson, Gloucester 1736 

Richmau, William, Salem, and Experience Read. 1773 

Richmond, Oldrick, Salem, and Sarah Chandler 1745 

Rickey, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Quigley, Burlington 1775 

Rickey, Thomas, Jr., and Rebecca Margerum 1778 

Rickhord, Jacob, Staten Island, and Phebe Johnson 1768 

Rickhow, Abraham, Staten Island, and Sarah Palmer, Staten Island. ..1756 

Rickman, John, Hackensack, and Susannah Brown, Hackensack 1760 

Riddel, William, Somerset, and Elizabeth Moore, Somerset 1750 

Riddell, John, Somerset, and Rachel Stockton, Somerset 1741 

Rider, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Bullman, Philadelphia 1730 

Ridgeley, Nicholas, Salem, and Mary Vining, Salem 1736 

Ridgents, William, Northampton, and Susanna Atkinson, Burlington. .1776 

Ridgeway, Richard, Monmouth, and Lavina Bird, Monmouth 1751 

Ridgeway, Barzilla, Springfield, and Edith Haines, Northampton 1775 

Ridgeway, Henry, Springfield, and Mary Wright, Hanover 1771 

Ridgway, Jacob, Burlington, and Sukey Ellis, Burlington 1780 

Ridgway, Jacob, Woolwich, and Kesiah Pedrick 1789 

Ridgway, Job, Stafford, and Elizabeth Matthews, L. Egg Harbour 1766 

Ridgway, John, Burlington, and Hannah Brown, Burlington 1727 

Ridgway, Joseph, Burlington, and Prudence Borton 1786 

Ridgway, Lott, Spriugfield, and Susannah Peat, Gloucester 1750 

Ridgway, Lott, Jr., Springfield, and Deborah Johnson 1780 



Sept. 


4 


Sept. 


27 


Aug. 


31 


July 


26 


Sept. 


8 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


17 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


30 


Jan. 


18 


Feb. 


15 


June 


4 


April 


10 


April 


4 


Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


30 


April 


28 


Aug. 


9 


Feb. 


6 


May 


18 


Feb. 


22 


Oct. 


25 


June 


3 


Aug. 


16 


Nov. 


28 


May 


14 


Dec. 


18 


June 


12 


Oct. 


29 


May 


11 


Sept. 


11 


Dec. 


23 


Jan. 


5 


May 


21 


Dec. 


28 


Feb. 


25 


Mar. 


29 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


25 


May 


5 


Mar. 


18 


Dec. 


3 


April 


24 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 323 

Ridgway, Noah, Northampton, and Susannah Haldren 1779 

Ridner, John, Bergen, and Gaterine Van Houtcn 1779 

Ridner, Nicholas, and Sarah Bright 1785 

Rigden, William, Pennsylvania, and Lydia Thomas, Burlington 1755 

Rigg, Robert, and Jane Bayliffe 1688 

Bighter, David, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Robinson 1781 

Righton, William, and Sarah Biddle 1095 

Riker, Peter, Pequannock, and Olchel Doremus 1783 

Riley, Charles, Salem, and Catharine Richmond ... 1785 

Riley, Joseph, Cumberland, and Rachel Ware 1773 

Riley, Patrick, Piscataway, and Elizabeth Vauderhoven, Woodbridge. 1753 

Riley, Samuel, Salem, and Sarah Cheesmau ... 1785 

Rimbo, Daniel, Amwell, and Elizabeth Doutie, Amwell 1749 

Ring, Thomas, Somerset, and Margaret Staats, Somerset 1741 

Ringo, Albartus, and Katherine Godown, Amwell .... 1745 

Rinnerson Isaac, Somerset, and Marget Finnise 1779 

Ripe, Jacob, Burlington, and Jane Kelley 1778 

Risley, Jeremiah, Gloucester, and Jane Carmstring ....... 1739 

Risley, John, and Margaret Doughty, Egg Harbour 1758 

Risley, Peter, Cape May, and Aun Carman, Burlington 1736 

Risley, Samuel, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Abigail Somers 1784 

Rittinger, John, Burlington, and Rachel Fenuimore. 1778 

Rives, William, Middlesex, and Martha Barton, Middlesex 1739 

Roads, Anthony, Springfield, and Mary Dunfee, Springfield 1765 

Robart, John, L. Egg Harbour, and Mary Jones, L. Egg Harbour . .1765 

Robarts, Aaron, Newark, and Elizabeth Hedden 1778 

Robarts, Edmund, Maidenhead, and Massey Moore 1778 

Robbarts, Richard, Roxbury, and Anna Sweezey ..... 1778 

Robbins, Richard, Burlington, and Anne Race, Burlington 1729 

Bobbins, Zebidee, Burlington, and Hope Atkinson, Burlington 1766 

Robeeo, James, Gloucester, and Mary Hillman 1779 

Robens, Aaron, Monmouth, and Mary Worthley, Monmouth 1740 

Roberds, Freeman, Bucks, Pa., and Martha Runyon, Bucks, Pa 1768 

Roberson, Thomas, Monmouth, and Catharine Pearse, Monmouth. . . 1749 

Roberson, William, Elizabeth, and Elizabeth Briant, Elizabeth 1781 

Roberts, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Charity Large 1768 

Roberts, Edmond, Bucks, and Jane Vanhorue 1732 

Roberts, James, Middletown, and Phebe Cahart, Middletown 1758 

Roberts, John, Burlington, and Hannah Newberry, Burlington 1732 

Roberts, John, Middletown, and Deborah Jobes, Middletown 1753 

Roberts, John, South Amboy, and Priscilla Buckalew 1757 

Robert, John, Middletown, and Sarah Walling ... 1774 

Roberts, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Bassett 1791 

Roberts, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Mary Butler, Burlington 1748 

1 Aeltje. Dutch for Aletta or Alida. 



April 


8 


Nov. 


20 


July 


5 


Jan. 


27 


Aug. 


25 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


21 


May 


31 


Sept. 


26 


Aug. 


28 


Nov. 


12 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


29 


Aug. 


5 


Sept. 


19 


Dec. 


25 


Mar. 


23 


Mar. 


6 


May 


4 


Jan. 


22 


Aug. 


14 


Oct. 


24 


July 


17 


April 


27 


Aug. 


28 


Sept. 


1 


Sept. 


18 


May 


17 


Mar. 


21 


Oct. 


23 


April 


9 


Dec. 


13 


Oct. 


20 


July 


18 


Oct. 


17 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


9 


Dec. 


24 


July 


4 


April 


2 


Sept. 


21 



324 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Roberts, Joseph, Monmouth, and Mary Hill, Monmouth 1764 

Roberts, Joseph, Gloucester, and Letitia Jones, Gloucester 1764 

Roberts, Joseph, Woolwich, and Ann Piatt, Gloucester 1770 

Roberts, Joseph, Hanover, and Edith Harrison, Hanover 1770 

Roberts, Matthew, Middletown Point, and Mary Beinet, Shrewsbury. .1759 

Roberts, Robert, Gloucester, and Thomasiu Parker, Gloucester 1762 

Roberts. Samuel, Morris, and Sarah Bonnel, Essex 1761 

Roberts, Simeon, Philadelphia, and Prudence Brown, New Town 1762 

Roberts, Timothy, Pennsylvania, and Mary Rue, Pennsylvania 1735 

Roberts, Thomas, Middletown, and Anne Walling, Middletown 1747 

Roberts, Thomas, Middleton, and Mary Powling, Middleton 1756 

Robertson, Charles, New Fork, and Lucy Jemison 1784 

Robertson, David, and Phebe Coleman 1745 

Robertson, David, Middletown, and Margaret Wilson, Middletown.. . .1749 

Robertson, James, Gloucester, and Esther Adman, Gt. Egg Harbor 1736 

Robertson, John, Cape May. and Experience Hand, Cape May 1756 

Robertson, John, Cape May, and Tabittha Foster 1786 

Robertson, Patrick, Monmouth, and Mary Warne, Monmouth 1749 

Robertson, William, Monmouth, and Mary Carhart, Monmouth 1744-5 

Robeson, James, Bordentown, and Elizabeth Pugh, Bordentown 1764 

Robeson, Jonathan, Philadelphia, and Hannah Williams 1773 

Robins, Benjamin, Nottingham, and Ruth Radheld, Nottingham 1771 

Robins, Daniel, Upper Freehold, and Sarah Leonard, Up. Freehold. . . 1747 

Robins, Daniel, Middlesex, and Mary Cunningham, Monmouth 1767 

Robins, Ephraim, Monmouth, and Mercy Cox, Monmouth 1746 

Robins, Esek, Monmouth, and Ruth Rmdle 1762 

Robins, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Core, Burlington 1737 

Robins, Jesse, Monmouth, and Mary Robins, Monmouth 1771 

Robins, John, Monmouth, and Mary Wright, Monmouth 1766 

Robins, John, Monmouth, and Mary Hutchinson 1768 

Robins, John, Monmouth, and Rebeckah Stout, Middletown 1779 

Robins, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Clayton, Monmouth 1732 

Robins, Moses, Monmouth, and Anne Ansley, Monmouth 1761 

Robins, Moses, Lt. Egg Harbour, and Sarah Warner, Lt. Fgg Harb'r. 1774 

Robins, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Ruth Yanroom, Burlington 1741 

Robins, Nathaniel, Jr., Burlington, and Mary Swain 1779 

Robins, Obadiah, Cumberland, and Rachel Shepherd 1754 

Robins, Thomas, Monmouth, and Miribah Geberson 1758 

Robins, Timothy, Monmouth, and Ruth Smith, Monmouth 1745 

Robins, Vauroom, Nottingham, and Tabitha Ford 1783 

Robins, Zachariab, Monmouth, and Mary Gibison, Monmouth 1769 

Robinson, Caleb, Woolwich, and Mary Dickson 1786 

Robinson, Daniel, Middletown, and Mary Cooperax, Middletown 1764 

Robinson, Henry, Freehold, and Anna Rhea, Freehold 1763 

Robinson, James, Middlesex, and Margaret Hance 1751 

Robinson, James, Stow Creek, and Elizabeth Dare, Stow Creek 1759 



Jan. 


3 


Feb. 


14 


Feb. 


12 


Nov. 


13 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


28 


June 


14 


April 


15 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


29 


May 


12 


June 


12 


April 


17 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


23 


June 


17 


July 


7 


Mar. 


22 


May 


21 


Oct. 


6 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


12 


Oct. 


3 


April 


21 


Mar. 


3 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


12 


Jan. 


6 


Aug. 


23 


Mar. 


31 


Mar. 


29 


Nov. 


13 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


7 


Mar. 


26 


Feb. 


28 


Oct. 


9 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


8 


April 


20 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


29 


May 


29 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 325 

Robinson, James, Toms River, and Mary Yum lass 17G8 July 26 

Robinson, John, Monmouth, and Rachel Vahan, Monmouth 175G Aug. 19 

Robinson, John, Toms River, aud Eleanor Hart 1768 July 26 

Robinson, John, Somerset, and Sarah Britton 1779 Dec. 11 

Robinson, Joseph, Freehold, and Eunice West, Shrewsbury 1776 Sept. 3 

Robinson, Joseph, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Scott 1772 April 25 

Robinson, Joseph, Gloucester, aud Pamelia Hendrickson 1782 April 25 

Robinson, Nicolas R., Pennsylvania, and Ann Friend 1775 Dec. 6 

Robinson, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Mason, Salem 1738 Jan. 29 

Robinson, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Rachel Hartshorne, Middlet'n. . 1751 Nov. 4 

Robinson, Thomas, Burlington, and Ann Trenet, Burlington 1757 Aug. 15 

Robinson, William, Cape May, and Phebe Young, Cape May 1738 June 20 

Robinson, William, Middlesex, and Mary Loffborough, Monmouth. . . . 1744 Nov. 23 

Robinson, William, Cape May, and Roada Corson, Cape May 1754 Aug. 13 

Robinson, William, Penns Neck, and Sarah Newkirk, Piles Grove. .... 1767 Mar. 16 

Robinson, William, Deptford, and Lydia Fowler 1774 June 17 

Robinson, William, Cumberland, and Sarah Woodruff 1789 July 9 

Robinson, William, Jr., Maurice River, and Mary Youngs 1772 June 20 

Robison, David, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Chew 1774 May 6 

Robison, William, Cape May, and Hannah Veal 1778 Jan. 6 

Robison, William, Trenton, and Sarah Kotts 1780 Feb. 10 

Rockafellow, Peter, Amwell, and Elizabeth Peterson, Amwell 1774 Dec. 26 

Rockfellar, Christopher, Amwell, and Anna Quick 1780 Oct. 21 

Rockhill, A mos > Mansfield, and Jerusha Lip2:>incott, Northampton . . . 1751 April 16 

Rockhill, David, Burlington, and Ann xiarison, Burlington. . . 1758 Aug. 30 

Rockhill, Edward, Mansfield, and Mary Buffin 1763 Sept. 10 

Rockhill, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Taylor, Burlington 1728 May 26 

Rockhill, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., aud Sarah Cutler, Burlington 1736 April 8 

Rockhill, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Morris, Mansfield 1774 July 25 

Rockhill, Solomon, Burlington, and Susannah Taylor, Chesterfield . . 1749 Aug. 8 

Rockhill, Thomas, Burlington, and Lydia Jones 1786 Oct. 26 

Rockhill, William, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Smyth, Shrewsbury 1761 Mar. 30 

Rockllar, Peter, Amwell, and Abigail Large 1778 May 14 

Rode, George, Hunterdon, and Anne Thomas, Hunterdon 1750 July 13 

Roe, David, Gloucester, and Ursulla Hurff, Gloucester 1767 July 24 

Roe, Henry, Gloucester, and Hannah Cheesman, Gloucester 1729 Feb. 16 

Roe, Henry, Gloucester, and Ann Jacquet 1780 Jan. 24 

Roe, John, Perth Amboy, and Mary Wilson, Perth Amboy 1757 Aug. 30 

Roe, Michael, Gloucester, and Mary Smallwood 1784 April 20 

Roe, Samuel, Maryland, and Isabella Mackkouw 1784 May 4 

Rogers, Benjamin, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Woolley, Shrewsbury. .1753 Oct. 26 

Rogers, Hezekiah, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Clews, Pennsylvania. .1728 June 11 

Rogers, Isaac, Monmouth, and Hannah Talman 1757 Sept. 29 

Rogers, Isaac, Burlington, and Elizabeth Stokes, Burlington 1765 Oct. 29 

Rogers, Isaac, New Windsor, and Ann Taylor, Nottingham 1768 July 6 

Rogers, James, Burlington, and Theophilus Gaskill 1786 Oct. 10 



326 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Rogers, Job, Burlington, and Margery Allen. 1769 

Rogers, John, Burlington, and Yesti Austin, Burlington 1754 

Rogers, John, Burlington, and Mary Bennett, Burlington 1768 

Rogers, John, Monmouth, and Mary Silver, Middlesex 1768 

Rogers, John, Northampton, and Anne Norcross, New Hanover 1784 

Rogers, John, Jr., Burlington, and Sarah Stokes, Burlington 1734 

Rogers, Jonathan, Salem, and Bridget Conchton, Salem 1745 -6 

Rogers, Joseph, Northampton, and Hester Atkinson, Northampton 1783 

Rogers, Lewis, Philadelphia, and Anne Roberts, Philadelphia 1750 

Rogers, Othneil, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Leonard, Monmouth 1744 

Rogers, Robert, Middlesex, and Ann Holloway, Chesterfield 1763 

Rogers, Robert, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Fowler 1780 

Rogers, Samuel, Monmouth, and Sarah Lefetra, Monmouth. 1750 

Rogers, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Jones 17c 6 

Rogers, Samuel, Freehold, and Elizabeth Barnes, Freehold 1763 

Rogers, Samuel, Burlington, and Margaret Thomas 1783 

Rogers, Thomas, Burlington, and Ann Staples 1736 

Rogers, Thomas, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Anna Rodman, Gt. Egg Har..l766 

Rogers, William, Burlington, and Martha Esturgans, Burlington 1754 

Rogers, William, Burlington, and Anna Elton 1777 

Rogn, Karl Martin, Shrewsbury, and Catharine Jeffemey, Shrewsbury. 1761 

Rogne, John, Morris Town, and Hannah Bonnel 1781 

Rohde, Ephraim Marcus Y., Bergen, and Willimyntie Eckhart, Bergen. 1786 

Roland, John, Hunterdon, and Martha Anderson, Hunterdon 1740 ^ June 

Rolfe, Joseph, Salem, and Hannah Darkin, Salem , 1741 

Rolston, John, Morris, and Margaret Logan 1785 

Romine, Christopher, Monmouth, and Rachel Romine, Monmouth 1750 

Romine, Elias, Bergen, and Rachel Komine 1769 

Romine, John, Shrewsbury, and Johannah Emaus, Shrewsbury 1763 

Romine, Lay ton, Shrewsbury, and Ester Holstead, Shrewsbury 1762 

Romine, Niclas, Morris, and Adriatje Lambert 1787 

Romine, Samuel, Monmouth, and Christiana Flemming, Monmouth. . 1760 
Romine, Samuel, Shrewsbury, and Catharine Huffmire, Middletown. . 1762 
Romine, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Rebekah Coltrile, Shrewsbury . . . 1752 

Romine, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Neley Yannort, Shrewsbury 1761 

Roofers, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Johanna Bills, Monmouth 1740 

Roome, Peter, Morris, and Sarah Berry, Morris 1752 

Roos, William, Monmouth, and Deborah Learning 1762 

Roosevelt, Cornelius C, Orange, N. Y., and Alida Fargie 1781 

Rosat, Abraham, Essex, and Catharine Kipp, Essex 1752 

Rose, Albert, Hackensack, and Hannah Earl, Hackensack 1772 

. Ananias, Perth Amboy, and Affie Yan Allen, Perth Amboy 1757 

Rose, Annanias, Middlesex, and Mary St- ydilL 1769 

Rose, Charles, New Jersey, and Rebekah Mulliner 1781 

Rose, EzekieL Salem, and Elizabeth Newkirk, Salem. 1769 

Rose, Ezekiel, Ainwell, and Mary Field, Hopewell 1772 



Jan. 


16 


Aug. 


6 


April 


12 


Nov. 


12 


Oct. 


26 


Jan. 


14 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


22 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


28 


Sept. 


16 


Aug. 


28 


Nov. 


27 


Cct. 


7 


Nov. 


21 


Oct. 


30 


May 


10 


Aug. 


19 


Dec. 


20 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


21 


June 


16 


May 


6 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


13 


Feb. 


11 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


4 


Dec. 


14 


April 


28 


Dec. 


9 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


28 


Dec. 


10 


Mar. 


25 


Nov. 


27 


Oct. 


17 


April 


13 


Nov. 


18 


Mar. 


21 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


22 


Nov. 


18 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



327 



Rose, Hugh, Monmouth, and Mary Yandike, Monmouth 1746 Oct. 17 

Rose, Isaac, Bergen, and Sarah Bogert 1788 Nov. 15 

Rose, Jonathan, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Hixson 1779 Jan. 8 

Rose, Joseph, New Jersey, and Margaret Barkyt, Somerset 1749 Jan. 10 

Rose, Samuel, Burlington, and Anne Duckworth, Burlington 1739 Feb. 26 

Rose, Samuel, L. Egg Harbour, and Hannah Carman, Burlington. . 1765 June 18 

Rose, Timothy, Perth Auiboy, and Anna Van Alia, Perth Amboy 1760 Oct. 23 

Rose, William, South Amboy, and Margaret Letts, South Amboy 1766 May 12 

Boseboom, Garret, and Wooltie Tunison 1742 Feb. 4 

Rosekrans, Alexander, Shrewsbury, and Mary Allen, Shrewsbury. .. 1765 Feb. 21 

Rosele, James, Northampton, and Elizabeth Allcott, Northampton. . . . 1745 April 24 

Rosele, Zebulon, Burlington, and Anne Rosele, Burlington 1746 April 18 

Rosell, James, Burlington, and Elizabeth Alcott, Burlington 1745 April 24 

Rosell, Zachariab, Bridgetown, and Margaret Curtis, Bridgetown 1748 Jan. 25 

Rosell, Zachariab, New Hanover, and Mary Kemble 1783 Dec. 24 

Rosell, Zebulon, Burlington, and Ann Rosele, Burlington 1746 April 18 

Ross, David, New Castle, Del., and Sarah Rolfe, Salem 1731 Feb. 12 

Ross, Hugh, Philadelphia, and Sarah Corry, Philadelphia 1732 June 4 

Ross, Hugh, Horse Neck, Conn., and Ann Clay, Pennsylvania 1771 Sept. 13 

Ross, Isaiah, Gloucester, and Ruth Tindall, Gloucester 1733 June 22 

Ross, James, Middlesex, and Margaret Ellison, Middlesex 1762 Mar. 19 

Ross, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Jackson, Woodbridge 1759 June 20 

Ross, John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Griscomb 1 773 Nov. 4 

Ross, Joseph, Middlesex, and Elizabeth McCoy, Somerset 1749 Jan. 25 

Ross, Thomas, Cape May, and Mary Hand, Cape May 1782 Jan. 14 

Rossell, Hezekiah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bishop, Burlington . . . 1761 Oct. 1 

Rossell, Job, Burlington, and Huldah Kemble. . 1775 May 13 

Rossell, Samuel, Burlington, and Beulah Starkey, Burlington 1777 April 22 

Rouze, YVhilden, Ainwell, and Rebecca Lee, Amwell 1774 Jan. 18 

Row, David, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Taber, Gloucester 1 738 Sept. 6 

Kowand, Alexander, Gloucester, and Phebe C. Emens 1785 Aug. 2 

Rowand, Jacob, Gloucester, and Ann Heppard, Waterford 1771 May 22 

Rowand, Jacob, Gloucester, and Rhoda Cheesman .... 1782 May 4 

Rowe, Cornelius, Middlesex, and Charity Everingham - 1767 Sept. 28 

Rowland, Jacob, Middlesex, and Nancy Clawsen, Middlesex 1766 Sept. 20 

Rowland, James, Woodbridge, Johanne FitzRandolph, Woodbridge. . . 1756 Nov. 9 

Rowse, Thomas, Salem, and Hanah Hingerson, Salem 1746 Mar. 17 

Roy, Insley, Sussex, and Isable Rhodes 1779 Dec. 14 

Roy, John, Sand Plane, and Sarah Alloways, Sand Plane 1745 Jan. 16 

Rozell, Abner, Maidenhead, and Tabitha Cook 17S2 Feb. 27 

Rozell, Joseph, Burlington, and Ann Alcott, Burlington 1737 Dec. 29 

Rozell, Zachariab, Burlington, and Mary Morgan, Burlington 1739 Jan. 11 

Ruokman, Samuel, Kingwood, and Martha Foster, Kingwood 1772 July 4 

Ruckman, Thomas, Kingwood, and Susanna Ent, Amwell 1774 April 5 

Rudderow, John, Evesham, and Rachel Bates, Evesham 1747 Sept. 12 

Rudderow, William, Burlington, and Abigail Spicer, Gloucester 1758 May 4 



328 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Rudderow, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Jones 1730 Nov. 2 

Ruderford, Adam, Salem, and Esther Elwell, Salem 1761 Aug. 24 

Rudolph, Hans, Philadelphia, and Ann Eaton, Salem 1736 June 3 

Rudulph, Bartholomew, Cumberland, and Sarah Ewing 1779 Sept. 20 

line, John, Middlesex, and Lytie Voorhees, Middlesex 1751 May 20 

Rue, John, South Amboy, and Mary Letts, South Amboy 1758 July 24 

Rue, Joseph, Middlesex, and Anne Disbrow, Middlesex 1752 Dec. 2 

Rue, Lewis, Bucks, Pa., and Piachel Vansant 1736 Mar. 4 

Rue, Matthew, Middlesex, and Margaret Harbour, Middlesex 1749 Oct. 11 

Ruge, Benjamin, Salem, and Ann Craven 1731 Mar. 20 

Rulen, David, Stafford, and Dorcas Williams, Stafford 1763 Sept. 6 

Rulen, David, Stafford, and Mercy Soper, Stafford 1767 July 1 

Rulon, David, Burlington, and Jemima Hankim 1781 Feb. 12 

Rulon, John, Fairfield, and Sarah Burt 1782 Dec. 10 

Rumsey, Charles, Salem, and Susannah Dickson, Salem 1739 Nov. 1 

Rumsey, Daniel, Salem, and Rachel Ayars, Salem . . 1772 April 1 

Runalls, William, Woodbridge, and Mary Frazer, Woodbridge 1758 Mar. 15 

Bunk, Peter, Ainwell, and Ellenor Farley, Amwell 1774 Mar. 30 

Runkel, John, Lebanon, and Hannah Graff, Amwell 1775 Dec. 2 

Runkle, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Sarah Stout 1779 April 19 

Ruuyon, Benjamin, Amwell, and Rebecca Barton, Amwell 1764 Jan. 21 

Runyon, Ephraim, Piscataway, and Ruth Mollisou, Piscataway 1757 Oct. 12 

Ruuyon, Reune, Jr., Middlesex, and Anne Bray, Middlesex 1765 June 8 

Runyon, Reszia, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Crow, Middlesex 1761 Dec. 29 

Ruuyon, Reuben, Hunterdon, and Mary Gorden 1767 Dec. 24 

Runyon, Samuel, Freehold, and Martha Gravat, Freehold 1852 Oct. 23 

Rusco, Nathaniel, Essex, and Sarah Conklin, Essex 1747 Feb. 16 

Russel, John, Shrewsbury, and Hannah Coulton 1749 Jan. 23 

Russell, Clement, Gloucester, and Sarah Purdy, Gloucester 1742 Sept. 23 

Russell, James, Monmouth, and Abigail Holstid, Monmouth 1740 Sept. 5 

Russell, Thomas, Middlesex, and Else Adams, Hunterdon 1768 Dec. 23 

Rutan, Jacobus, Paramus, and Willempje Bogart, Paramus 1765 June 1 

Kutgers, Harmauis, New York, and Margaret Deforest, New York .. . . 1739 Sept. 17 

Rutherford, Henry, Salem, and Martha Cowin 1733 Aug. 13 

Ryder, Garret, Middlesex, and Mary Lecaw, Middlesex 1780 April 22 

Ryder, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Van Nuis 1780 Nov. 27 

Ryer, John, Bergen, and Mary Fismear 1784 Feb. 27 

Ryerson, Abraham, Saddle River, and Sarah Mauderviel 1782 Nov. 22 

Ryerson, George, Bergen, and Antje Hennyon, Bergen 1760 June 21 

Ryerson, George, Saddle River, and Abigail Post, Saddle River 1773 Dec. 17 

Ryerson, Hassel, Bergen, and Dorothy Earl, Bergen 177 L Dec. 11 

Ryerson, Hassel, Bergen, and Catherine Van Alen 1787 Nov. 20 

Ryerson, John, Reading, and Mary Slight, Reading 1774 Feb. 2 

Ryerson, Luke, Bergen, and Susanna Van Derlindeu, Bergen 1745 June 4 

Ryerson, Martin, Jr., Bergen, and Frouche Van Winkle 1778 Aug. 8 

Ryerson, William, Essex, and Eleaner Cook 1789 Sept. 15 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 329 

Ryle, Kraghead, and Lydia Akin 1779 

Ryly, Joseph, Cumberland, and Judith Moore, Cumberland 1774 

Rynearson, Rynear, Somerset, and Judith Low 1780 

Ryneir, Thomas, Mansfield, and Damey Thompson ... 1783 

FEMALES. * v 

Raccow, Ann, Richmond, N. Y., and Caleb Aydelow, Richm'd, N. Y. .1763 

Race, Anne, Burlington, and Richard Robbins, Burlington 1729 

Race, Hannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Dickens, Monmouth 1760 

Race, Priscilla, Middletown, and Joseph Patterson, Middletown 1746 

Radcliff, Hilletie, and William Ely, Essex 1781 

Radford, Mary, Burlington, and Richard Bibby, Burlington 1730 

Radford, Sarah, Burlington, and John Hartman, Burlington 1761 

Raef, Mary, and Gesbert Vansickle, Middlesex 1780 

Ragan, Margaret, Gloucester, and Thomas Taber, Gloucester 1764 

(^ Rainer, Eunice, and Thomas Johnson, Morris 1779 

Rakestraw, Hannah, and Abraham Haines, Burlington 1772 

Rakestraw, Lucretia, and Isaiah Flitcrof t, Burlington 1773 

Rakestraw, Lucretia, and James Nayler, Evesham 1777 

Rambo, Bridgett, Philadelphia, and John Carpenter, Philadelphia. . . . 1738 

Rambo, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Thomas Denny, Gloucester 1745 

Rambo, Mary, and David Seely, Salem 1758 

Rambon, Hannah, and Joseph Jones, Gloucester 1785 

Randall, Elizabeth, and Thomas Blacklege, Bucks, Pa 1730 

Randall, Phebe, Bucks, Pa., and John Mitchell, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Randall, Sarah, and Thomas Hair, Bucks, Pa 1768 

Randle, Ruth, and Esek Robins, Upper Freehold 1762 

Randolph — see also Fitz Randolph. 

Randolph, Ann, Middlesex, and Richard Manning, Morris 1753 

Randolph, Anne, and Jeremiah Bennet, Monmouth 1780 

Randolph, Experience, and James Coddington, Middlesex 1781 

Randolph, Grace, Middlesex, and Alexander Freeman, Middlesex 1748 

Randolph, Hannah, Cumberland, and Benjamin Acton, Salem 1773 

Randolph, Jane, Cumberland, and John Morrow, Cumberland 1771 

Randolph, Mary, and Elisha Brown, Philadelphia 1783 

Randolph, Rachel, Middlesex, and Jeremiah Manning, Middlesex . . . 1764 

Randolph, Zeruiah, Middlesex, and John Manning, Somerset 1763 

Raney, Latitia, Cape May, and Thomas Ewing, Cape May 1780 

Raney, Priscilla, and John B. McCormick, Cape May 1775 

Ranier, Sarah, and Joseph Housler, Burlington 1781 

Rankins, Anne, and Matthew Brown, Sussex 1708 

Rankins, Frances, and Abraham House 1771 

Rannals, Ruth, Pennsylvania, and John Croiier, Pennsylvania 1776 

Rape, Judah, and John Millhouse, Gloucester 1785 

Rappleye, Mary, and Jacob Boyce, Middlesex 1741 

Rappleyea, Anne, and Cornelius Sidam, Somerset 1780 



Mar. 


27 


May 


26 


Dec. 


16 


Jan. 


7 


July 


11 


Mar. 


21 


April 


11 


Sept. 


16 


May 


19 


May 


11 


April 


6 


Jan. 


19 


April 


5 


April 


26 


Dec. 


28 


May 


27 


Jan. 


9 


April 


17 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


2 


Mar. 


4 


April 


15 


Oct. 


17 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


28 


Sept. 


26 


July 


9 


Jan. 


11 


Nov. 


24 


Mar. 


28 


April 


12 


Feb. 


28 


Jan. 


21 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


11 


Aug. 


29 


June 


20 


Mar. 


18 


Mar. 


8 


Mar. 


28 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


28 



330 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Rappelyea, Jannetia, Somerset, and William Lane, Somerset 1750 

Rappelyea, Sarah, Piscataway, and Conrad Ten Eiek, Raritan 1751 

Rates, Sarah, and Joseph Avise, Salem 1781 

Ratford, Martha, and Godfrey Pilgrim, Burlington 1771 

Rathstone, Hannah Sophia, and William Hayes, Sussex 1770 

Rattan, Rachel, Somerset, and Elias Southard, Elizabethtown 1760 

Rattoon, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Robert Sproul, Perth Amboy. 1758 
Rattoon, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and Daniel O'Brien, Perth Amboy. 1749 

Rawle, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Thomas Massey, Philadelphia 1763 

Ray worth, Jane, Burlington, and William Versee. ...... 17-15 

Ray, Mary, Gloucester, and John Church, Philadelphia 1784 

Ray, Sarah, Philadelphia, and William Williamson, Philadelphia 1731 

Raziner, Sarah, and William Newbury, Gloucester 1783 

Rea, Agnes, Salem, and Elijah Bassett, Salem -1770 

Read, Catharine, Philadelphia, and William Stapler, Philadelphia 1730 

Read, Dinah, and Samuel Delancy, Gloucester , 1774 

Read, Eleanor, Monmouth, and Robert McAfey, Monmouth 1748 

Read, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Estlack, Jr., Gloucester 1751 

Read, Experience, and William Richman, Pitts Grove 1773 

Read, Helen, Monmouth, and Thomas Boune, Monmouth 1747 

Read, Jemima, and Isaac Ingerson, Gloucester 1775 

Read, Mary, Woodbridge, and Henry Freeman, Jr., Woodbridge 1742 

Read, Mary, Fairfield, and David Page, Fairfield 1763 

Read, Priscilla, Fairfield, and David Padgett, Cumberland 1752 

Read, Rachel, Salem, and John Miller, Salem 1740 

Read, Sarah, Monmouth, and Francis Covert, Monmouth 1744 

Read, Susanna, and Solomon Titus, Hopewell 1779 

Reading, Amelia, and Albert Zabriskie, Bergen 1787 

Reading, Ann, Hunterdon, and Charles Beaty, Bucks 1746 

Reading, Euphemia, and Peter Imlay, Monmouth 1772 

Reading, Isabella, and Henry Bailie, Hunterdon 1767 

Reading, Mary, and Arthur Gray, Hunterdon 1778 

Reading, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Augustin Rekl, Monmouth 1756 

Ready, Elizabeth, Cape May, and James Mickel, Cape May 1763 

Reay, Elizabeth, and Cornelius Clark, Salem 1758 

Rece, Elizabeth, and Thomas Town 1759 

Reckhow, Rachel, Staten Island, and Jacob Pries, Staten Island 1746 

Reckless, Ann, and William Shreve, Burlington 1779 

Records, Mary, and Thomas Potts 1698 

Reddy, Sarah, and John Sharp, Cape May 1767 

Redford, Elizabeth, and Lewis M. Ashfield 1748 

Redmon, Elizabeth, Somerset, Benjamin Fitzrandolph, Jr., Somerset. 1727 

Redstreak, Elizabeth, Salem, and Anthony Casparson, Salem 1739 

Redstreaks, Isabel, and James Smith 1771 

Reece, Susannah, and George Cook, Monmouth 1 762 

Reed, Alice, and John Disbrow, Hunterdon 1778 



June 4 
Dec. 27 
Dec. 10 
Feb. 2 
Nov. 17 
Oct. 25 
Feb. 4 
Oct. 11 
Sept, 28 
Jan. 25 
July 15 
Mar. 27 
Jan. 8 
Nov. 19 
June 16 
May 8 
Jan. 3 
May 29 
Oct. 25 
Dec. 26 
April 12 
July 1 
July 30 
Jan.. 16 
Oct. 31 
Nov. 3 
April 6 
Mar. 20 
Jan. 13 
April 13 
Dec. 8 
April 3 
July 6 
Feb. 12 
June 20 
Feb. 16 
Jan. 16 
Feb. 17 
June 30 
April 27 
Feb. 4 
Mar. 9 
Oct. 15 
Feb. 21 
April 15 
July 25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



331 



Reed, Elizabeth, Freehold, and Jonathan Combs, Perth Amboy 

Reed, Elizabeth, GeorgeT'n, Md., Jos. Montgomery, George T'n, M<1 

Reed, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Francis Mount, Monmouth 

Reed, Hannah, Middlesex, and Andrew Brown, Middlesex 

Reed, Nancy, and James Emerson, Jr., Hunterdon 

Reed, Maria, and Joseph Mcllvaue, Burlington. 

Reed, Martha, and Samuel Dowdney, Cumberland 

Reed, Patience, and Joshua Laing, Hunterdon 

Reed, Pheabe, Cape May, and Anthony Ludlum, Cape May 

Reed, Rachel, and William Snowden, Chesterfield 

Reed, Rhoda, and John Hunt, Hunterdon 

Reed, Ruth, and Thomas Plessent, Hunterdon. 

Reed, Sarah, and John Carr, Hunterdon 

Reeder, Elizabeth, and Thomas Drake, Hunterdon 

Reeder, Martha, Hunterdon, and James Kelly, Hunterdon. . . 

Reeder, Mary, and James Powell, Kingwood 

Reeder, Phebe, and Daniel Drake, Hiinterdon 

Reeds, Hedy, and Richard Groff, Gloucester 

Reemer, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Michael Henderson, Monmouth. . . . 

Reemer, Katherine, Somerset, and John Castner, Somerset 

Reese, Mary, and Jesse Eldridge, Burlington 

Reeve, Anne, Northampton, and Moses Reeve, Northampton 

Reeve, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Sherwell, Burlington. . . . , 

Reeve, Hannah, Evesham, and Levi Shinn, Evesham 

Reeves, Ann, Deptford, and John AVood, Deptford 

Reeves, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Bishop, Burlington 

Reeves, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Isaac Atkinson, Burlington 

Reeves, Elizabeth, Alloways Creek, and Aaron Stretch, Alloways Creek 

Reeves, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Sheppard, Burlington 

Reeves, Elizabeth, and Samuel Bennet, Gloster 

Reeves, Esther, Northampton, and Jabus Eldridge, Burlington 

Reeves, Hope, Burlington, and Joseph Haines, Burlington 

Reeves, Mabel, and Levi Leeke, Cumberland 

Reeves, Martha, Deptford, and William Thompson, Deptford 

Reeves, Mary, Burlington, and Francis Surly, Burlington 

Reeves, Mary, and Price Reese, Burlington 

Reeves, Mary, Gloucester, and Charles Hoffman, Gloucester 

Reeves, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Haines, Burlington 

Reeves, Mary, Evesham, and Andrew Stapleton, Evesham 

Reeves, Meribah, Burlington, and Edmund Lerithicum, Burlington . . 

Reeves, Prudence, and Daniel Brewster, Cumberland 

Reeves, Rachel, Burlington, and Mathias Brook, Burlington 

Reeves, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Adams, Gloucester 

Reeves, Sarah, and Israel Read, Cumberland 

Regan, Elizabeth Christina, and Simeon Verner, Somerset 

Regains, Mary, and Joseph Chester, Cape May 



1741 

1762 
1761 
1714 
1788 
1793 
1783 
1779 
1771 
1771 
1784 
1778 
1779 
1785 
1773 
1780 
1777 
1779 
1764 
1783 
1778 
1776 
,1756 
.1776 
1765 
1754 
.1736 
.1765 
1776 
.1783 
1746 
.1749 
1783 
.1768 
.1737 
1747 
1761 
.1771 
. 1782 
.1783 
.1780 
.1750 
.1754 
1787 
1767 
.1773 



1 
9 

7 
8 

is 



June 3 

May 4 

Feb. 8 

April '23 

Feb. 20 

Sept. 19 

Oct. 27 

Feb. 13 

April 2 

Jan. 3 

Feb. 16 

July 15 

Mar. 2 
Mar. 
Feb. 
Oct. 
July 
Jan. 

Jan. 24 

June 16 

May 2 

Jan. 17 

Oct. 14 

Jan. 2 

Oct. 28 

May 28 

Jan. 12 

Sept. 26 

May 16 

Mar. 8 

Nov. 12 

Nov. 2 

July 28 

Sept. 12 

Mar. 22 

May 16 

July 13 

Mar, 19 

June 21 

Sept. 20 

April 10 

Sept. 19 

June 'is 

Jan. 29 

Dec. 24 

June 30 



332 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Eegens, Margaret, Burlington, and Zebulon Bozworth, Burlington. . . . 1768 

Reid, Abigail, Monmouth, and Tunis Anderson, Monmouth 1746 

Reid, Anne, Freehold, and Obadiah Bowne 1749 

Reid, Anne, Freehold, and Samuel Barclay, Hunterdon 1750 

Beid, Euphemia, Monmouth, and Daniel Beading 1755 

Reid, Jane, Monmouth, and John Craig, Monmouth 1760 

Reid, Margaret, Freehold, and James Kearney 1751 

Reid, Mary, Monmoutb, and William Hartshorne, Monmouth 174 L 

Reid, Theodotia, and Jasper Smith, Anrwell. ... 1767 

Remine, Elizabeth, Freehold, and James Wilson, Freehold 1748 

Remine, Margaret, Monmouth, and Richard Hinds, Monmouth. .... 1736 

Remington, Rachel, and Jonathan Bowen, Cumberland 1760 

Remsen, Heyltye, and Samuel Gerr*n Verbryck, New Barbadoes 1781 

Remsen, Margaret, Orange, N. Y., and Johannis Bell, Orange, N. Y. . . 1761 

Renear, Mariby, and George Taylor, Pennsylvania .... 1779 

Renuals, Hannah, Monmouth, and Richard Bills, Monmouth 1753 

Rennit, Leah, Shrewsbury, and Henry Wetherbee, Shrewsbury 1760 

Renshaw, Mary, and James Steel, Gloucester 1759 

Revell, Anne, and Joseph White 1694 

Revell, Elizabeth, and Anthoney Elton 1688 

Rewlong, Fhebe, and Daniel Johnson, Monmouth 1765 

Reylins, Ruth. Burlington, and William Price, Burlington 17. . 

Reynear, Rachel, Burlington, and William Walsbey, Burlington . . . . 1780 

Reynolds, Ann, Monmouth, and Francis Mount, Monmouth 1758 

Reynolds, Ann, Burlington, and William Ireton, Burlington 1764 

Reynolds, Margaret, and Joseph Davis, Bucks 1737 

Reynolds, Margaret, Burlington, and John Bispham, Burlington 1754 

Beynolds, Mary, and Jacob Mattson, Gloucester 1733 

Reynolds, Mary, and John West, Burlington 1759 

Reynolds, Mary, Gloucester, and Nathan Beys, Jr., Gloucester 1763 

Reynolds, Mary, Middlesex, and Archibald Cunningbam, Philadelphia. 1771 

Reynolds, Rachel, Gloucester, and Zachariah Shaw, Gloucester 1762 

Reynolds, Uphamea, and William Holman, Monmouth 1761 

Reyper, Mariche, Bergen, and Roelif Van Der Linder, Bergen 1750 

Rhaney, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Cassoday, Monmouth. . . . 1768 

Rhe, Eleanor, Monmoutb, and William Craig, Monmouth 1753 

Rhea, Anna, Freehold, and Henry Robinson, Freehold 1763 

Rhea, Margaret, Monmoutb, and Samuel Henderson, Monmouth 1767 

Rhea, Mary, and William Montgomery, Monmouth 1778 

Rhodes, Babel, and Insley Roy, Sussex 1779 

Rially, Elizabeth, and David Garrison, Salem 1773 

Ribbet, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Benjamin Woolley, Shrewsbury. . 1759 

Ribet, Mary, Monmouth, and Tessher Cook, Monmouth 1764 

Rice, Sarah, and Jacob Hollinshead, Cumberland 1779 

Richard, Ann, and William Bisbop, Burlington 1734 

Richards, Bathsheba. and Samuel Kelly, Burlington 1733 



April 


7 


Dec. 


4 


Dec. 


12 


April 


9 


Feb. 


26 


May 


27 


July 


6 


Dec. 


21 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


8 


Aug. 


2 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


13 


Sept. 


4 


Jan. 


12 


Dec. 


19 


April 


12 


Feb. 


20 


Jan. 


11 


Aug. 


23 


Oct. 


14 


Jan. 


4 


Oct. 


1 


Mar. 


31 


Sept. 


16 


Jan. 


20 


July 


19 


Oct. 


17 


Sept. 


18 


Mar. 


1 


Sept. 


14 


Oct. 


23 


Jan. 


4 


May 


28 


Nov. 


1 


April 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


14 


April 


9 


Jan. 


13 


Feb. 


22 


April 


17 


Sept. 


9 


May 


23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Richards, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Prosser, Gloucester 1737 

Richards, Elizabeth, and Samuel Cozens, Gloucester 1761 

Richards, Grace, Burlington, and -Joseph Hutchins, Burlington 1745 

Richards,. Mahetabel, Perth Amboy, and Nathaniel Twining, P'th Anib.1756 

Richards, Marcy, and Isaac Miller, Burlington 1750 

Richards, Mary, and Jonathan West, Gloucester 1786 

Richards, Rachel, Perth Arnboy, and Daniel Carson, Cranberry 1755 

Richards, Susannah, and Peter Smith, Elizabeth 1771 

Richardson, Ann, and Henry Brown ... 1735 

Richardson, Ann, Deptford, and Dobson Wheeler, Deptford 1737 

Richardson, Anne, and Peter Schuyler, Burlington 1777 

Richardson, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Richardsou, Cape May 1733 

Richardson, Jane, and William Harris, Burlington 1772 

Richardson, Elizabeth, and John Spier, Gloucester 1733 

Richardson, Jane, Burlington, and James Davis, Burlington 1774 

Richardson, Martha, Burlington, and John Handcock, Burlington 1739 

Richardson, Mary, and John Cope, Salem 1775 

Richardson, Nancy, and Benjamin Bryan, Burlington 1780 

Richardson, Phebe, and William Page, Burlington 1756 

Richardson, Prissillah, and Selvanus Townsend, Cape May 1778 

Richardson, Rachel, Gloucester, and John Spence, Gloucester 1727 

Richardson, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and Jonathan Carmalk, Phila. . . . 1727 

Richardson, Rebecca, and Robert lownsend, Cape May 1767 

Richardson, Susannah, Chesterfield, and Abraham Brown, Chesterfield. 1749 
Richison, Miriam, Philadelphia, and William Hazleton, Philadelphia. .1737 

Richman, Christiana, and Brathwate Tuft, Lower Penns Neck 1771 

Richman, Lyddy, Salem, and David Moore, Salem 1771 

Richman, Rebecca, Salem, and John McCollister, Salem 1762 

Richmond, Cathrine, Salem, and George Johnston, Salem. . 1774 

Richmond, Cathrine, and Charles Riley, Pilegrove 1785 

Eichmond, Rachel, and John Hutcheson, Gloucester 1774 

Richmond, Sarah, and James Bond, Salem 1758 

Rickoff, Mary, and John Hillyer, Richmond, N. Y 1768 

Rickey, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Robert Brower, New York 1760 

Rickey, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and William Nicholls, Philadelphia 1775 

Rickey, Mary, Bucks, Pa. , and George White, Bucks, Pa 1765 

Rickey, Mary, Sussex, and James Broderick, Sussex 1771 

Rickey, Sarah, and Richard W. Furinan, Trenton 1786 

Rickets, Sarah, and Winson Wilkinson, Mansfield 1781 

Ricky, Nancy, and Samuel Hunt, Morris 1777 

Riddle, Ann, Cumberland, and Andrew Hunter, Cumberland 1775 

Riddle, Elizabeth, Monmouth, Remembrance Lippiocott, Monmouth. 1744 

Riddle, Elizabeth, and William Brotherton, Middlesex 1776 

Ridenaar, Antje, and Peter Outterberg, Bergen 1762 

Rider, Anne, and Abraham Gulick, Somerset 1780 

Rider, Elizabeth, and William Peacock, Burlington 1784 



333 

Nov. 9 
Sept. 15 
May 1 
Mar. 2 
Aug. 22 
Feb. 28 
Sept. 27 
Aug. 12 
Jan. 22 
April 30 
May 21 
Sept. 27 
Mar. 18 
Nov. 16 
May 9 
Jan. 1 
Feb. 10 
Oct. 18 
April 13 
Dec. 30 
June 19 
Nov. 23 
June 1 
July 26 
July 9 
April 4 
Dec. 4 
May 31 
July 17 
Sept. 26 
June 9 
June 15 
Feb. 2 
Dec. 2 
Mar. 12 
June 27 
April 6 
Aug. 19 
Jan. 30 
May 6 
Oct. 2 
Nov. 1 
April 2 
Sept. 15 
Feb. 11 
July 24 



334 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Rider, Keziah, Burlington, and Jacob Andrews, Burlington 1764 

Eider, Letty, and Jorge Vanarsdalen, Somerset 1781 

Ridge, Rose, Burlington, and John Morris, Burlington 1746 

Eidgeway, Elizabeth, Bordeutown, William Cunningham, Bordent'n. .1737 . 

Eidgeway, Hannah, Burlington, and Daniel Park, Burlington 1746 

Eidgeway, Lucy, and Robert W. Bishop, Burlington 1793 

Eidgway, Mary, Burlington, and John Butcher, Jr., Burlington 1738 

Eidgway, Abigail, and John Shreve, Burlington ... 1786 

Ridgway, Elizabeth, and John Cowgill, Burlington 1761 

Ridgway, Hepzibah, and Edward Tonkin, Springfield 1777 

Ridgway, Jane, Burlington, and Abraham Brown, Burlington 1774 

Eidgway, Marian, Wellenborough, Eichard McGinnes, Wallenbo'gh. . 1775 

Eidgway, Nancy, and Job Stockton, Springfield 1791 

Ridgway, Phebe, Mansfield, and Benjamin Gibbs, Mansfield 1748 

Ridgway, Sarah, Burlington, and James Moore, Burlington 1730 

Bied, Jane, Middlesex, and John Johnson, Middlesex 1765 

Riffetts, Mary, and Abraham Mitchel, Burlington 1757 

RifHin, Mary, and John Collins, Gloucester. 1769 

Rifuer, Mary, and Daniel Slate, Greenwich 1786 

Rigg, Jane, and Henry Marjeram 1693 

Rigge, Elisabeth, Somerset, and Joseph Wilson, Somerset 1757 

Riggents, Esther, Northampton, and John Reeve, Northampton 1779 

Eight, Catrine, Monmouth, and Benjamin Haviland, Monmouth. . . . 1754 

Eight, Lucrese, Monmouth, and Edward McCalla, Monmouth 1765 

Eight, Susannah, and Dean Simkins 1769 

Eiley, Margaret, P. Amboy, and Eobert King, Perth Amboy 1752 

Riley, Margaret, Monmcutb, and William Baird, Morris 1758 

Riley, Mary, Burlington, and Elnathan Stevenson, Burlington 1756 

Emerson, Else, and Minerd Willson 1781 

Eing, Eebecca, and William Hays, Burlington 1777 

Risley, Hester, and John Sommers 1744 

Risley, Hester, and Frederick Steelmun, Gloucester. . . 1744 

Risley, Jemima, Gloucester, and Edward Hegbe, Gloucester 1738 

liisley, Jemima, Gloucester, and George Hawkins, Gloucester 1758 

Risley, Leah, and James Holmes, Gloucester 1774 

Risley, Mary, Egg Harbour, and John Steelman, Egg Harbour 1736 

Eisley, Mary, Gloucester, and Joseph Ingersoll, Gloucester 1743 

Eisley, Melesent, and Eichard Chamberlin, Gloucester 1772 

Eisley, Eebecca, Egg Harbour, and James Simson, Egg Harbour 1765 

Eisley, Eebecah, and Zephaiah Steelman, Gloucester 1768 

Eitchey, Mary, Allentown, and Jacob Bryan, Burlington 1758 

Eizley, Ann, Gloucester, and Nehemiah Leeds, Jr., Gloucester 1763 

Roads, Sarah, and John Bale, Burlington 1711 

Roads, Sarah, Philadelphia, and John Mickinson, Philadelphia 1730 

Roads, Mary, Chester, Pa., and Robert Powell, Burlington 1730 

Eoan, Ann, and Jonathan Penrose, Pennsylvania 1775 



Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


8 


Dec. 


13 


April 


29 


July 


5 


June 


3 


Feb. 


23 


Sept. 


9 


Nov. 


12 


Mar. 


18 


Aug 


22 


June 


20 


Nov. 


23 


Sept. 


7 


Dec. 


1 


Mar. 


27 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


14 


June 


21 


Oct. 


3 


Nov. 


18 


Mar. 


31 


Dec. 


4 


April 


17 


July 


28 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


1 


Oct, 


21 


Jan. 


1 


May 


13 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


9 


May 


4 


July 


31 


July 


5 


July 


17 


June 


13 


Dec. 


23 


May 


20 


April 


16 


May 


26 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


12 


Nov. 


16 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 335 

Robbing, Elizabeth, Upper Freehold, William Sexton, Upper Freehold. 1 77 (i 
Bobbins, Martha, Allentown, and John Steward, Jr., Upper Freehold 1757 

Robens, Elizabeth, and John Polemus, Monmouth 1759 

Robens, Judith, Cape May, and Abraham Woolson, Cape May. • 1769 

Robinson, Marian, and Benjamin Walker, New York 1784 

Roberts, Abigail, Hunterdon, and Evans Goodwin, Hunterdon. ...... 1772 

Roberts, AnD, Philadelphia, and Thomas Turner, Philadelphia 1736 

Roberts, Anne, Philadelphia, and Lewis Rogers, Philadelphia 1750 

Roberts, Anna, and William Markworth, Trenton 1779 

Roberts, Anne, Middletowu, and Nicholas Cotterell, Middletown 1752 

Roberts, Deborah, Middletown Pt,, and Thomas Bell, Shrewsbury . . 1759 

Roberts, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Walling, Middletown 1757 

Roberts, Hannah, Gloucester, and Benjamin Holem, Gloucester. . . . 1735-6 

Roberts, Keziah, Burlington, and Levi Albertson, Gloucester 1756 

Roberts, Lydia, Cohansie, and James Carruthers, Salem 1733 

Roberts, Mary, Middletown, and Gershom Wolling, Middletown 1743 

Roberts, Mary, Middletown, and Joseph Collings, Middletown 1749 

Roberts, Prudence, Cumberland, and David Wood, Salem 1777 

Roberts, Rachel, and Joseph Homer, Monmouth 1768 

Roberts, Rebecka, Middletown, an tl Thomas Walling, Monmouth. . 1754 

Roberts, Rebecca, and William Gofforth, Gloucester 1774 

Roberts, Rebecca, and Ebenezer Adams, Gloucester 1781 

Roberts, Ruth, Salem, and John Lewis, Salem 1741 

Roberts, Sarah, Middletown, John Conves, New Brunswick 1743 

Roberts, Theodotia, and John Pitman, Burlington 1762 

Roberts, Zilpah, and John Welling, Hunterdon 1781 

Roberts, Esther, Gloucester, and John Hickman, Gloucester 1745-6 

Robertson, Isabel, Monmouth, and Thomas Lepper, Monmouth 1744 

Robertson, Jane, Monmouth, and Arthur Brown, Jr., Monmouth 1746 

Robertson, Mary, Monmouth, and John Bescherer, Morris 1754 

Robertson, Mary, Burlington, and William Burne, Burlington 1765 

Robertson, Mary, Amwell, and Cornelius Van Court, Moreland, Pa. . . 1775 

Robertson, Susannah, Amwell, and Samuel Opdycke, Amwell 1775 

Robison, Sarah, and Levy Jennings, Gloucester 1759 

Robins, AnD, Burlington, and Samuel Cheshire, Burlington 1740 

Robins, Ann, and Joseph Steward, New Hanover 1767 

Robins, Anne, and James Vaughan, Upper Freehold 1768 

Robins, Deliverance, Burlington, and John Taylor, Burlington 1739 

Robins, Dinah, Middlesex, and Benjamin BrittOD, Middlesex 1750-1 

Robins, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Morford, Monmouth 1739 

Robins, Elizabeth, and John Grover, Monmouth 1773 

Robins, Hannah, Monmouth, and James Cox, Monmouth 1745 

Robins, Leah, Monmouth, and Benjamin Wood, Monmouth 1741 

Robins, Lediab, Cumberland, and Constant Wothman, Cumberland. . 1754 

Robins, Lucy, Monmouth, and Robert Parent, Monmouth 1771 

Robins, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Gilbertsou, Jr., Monmouth. . 1750 



Nov. 


26 


Nov. 


12 


June 


7 


May 


29 


Aug. 


30 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


30 


Aug. 


22 


Mar. 


2 


Nov. 


29 


May 


14 


Mar. 


21 


Mar. 


3 


April 


24 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


24 


Jan. 


3 


July 


9 


Sept. 


26 


July 


6 


June 


1 


May 


16 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


19 


Feb. 


8 


Feb. 


20 


Feb. 


1 


April 


6 


Nov. 


3 


May 


4 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


7 


Feb. 


26 


Sept. 


13 


. May 


6 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


24 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


31 


Jan. 


10 


Jan. 


10 


Get. 


29 



336 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Robins, Margaret, Monmouth, and John Brown, Burlington 1750 Dec. 4 

Robins, Margaret, Monmouth, and Joseph Page, Monmouth 1761 Aug. 26 

Robins, Mary, Cape May, and James Sulisaii, Cape May 1739 May 4 

Robins, Mary, and Clayton Brown, Burlington 1749-50 Mar. 8 

Robins, Mary, and Benjamin Morris, Monmouth 1763 Dec. 2 

Robins, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Thorn, Burlington 1764 Jan. 16 

Robins, Mary, Monmouth, and Jesse Robins, Monmouth 1771 Aug. 12 

Robins, Mary, Hunterdon, and Joseph Burwell, Hunterdon 1771 Oct. 29 

Robins, Rachel, and Timotby Harburt, Monmouth 1768 Aug. 18 

Robins, Saiah, Monmouth, and Cornelius Everingham, Monmouth. . .1728 Aug. 8 

Robinson, Ann, Monmouth, and Jacob West, Monmouth 1771 Oct. 18 

Robinson, Charity, Monmouth, and William Hendrickson, New Jersey. 1756 Dec. 21 

Robinson, Christina, and William Hunter, Monmouth 1770 Dec. 9 

Robinson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Steward, Burlington. . .1739 Dec. 31 

Robinson, Elizabeth, and David Righter, Hunterdon 1781 Jan. 1 

Robinson, Elizabeth, and Robert Priest, Philadelphia 1783 Aug. 18 

Robinson, Jane, Monmouth, and David English, Monmouth 1754 Dec. 14 

Robinson, Lidia, Philadelphia, and Oswald Peel, Philadelphia 1728 Nov. 21 

Robinson, Martha, Burlington, and Jacob Hillier, Burlington 1762 April 17 

Robinson, Mary, Hopewell, and Burgin Board, Somerset 1734 April 2 

Robinson, Mary, and Joseph Jackson. Pennsylvania 1737 May 10 

Robinson, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Thomas Kinnau, Perth Amboy. . .1760 Feb. 4 

Robinson, Mary, New Brunswick, and Isaac Collins, New Brunswick. .1774 Sept. 23 

Robinson, Mary, and Nathan Clifton, Burlington. . . 1780 Nov. 21 

Robinson, Sarah, and George F. Randolph, Perth Amboy 1764 Jan. 31 

Robnett, Lydia, and Adam G-rubb, Gloucester 1773 April 12 

Roche, Catherine, Burlington, and Michael Howard, Burlington 1731 July 24 

Roche, Joanna, Burlington, and George Collins, Burlington 1731 Oct. 30 

Rockfort, Elizabeth, and Samuel Moore, Middlesex 1759 Jan. 24 

Rockhill, Abigail, and William Carslake, Burlington 1782 Nov. 28 

Rockhill, Acsah, and Thomas Bullock, Burlington 1772 Dec. 19 

Rockhill, Acsah, and William Erwin, Sussex 1782 June 5 

Rockhill, Anne, Mansfield, and John Trent, Chesterfield 1750 July 31 

Rockhill, Ann, Burlington, and Thomas English, Jr., Burlington. ...1768 Mar. 10 

Rockhill, Elizabeth, and Samuel English, BurlingtoD 1783 Aug. 28 

Rockhill, JVIargaret, and James Craft, Burlington 1758 July 19 

Rockhill, Mary, Burlington, and Abner Steward, Burlington. 1777 Oct. 24 

Rockhill, Meribeth, Mansfield, and Thomas Smith, Mansfield 1775 Nov. 6 

Rockhill, Susannah, Burlington, and Solomon Ivins. Burlington 1770 May 25 

Rockhill, Sarah, and William Borradail, both Burlington City. . ...... 1748 Sept. 30 

Rockhill, Sarah, Mansfield, and John Craft, Mansfield 1772 Mar. 19 

Rockhill, Theodocia, and Joseph Price, Burlington 1779 Nov. 16 

Rodger, Abigail, and George Henton, Burlington 1743 Sept. 23 

Rodgers, Ester, Burlington, and James ELlridge, Burlington 1729 June 4 

Rodgers, Hannah, and Joseph Height, Monmouth 1778 Aug. 18 

Rodgers, Margaret, Cape May, and William Smith, Cape May 1768 Dec. 27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 337 

Rodders, Mary, Burlington, and George Grimes, Salem 1743 Aug. 29 

Rodman, Anna, Burlington, and William Lister, Essex 1759 Oct. 20 

Rodman, Anna, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Thomas Rogers, Gt. Egg Har. .1766 May 10 

Rodman, Margaret, and William Mcllvaiue, Buck-, l'a 1773 Nov. 6 

Rodman, Margaret, and Thomas Aikens 17^0 Oct. 1 

Rodman, Mary, and John Johnson 1737 July 17 

Roe, Elizabeth, and George W, Babcock, Gloucester .... 178-1 Oct. 13 

Roe, Mary, and Ruth Burke, Burlington 1776 Jan. 1 G 

Roelufse, Cyntje, BergeD, and Johannis Demott, Bergen 1769 April 29 

Rogers, Abigail, Burlington, and Samuel Jones, Burlington 1750 June 1 

Rogers, Ann, Burlington, and James Cattell, Burlington. ... 1738 May 18 

Rogers, Aun, Burlington, and Moses Huestis, Burlington 1771 Dec. 17 

Rogers, Desire, Monmouth, and Joseph Allen, Monmouth 1742 Feb. 18 

Rogers, Desire, Monmouth, and Henry Marsh, Monmouth 1760 Jan. 8 

Rogers, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Hoffmire, Monmouth. ... 1740 Nov. 11 

Rogers, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Daniel Tuttel, Burlington 1761 July 29 

Rogers, Elizabeth, and William Deacon, Burlington. 1764: Jan. 25 

Rogers, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Jarvis Stokes, Burlington 1773 Nov. 27 

Rogers, Elizabeth, and Abraham Tilton, Burlington 1781 Jan. 15 

Rogers, Hannah, Burlington, and George Cleaveland, Burlington 1756 Sept. 20 

Rogers, Luly, Monmouth, and Denis Herliky, Monmouth 1760 Mar. 11 

Rogers. Mahitabell, Burlington, and Samuel Deacon, Burlington 1762 Mar. 20 

Rogers, Marah, Monmouth, and Peter Funk, Monmouth 1753 Mar. 5 

Rogers, Martha, and William Cnrny, Burlington 1749 Dec. 8 

Rogers, Martha, and Joseph Bennett, Burlington 1764 Mar. 21 

Rogers, Mary, Burlington, and William Dennis, Burlington 1737 June 1 

Rogers, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Staples, Burlington 1738 Mar. 25 

Rogers, Mary, Burlington, and Jarret McDanuels, Monmouth 1748 May 11 

Rogers, Mary, Burlington, and Robert Fulton, Burlington 1765 July 19 

Rogers, Mary, and Phinias Kirksbride, Burlington 1797 July 22 

Rogers, Mary, and James Lawrence, Monmouth 1785 Feb. 27 

Rogers, Rachel, Monmouth, and Robert Oottrel, Monmouth 1766 Jan. 22 

Rogers, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Eayre, Burlington 1756 Sept. 20 

Rogers, Rebeckah, Freehold, and Koert Schenck, Jr., Freehold 1767 Jan. 20 

Rogers, Rhoda, and John Osborn, Philadelphia 1779 April 14 

Rogers, Sarah, Burlington, and Stephen Adams, Burlington 1733 "Sept. 1 

Rogers, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Biddle, Burlington 1745 Jan. 6 

Rogers, Susannah, Monmouth, and Samuel Baird, Monmouth 1762 Aug. 6 

Rolf, Elizabeth, and Thomas Clement, Gloucester. 1774 Nov. 1 

Rolph, Hannah, Woodbridge, and David Edgar, Woodbridge 1713 Feb. 22 

Rolf, Mary, Morris, and James Keen, Morri° '. 1768 July 28 

Rolfe, Sarah, Salem, and David Ross, New Castle, Del 1731 Feb. 12 

Rolph, Sarah, Elizabethtown, and Joseph Barnet, Elizabethtown 1751 June 6 

Rols, Anne, Hunterdon, and Abraham Van Sickle, Hunterdon 1744 Dec. 11 

Romine, Catharine, Saddle River, and Simeon Van Winckle, Sad Riv. 1769 April 25 

Komine, Elizabeth, Hackensack, and David Simmons Hackensack. . 1761 Sept. 16 
21 



338 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Romeyn, Giertie, Somerset, and Peteris Wycof, Somerset 1743 

Romine, Katharin, Monmouth, and William Clark, Monmouth 1745 

R online, Kerchey, Shrewsbury, aud John Vannort, Shrewsbury 1760 

Rornine, Rachel, Lower Freehold, Christopher Romine, L'r Freehold. . 1750 

Romine, Rachel, Bergen, and Andries Hopper, Bergen 1762 

Romine, Rachel, and Elias Romine, Bergen 1769 

Rose, Debro, and Daniel Howell, Hunterdon 1763 

Rose, Elizabeth, aud John Coole, Hunterdon 1743-4 

Rose, Hannah, and Elijah Letts, Middlesex 1769 

Rose, Hannah, Morris, and William Henery, Sussex 1773 

Rose, Jerusa, Hopewell, and Jacob Quick, Amwell 1772 

Rose, Martha, Egg Harbour, and John Leek, Egg Harbour 1761 

Rose, Mary, Burlington, and Michael Sill, Burlington. 1730 

Rose, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Frederick Buckalew, Perth Amboy. . . . 1750 

Rose, Mary, Salem, and John Gray, Salem 1762 

Rose, Mary, Burlington, and Francis Bodine, Burlington 1768 

Rose, Patience, Hunterdon, and Henry Baker, Bucks 1764 

Rose, Phebe, Trenton, aud Amos Scudder, Trenton. 1763 

Rose, Fhebe, Monmouth, and Harman Johnson, Monmouth 1767 

Rosebrook, Mary, and David Henasy 1751 

Rosebury, Margaret, Middlesex, and John Van Schaick, Middlesex 1764 

Rosecrants, Mary, aud John Dildine, Somerset 1780 

Rosegrants, Anne, and John Hudnut, Hunterdon 1769 

Rosele, Anne, Evesham, and Zebulon Rosele, Ev&sham 1746 

Resell, Aun, Burlington, and Samuel Hollinshead, Burlington 1736 

Rosell, Aim, Burlington, aud Zebulon Rosell, Burlington 1746 

Rosell. Sarah, and Martin Scott 1735 

Ross, Abigail, and John Meeker, Middlesex . . 1769 

Ross, Hannah, and Aaron Frazer, Middlesex 1768 

Ross, Jane, Woodbridge, and William Bloomfield, Woodbridge 1758 

Ross, Jane, Essex, and William Jelf, Morris 1771 

Ross, Margaret, New Castle, Del., Walter Harket. New Castle, Del 1730 

Ross, Margaret. Somerset, and John Steell, Somerset 1752 

Ross, Mary, Elizabeth, and Matthias Baldwin, Elizabeth 1746 

Ross, Mary, Middlesex, and James Drake, Middlesex 1765 

Ross, Polly, and Samuel Kemble, Jr., Burlington 1782 

Ross, Sarah, Middlesex, and William Annin, Somerset 1749 

Ross, Susannah, and Joseph Crane, Essex 1772 

Rossell, Elizabeth, and George Wills, New Jersey 1779 

Rossell, Hope, Burlington, and Caleb Gaskill, Burliugton 1765 

Rossell, Margaret, and Matthew West, Burlington 1784 

Rossell, Rebecca, Northampton, Solomon Southwick, Northampton. .. 1759 

Rossell, Susannah, and Jonathan Force, Middletown, Pa 1782 

Rounds-avell, Rebecca, Hunterdon, and John Hoffman, Hunterdon. .. 1774 

Rowan, Sarah, Builington, aud Joseph Lyndall, Burlington 1778 

Rowand, Ann, and Samuel C. Davis, Gloucester 1790 



Feb. 


15 


April 


12 


Aug. 


22 


Aug. 


13 


June 


17 


Feb. 


11 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


6 


Dec. 


20 


Dec. 


11 


Oct, 


28 


July 


3 


Sept. 


11 


Feb. 


17 


April 


14 


Mar. 


20 


April 


13 


Dec. 


26 


Feb. 


3 


Dec. 


9 


Feb. 


28 


Feb. 


7 


Dec. 


30 


April 


18 


July 


9 


April 


18 


Jan. 


12 


July 


13 


Nov. 


8 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


21 


June 


4 


Feb. 


15 


May 


12 


May 


8 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


25 


April 


16 


Feb. 


3 


July 


15 


Jan. 


1 


April 


14 


Dec. 


17 


Aug. 


6 


April 


19 


Dec. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 339 

Bowand, Hannah, Gloucester, and Uriah Cheesmau, Gloucester 1749 May 11 

Uowand, Hannah, aud Benjamin Matlack, Gloucester 1783 Sept. 5 

Howell, Elizabeth, and Anthony Montgomery, Cumberland 1778 Oct. 21 

Eowen, Abigail, Gloucester, and George Ward, Gloucester 1746 July 13 

Eowen, Mary, and Joseph Harden 1775 Mar. 2 

Eowlan, Elizabeth, and John Tudor, Burlington 1769 Sept. 20 

Rowling, Deborah, Middlesex, and Joseph Freeman, Jr., Middlesex. .. 1763 Aug. 23 

Roy, Margarett, Somerset, and Lawrence Strigbt, Somerset 1773 Nov. 3 

Roy, Martha, Burlington, and William Corry, Burlington 1766 Jan. 11 

Royall, Elizabeth, and Andrew Holsten, Salem 1736 Aug. 21 

Royse, Mary, Piscataway, aud William Hooks, E'iscataway 1749 April 25 

Rozell, Esther, Northampton, and Jabez Woolston, Evesham 1767 Dec. 5 

Ruckell, Amey, and 'Ihomas Shourds, Burlington 1780 Mar. 25 

Ruckman, Hitabel, and John Parsons, Trenton 1733 Nov. 26 

Buekinan, Susauab, Kingwood, and Peter Overfield, Amwell 1769 June 27 

Euddenrow, Sarah, Chester, and William Vanhorn, Chester 1757 May 21 

Euderow, Haunab, Burlington, and William Hollinsbead, Burlington. 1727 April 1 

Eudrow, Rachel, and James Bell, Gloucester 1784 May 3 

Eue, Abigail, South Amboy, and Henry Perine, South Amboy 1757 Nov. 8 

Eue, Anne, and Blackstone Ingliedue, Bucks, Pa 1761 May 20 

Eue, Catharine, Bucks, Pa , and James Parker, Burlington 1765 Mar. 28 

Eue, Eleanor, Monmoutb, and William Perine, Middlesex 1763 Mar. 14 

Eue, Elizabeth, aud Peter Comback, Hunterdon. 1784 Mar. 22 

Eue, Margaret, Middlesex, and James Dey, Monmouth 1760 Nov. 24 

Eue, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Case, Bucks, Pa 1734 Aug. 22 

Eue, Mary, Pennsylvania, and Timothy Eoberts, Pennsylvania 1735 April 15 

Eue, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Perine, Jr., Perth Amboy 1756 June 1 

Eue, Mary, Chester, and George Tyson, Chester 1763 Dec. 2 

Eue, Susannab, and Joseph Adams, Gloucester 1782 Jan. 1 

Buff, Barbary, Cumberland, aud Henry Fox, Cumberland 1767 Nov. 26 

Eugg. Prudence, Salem, and John Vaughan, Philadelphia 1761 Dec. 16 

Eulins, Mary, and Richard Heard. Burlington 1777 Feb. 25 

Eullin, Ester, Middletown, and William Taylor, Jr., Freehold 1762 April 13 

Rulon, Desire, Stafford, and Benjamin Collins, Monmouth 1756 Jan. 12 

Eulong, Elizabeth, and Syvanus Cook, Monmouth 1777 Aug. 14 

Eulong, Hannah, Nottingham, and Jonathan Browne, Burlington City. 1748 April 13 

Eulong, Mary, and Michael Spray, Barnegat 1762 Nov. 26 

Eumford, Hannah, Gloucester, and George Avis, Gloucester 1761 Jan. 30 

Rumsey, Hannah, Salem, and Peter Monnson, Salem 1764 June 30 

Ruinsy, Ruth, Salem, aud Joshua Brick, Salem 1737 July 25 

Rumsy, Sarab, Salem, and George Miller, Salem 1737 Aug. 22 

Runalls, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Abraham Tappen, Woodbridge. . . 1750 Nov. 22 

Bunion, Alice, aud Daniel Jobues, Middlesex .... 1773 June 21 

Bunions, Anna, Morris, and Michael Macafee, Middlesex 1752 April 16 

Bunk, Eachel, and Eobert Sharp, Amwell 1780 Jan. 1 1 

Bunyan, Mary, and Samuel Large, Hunterdon 1780 Feb. 10 



340 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tinman, Sarah, and Elijah Stout, Hunterdon 1778 April 8 

Runyon, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Jonas Sutton, Am well 1764 Sept. 22 

Runyon, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and Richard Barry, Perth Arnboy. . 1757 Nov. 12 

Runyon, Martha, Bucks, Pa., and Freeman Roberds, Bucks, Pa 1768 Oct. 20 

Runyon, Mary, Middlesex, and Joshua Martin, Jr , Middlesex 1756 Sept. 11 

Rush, Ann, Gloucester, and Nathaniel Dell Gloucester .... 1763 June 24 

Rushford, Auslis, Burlington, and Patrick Reynolds, Burlington 1729 Jan. 29 

Russel, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and Joshua Parker, Shrewsbury 1758 April 12 

Russel, Mary, Monmouth, and Silas Cook, Monmouth 1746 Oct. 15 

Russell, Elizabeth, Salem, and Henry Hart, Salem 1767 Sept. 29 

Russel], Sarah, Monmouth, and John McConnell, Monmouth 1752 Oct. 26 

Ryason, Elizabeth, Bergen, and John Joralemon, Essex 1749 Oct. 30 

Ryerner, Catharine, Somerset, and Leonaid Stright, Somerset 1718 July 29 

Ryers, Margary, and Frederick Woertendyck, both Orange Co., N. Y.. 1763 Aug. 25 

Ryerson, Ann, Readington, N. J , Garradus Hardenburgh, Ulster, N. Y. 1766 April 28 

Ryerson, Eleanor, Readings Town, and Bernard Governeur, Bergen.. 1763 Sept. 19 

Ryerson, Geertye, and Abraham Banta, Bergen , 1782 Dec. 26 

Ryerson, Helma, and Joseph Waldron, Bergen 1789 Nov. 14 

Ryerson, Janey, and George Dorremus, Bergen 1783 Dec. 30 

Ryerson, Jane, Bergen, and Richard Stanton, New York, 1762 Nov. 23 

Ryerson, Lenah, Pompton, and Henry Esler, Morris 1782 Nov. 1 

Ryerson, Mary, and Abraham Garrison, Bergen 1784 Aug. 12 

Ryerson, Rachel, Saddle River, and Isaac Vanderbeck, Hackensack. . . 1767 Nov. 23 

Person, Rebecca, and John Demorest, Bergen . 1764 Oct. 18 

Rynders, Esther, New York City, Stephen De Lancey, New York City. 1761 Aug. 24 

Ryne, Catherine, Middlesex, and Jonathan Moore, Middlesex 1746 May 17 

Ryneer, Mary, and David Adams, Burlington. 1786 May 22 

MALES. ^ 

Sacket, Simon, Bristol, Pa., and Mary Walhill, Bristol, Pa 1711 May 1 

Saltar, James, Amwell, and Agnes Housel 1785 Jan. 18 

Saltar, Joseph, Monmouth, and Sarah Holmes, Monmouth 1756 April 3 

Saltar, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Huldar Mott, Middletown 1759 Oct. 22 

Salmon, Stephen, Essex, and Margaret Frost, Essex. 1751 April 2 

Sampson, Hasadiah, Burlington, and Rebeckah Simson 1763 Mar. 3 

Samson, Jacob, Cumberland, and Mary Harding 1778 Sept. 24 

Sanders, Thomas, Deptford, and Rachel Stephens, Deptford 1768 Sept. 12 

Sandford, John, -Newark, and Hannah Campbell, Newark 1760 Feb. 19 

Sandford, William, Bergen, and Catrine Vanderpoel .1741 Jan. 18 

Sands, Christopher, Burlington, and Susannah Tanner. . 1779 Jan. 4 

Sands, Edmund, Bucks, Pa., and Rachel Clowes, Bucks, Pa 1710 July 23 

Sands, Edmund, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Barber, Bucks, Pa 1770 April 5 

S;mds, Richard, Bucks, Pa , and Elizabeth Beans, Bucks, Pa 1719 Nov. 2 

Sands, Stephen, Bensalem, and Mary Hatcher, Bensalem, Bucks, Pa. . 1749 Oct. 27 

Sauford, Thomas, Essex, and Dorcas Stagg 1778 July 9 

Sanghurst, Edward, Salem, and Elisha Crow, Salem 1733 May 16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 34 1 

Sansbury, ftichard, Amwell, and, Elenor Covenhoven 1 7 * > 4 July 19 

Sarish, Stephen, Evesham, and Mary Moore, Evesham 1767 Feb. 26 

Sarjent, John, Shrewsbury, and Catharine Shall, Shrewsbury 1763 Sept. 7 

Sarpinsteiu, Moritz, Roxbury, and Catharine Miller, Morris. . .. 1770 Oct. 11 

Satterthwaite, ( ieorge, Burlington, and Robotha Pattison, Burlington. 1727 June 20 

Saunders, Richard, Gloucester, and Mary Fortune, Gloucester 1763 Sept. 30 

Saunders, Robert, Burlington, and Margaret Cliff, Philadelphia 1733 Oct. 13 

Savage, Joseph. Cape May, and Martha Daniels, Cape May 1742 Sept. 21 

Savage, Thomas, Somerset, and Ann Parker, Burlington . 17G7 Nov. 11 

Savill, Benjamin, Mansfield, and Mary Lindsey 1778 Mar. 16 

Saxton, Charles, Amwell, and Elizabeth Pelton, Hopewell 1775 April 24 

Savants, Samuel, Perth Amboy, and Rachel Leonard, Perth Amboy. . . 1753 Jan. 20 

Sayer, Job, Hunterdon, and Mary Burtis, Hunterdon 1770 Mar. 31 

Savers, William, Cumberland, and Mary Fithian, Jr., Cumberland. . . 1762 May 25 

Sayles, Samuel, New Hanover, and Margaret Jones, New Hanover . . 1773 Sept. 14 

Sayre, Abbit, Alloways Creek, and Elizabeth Bacon 1780 Oct. 16 

Sayre, Abraham, Fairfield, and Rachel Meake 1779 Jan. 15 

Sayre, Annanias, Salem, and Elizabeth Eldredge 1779 Mar. 22 

Sayre, David, Alloways Creek, and Prudence Keasbey, Salem. 1774 Oct. 18 

Sayre, Rene], Salem, and Rachel Ludlum 1779 Jan. 23 

Sayres, Jonathan, Newark, and Lydia Harrison, Newark 1761 Jan. 22 

Sayre, David, Gloucester, and Jane Engersol 1 764 Dec. 28 

Scarborough, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Susannah Dean 1768 July 14 

Scarrum, Richard, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Fisks, Monmouth 1728 Aug. 15 

Scattergood, David, Mansfield, and Sarah Shreaves 1768 May 4 

Scattergood, Joseph, Burlington, and Rebecca Watson, Philadelphia. . 1736 Jan. 11 

Scattergood, Samuel, Burlington, and Rebecca Lovett, Burlington . . . 1730 Feb. 6 

Scattergood, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Strieker, Bristol, Pa. ... 1764 Dec. 11 

Scattergood, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Ivins, Burlington 1776 Feb. 10 

Scattergood, Thomas, Bristol, Pa., Lydia Sankey 1789 Jan. 2 

Schamp, George, Reading, and Mary Emmens, Readiugtown 1775 Feb. 2 

Schamp,- Henry, Reading Town, and Margaret Cock, Readiugtown. . . 1750 May 14 

Schamp, Peter, Hunterdon, and Margaret Bodiue, Hunterdon 1741 April 7 

Schanck, Garret, Middletown, and Sarah Covenhoven, Middletown . . 1762 Jan. 5 

Schanck, John, Monmouth, and Mary Covenhoven, Monmouth 1752 Dec. 19 

Schanck, John, Freehold, and Mary Denisse, Freehold 1767 July 30 

Schanck, John, Amwell, and Aida Sutphin 1770 Oct. 10 

Schanck, John, Middletown, and Rhode Holmes, Middletown 1772 Dec. 23 

Schanck, Peter, Monmouth, and Jean Covenhoven, Monmouth 1747 Dec. 26 

•Schanck, Peter, Freehold, and Mary Covenhoven, Freehold 1753 June 11 

Schanck, Ralph, Amwell, and Catherine Emmons 1779 Aug. 18 

Schanck, Ralph, Amwell, and Ann Taylor, Amwell 1774 Oct. 8 

Schanck, Roleff, Amwell, and Anne Hogland, Amwell 1764 June 14 

Schellinger, Abraham, Cape May, and Rachel Whildin 1782 Jan. 14 

Schellinger, Cornelius, Cape May, and Lydiah Tayler, Cape May 1756 Dec. 14 

Schellinger, Daniel, Cape May, and Joan Dubelday 1758 July 4 



342 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Schellinger, Jacob, Cape May, and Martha Furman, Cape May 1772 Jan. 22 

Schenck, Cornelius, Freehold, aud Margaret Tayler, Freehold 1765 July 3 

Scheuck, Garret, Hunterdon, and Mary Vau Sickle, Hunterdon 1747 Dec. 5 

Schenck, Garret, Amwell, and Mary Van Mater 1778 July 28 

Schenck, Garret, Hunterdon, and Anne Denyke 1780 Sept. 26 

Schenck, Hendrick, Freehold, and Catharine Holmes, Freehold 17-19 Feb. 28 

Schenck, Hendrick, Penns Neck, and Margaret Davison 1780 Sept. 20 

Schenck, John, Mournotrth, and Eleauor Bennet, Monmouth 1750 June 14 

Schenck, John, Freehold, and Mary Vandorn, Freehold 1763 Nov. 12 

Schenck, John, Middlesex, and Eve Houghton 1768 April 2 

Schenck, Koert, Jr., Freehold, and Rebeckah Rogers. Freehold 1767 Jan. 20 

Schenck, Roelef, Monmouth, and Mary Golder, Monmouth 1749 June 21 

Schenck, Henry, Somerset, and Lena Van Lowe, Somerset 1747 Aug. 14 

Schenk, Roluf, Freehold, aud Rebekah Lippit, Middletown 1762 Jan. 22 

Schenk, Peter, Somerset, and Maria Vollerson, Somerset 1747 Aug. 14 

Schillinger, Henry, Cape May, and Prudence Church 1760 Jan. 21 

Schillinger, Henry, Cape May, and Rebecca Scull, Cape May 1775 Nov. 30 

Schillinger, James, Cape May, and Rhoda Crowell 1780 June 27 

Scholey, John, Burliugton, and Mary Willsou, Burlington 1727 Sept. 14 

Schooley, Richard, Morris, and Martha Tantorn 1751 May 25 

Schooly, Asa, Burlington, and Mary Kimble 1786 Jan. 25 

Schoontnaker, Henricus Bergen, and Salome Demarest, Bergen 1765 June 22 

Schoonmaker, Martinns, Acquackauonk, Mary Basset, Acquackanonk. 1761 June 5 

Schureman, Abraham, Middlesex, and Hetty Combs 1781 Mar. 8 

Schureman, James, Middlesex, and Eleanor Williamson 1778 Jan. 23 

Schuuart, Johannes, Bergen, and Elizabeth Vryefinger, Bergen 1762 April 10 

Schureman, John, Middlesex, and Auue Stryker, Middlesex 1750 Feb. 22 

Schuyler, Aaron, Burlington, aud Esther Dey . . . ... 1784 Oct. 9 

Schuyler, Adoniah, Pompton. and Elizabeth Bogert 1783 Aug. 27 

Schuyler, Arent, Bergen, and Helena Van Wagenau 1741 Sept. 21 

Schuyler, Arent, Burlington City, and Jeneke Van Wagener, Essex. . . 1748 May 19 

Schuyler, Arent, Bergen, and Rachel Demarest. . . . 1788 Aug. 1 

Schuyler, Peter, Burliugton, and Ann Richardson 1777 May 21 

Scobey, Alexander, Middlesex, and Alice Williams, Middlesex 1745 Oct. 1 

Scoby, John, Perth Amboy, aud Elisabeth Warner, Perth Amboy. . . 1762 July 20 

Seoby, William, Gloucester, and Abigail Johnson, Burlington 1780 Apiil 28 

Scoggin, Jonah, Salem, and Ann Hall Salem 1748 Ff b. 25 

Scott, Barzilla, Burliugton, and Elizabeth Wheeler, Burlington 1765 Mar. 25 

Scott, Barzilla, Burlington, and Mary Garwood, Burlington 1776 May 7 

Scott, David, Somerset, and Jane Canady, Somerset 1735 Aug. 18 

Scott, Ebenezer, Monmouth, and Patience Leonard, Monmouth. ... 1748 Oct. 1 

Scott, Henry, Burlington, and Jane Hancock, Burliugton 1728 Aug. 10 

Scott, Henry, Burlington, and Priscilla Turner, Burlington 1749 Aug. 7 

Scott, James, Monmouth, and Margaret Van Cleaf ... 1774 May 16 

Scott, John, Gloucester, and Mary Chester, Gloucester 1738 Aug. 12 

Scott, John, Burliugton, and Rebecca Hall, Burliugton 1740 Dec. J3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 343 

Scott, John, Priuee Town, ami Ruth Stockton, Prince Town ......... 17 K'> 

Scott, John, Burlington, and Anne Atkinson, Burlington 1754 

Scott, John, Shrew slmiy, and Sarah Ilissnn 1779 

Scott, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Ca&saway, Burlington 1738 

Scott, Jonathan, Burlington, and Ann Turner, Burlington 1780 

Scott, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Hancock, Burlington 1770 

Scott, Joseph, Penns Neck, and Barbary Butler 1777 

Scott, Jose] h, Pequannock, and Catharine Miller, Pequaunock 1778 

Scott, Martin, and Sarah Rosell 1735 

Scott, Samuel, Shrewsbury, and Sary Allen, Shrewsbury 1758 

Scott, Samuel, Monmouth, and Catharine White 1778 

Scott, Thomas, Woolwich, aud Auna Homer ... 1771 

Scott, Thomas, Cape May, and Rebecca Evans, Cape May 1776 

Scott, Thomas, Bristol, Pa, and Elizabeth Bowers 1779 

Scotten, Samuel, Deptford, and Jecou Hall 1775 

Scout, Adrian, and Mary Jerney, Staten Island 1713 

Scroggy, John, Burlington, and Rachel Butler, Mansfield 1748 

Scroggy, Thomas, Hanover, and Ann Jones 1777 

Scudder, Amos, Trenton, and Bhebe Rose, Trenton. 1763 

Scudder, John, Trenton, and Pheebe Howell 1733 

Scudder, Samuel, Alloways Creek, aud Leah Sockwell, Cumberland. . . 17G1 

Scudder, William, and Hannah Skelton 1779 

Scull, Abel, Jr., Gloucester, and Martha Shivers 1758 

Scull, Abell, Gloucester, and Martha Hew 1749 

Scull, Daniel, Gloucester, aud Hanuah Manuary 1731 

Scull, Daniel, Gloucester, and Rachel Maunery Gloucester 1741 

Scull, Daniel, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Elizabeth Stevens 1762 

Scull, Daniel, Gt. Egg Harb'r, and Abigail Badcock, Gt. Egg Harb'r. .1768 

Scull, James, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Rebecca Cownover 1783 

Scull, John, Waterford, and Ann Hinchman 1773 

Scull, John, Cape May, and Sarah Smith, Cape May 1776 

Scull, Joseph, Gloucester, and Martha Marshall 1778 

Scull, Peter, Gloucester, and Jane Mott, Gloucester 1731 

Scull, Peter, Gt. Egg Harb'r, and Margaret Gibbons, Gt. Egg Harb'r 1762 

Scull, Philip, Gloucester, and Abigail Townsend, Gloucester 1737 

Scull, Philip, Cape May, and Elizabeth Stiles 1769 

Scull, Philip, Evesham, and Priscilla Prickett 1777 

Scull, Samuel, Gloucester, aud Ruth Hickman, Gt. Egg Harbour. . . 1745 

Seabrook, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Mary Little, Shrewsbury 1759 

Seabrook, Thomas, Monmouth, and Martha Tallman, Monmouth 1758 

Seagrave, William, Cape May, and Esther Kent, Cape May 1737 

Seaman, Edmund, New York, and Elizabeth Zabriskie, Bergen 1768 

Sears, William, Shrewsbury, and Mary Bonham, Shrewsbury 1758 

Sebet, James, Burlington, and Hannah James, Burlington 1736 

Sebriug, Cornelius, New Jersey, aud Antie Van Arsdale, Somerset. . . . 1748 
Sebriug, Folkard, Jr. , Somerset, and Irinstea Van Nest 1768 



Sept. 


•29 


April 


29 


May 


22 


Nov. 


4 


Nov. 


4 


May 


30 


May 


17 


Dec. 


23 


-) an. 


12 


Sept. 


13 


April 


28 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


2 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


20 


Sept. 


24 


Aug. 


17 


Mar. 


12 


Dec. 


26 


Feb. 


2 


Jan. 


8 


April 


29 


Nov. 


2 


April 


16 


June 


14 


Oct. 


26 


July 


23 


Jan. 


5 


Sept. 


11 


Nov. 


8 


Nov. 


22 


Aug. 


29 


Feb. 


20 


Nov. 


10 


Sept. 


14 


April 


18 


April 


1 


Nov. 


14 


June 


19 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


24 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


28 


April 


25 


Dec. 


16 



344 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sebriug, Jacob, Middlesex, and Jane Vantile, Bergen 1768 

Sebriug, John, Middlesex, and Charity Teuuisson, Somerset 174S 

Sedam, John, Middlesex, and Jane Piatt 1785 

Sedain, Ryke, Middlesex, and Rachel Merrill 1785 

Seeds, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Nancy Patterson 1775 

Seeds, Samuel, Deptford, and Sarah Bryant, Deptford 1737 

Seeds, William, BurliugtoD, and Mary Dunn, Burlington 1739 

Seely, David, Deerfield, and Mary Merscillier 1781 

Seeley, David, Salem, and Mary Rambo 17E8 

Seeley, Ebenezer, Cumberland, and Mary Clark 1783 

Seely, Henery Deerfield, and Hannah Dare, Deerfield 1762 

Segrave, William, Cape May, and Arabella Coole, Philadelphia 1740 

Sell, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Blackwood 1775 

Sell, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Deborah Wood, Deptford 1750 

Sell, William, Gloucester, and Deborah Chew 1761 

Sellers, David, Philadelphia, and Rachel Coleman 1779 

Selpath, Johu, Mansfield, and Rebecca Thompson 1763 

Senexon, Andrew, Jr., Salem, and Margeth Bilderback 1769 

Series, George, South Amboy, and Margaret Sharp, South Amboy . . . . 1756 

Servass, Jacob, Am well, and Esaballa Fleming 1766 

Se.vel, Henry, Gloucester, and Charlotta Sack 1756 

Sevens, Jacob, Manningtou, and Mary Helleuus 1783 

Sever, Benjamin, Evesham, and Jane Strattou 1783 

Sever, Joseph, Evesham, and Patience Taylor 1780 

Sever, Peter, Evesham, and Hannah Lewis 1 757 

Severns, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Sarah Green, Hunterdon 1730 

Severns, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., aud Mary Allen 1779 

Severns, John, Bensalem, Bucks, Pa., Joyce Vandegrift, Bensalem... 1747 

Severns, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Anna Albertson, Bucks, Pa 1776 

Severns, Theophilus, Trenton, and Sarah Bainbridge, Maidenhead . . 1738 

Sexton, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Catherine Larason 1779 

Sexton, Daniel, Evesham, and Abigail Maxell 1778 

Sexton, Jared, Hopewell, and Anne tareson, Hopewell. . . 1768 

Sexton, Jared, Hunterdon, and Mary Stout 1779 

Sexton, Nehemiah, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Campbell 1779 

Sexton, William, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Bobbins. Monmouth. . . 1776 

Shadeker, David, Northampton, and Aules Vagow, Burlington 1747 

Shaits, Jost, Allowajs Creek, and Sarah Moore 1773 

Shallcross, William, Bucks, Pa., and Ruth Holmes, Bucks, Pa 1773 

Shallcross, William, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Ashton, Bucks, Pa... 1764 

Shank, Anthony. Bucks, Pa., aud Susannah Craig 1783 

Sharman, Thomas, Burlington, and Frances Ward, Burlington 1682 

Sharp, Abraham, Burlington, and Mary French, Burlington 1735 

Sharp, Amos, Evesham, and Deborah Haines, Evesham 1751 

Sharp, Anthony, Roxbury. and Susanna Swezey 1778 

Sharp, Barzilla, Evesham, and Lydia Peacock 1785 



June 


6 


Oct. 


1 


Mar. 


24 


Mar. 


24 


Aug. 


23 


Feb. 


25 


Dec. 


19 


Aug. 


20 


Jan. 


2 


Mar. 


30 


Oct. 


6 


April 


7 


Aug. 


7 


Sept. 


16 


Dec. 


23 


Aug. 


27 


Dec. 


23 


Feb. 


11 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


2 


May 


1 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


27 


July 


16 


May 


28 


Oct, 


25 


July 


28 


Sept. 


30 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


24 


Feb. 


21 


Mar. 


28 


Feb. 


15 


Apri 


15 


Nov. 


26 


Feb. 


22 


Mar. 


9 


Apri' 


11 


Pec. 


4 


Dec. 


13 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


9 


May 


2 


Sept, 


7 


Feb. 


15 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 345 

Sharp, Benjamin, Burlington, and Elizabeth Sharp, Turlington. . . . 1728 

Sharp, Benjamin, Chester, and Tamar Austin, Chester 1773 

Sharp, Enoch, Evesham, and Susannah Austin 1783 

Sharp, Henry, Piscataway, and Sarah Drake, Piscataway 1758 

Sharp, Hugh, Burlington, anil Elizabeth Jacquatt, Gloucester 1743 

Sharp, Hugh, Evesham, and Anue Stratton, Evesham 17-18 

Sharp, Isaac, Cumberland, and Rachel M ulford, Cumberland 1704 

Sharp, Isaac, Evesham, and Mary Green, Evesham . 1766 

Sharp, Isaac, Evesham, and Susannah Peacock 1779 

Sharp, Job, Burlington, and Phebe Haines, Burlington 1780 

Sharp, Job, Evesham, and Elizabeth Green, Evesham 178-4 

Sharp, John, Cape May, and Sarah Reddy 1767 

Sharp, John, Chester, and Acsah Ivins, Chester 1781 

Sharp, John, Evesham, and Rebecca Austin, Evesham 1782 

Sharp, Jonathan, New Brunswick, and Margaret Herriot, Woodbridge.1772 

Sharp, Joseph, Salem, and Grace Smith, Jr., Mannington 1758 

Sharp, Joseph, BurlingtoD, and Jane Green, Burlington ... 1774 

Sharp, Josiab, Evesham, and Hannah Ingle, Evesham. . 1770 

,Sharp, Levi, Burlingtou, and Rachael Hillard, Burlington 1777 

Sharp, Robert, Ainwell, and Rachel Runk 1780 

Sharp, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Peacock, Burlington 1754 

Sharp, Samuel, Piscataway, arid Priscilla Sutton, Piscataway. 1759 

Sharp, Thomas, Evesham, and Ruth Stratton 1 778 

Sharp, William, Burlington, and Hannah Austin, Burlington 1735 

Sharp, William, Gloucester, and Hannah Chatten 1773 

Sharp, William, Evesham, and Elizabeth Green, Evesham 1776 

Sharp, William, New Jersey, and Hannah Dilks 1779 

Sharpless, Aaron, Bristol, Pa., and Mary Ellwood 1783 

Shaver, Jacob, Burlington, and Ann Delan. 1759 

Shaw, Abiah, Cumberland, and Abigail Bucke 1778 

Shaw, Elijah, Cape May, and Jemimah Hand 1768 

Shaw, Henry, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Gordon 1768 

Shaw, James, Bucks, Pa., and Frederick Baker, Bucks, Pa 1742 

Shaw, John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Salter 1739-40 

Shaw, John, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Cox, Hunterdon 1770 

Shaw, John, Cape May, and Mary Eldredge, Cape May 1771 

Shaw, John, Cumberland, and Judith Payday 1786 

Shaw, Joshua, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Abigail Leeds 1759 

Shaw, Joshua, Cape May, and Anne Furman, Cape May. 1773 

Shaw, Nathan, Cumberland, and Abigail Fithiau 1754 

Shaw, Nathan, Cumberland, and Mary Van Meter 1760 

Shaw, Nathan, Maurice River, and Mary Jones, Maurice River 1769 

Shaw, Richard, Fairfield, and Abigail Westcoat 1755 

Shaw, Richard, Cape May, and Jerusha Garritson 1764 

Shaw, Samuel, Chester, and Lydia Potts 1786 

Shaw, Thomas, Cape May, and Hannah Goff, Cape May ... 1770 



Sept. 


30 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


4 


Feb. 


8 


April 


27 


Nov. 


1 


April 


9 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


23 


Aug. 


26 


Dec. 


5 


April 


27 


Mar. 


19 


April 


23 


Oct. 


8- 


Dec. 


2 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


16 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


11 


May 


2 


July 


2 


Dec. 


7 


May 


5 


Nov. 


29 


May 


27 


Oct. 


23 


May 


7 


Sept. 


27 


June 


23 


April 


12 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


7 


Feb. 


28 


Feb. 


20 


Jan. 


4 


Oct. 


8 


Feb. 


13 


May 


17 


July 


17 


Mar. 


15 


Jan. 


16 


Feb. 


18 


June 


19 


Apri' 


I 29 


July 


5 



346 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Shaw, William, Cape May, and Jerusha Hand, Cape May 1762 

Shaw, William, Burlington, aud Anna Atkinson, Burlington 1773 

Shaw, Zechariah, Gloucester, and Rachel Reynolds, Gloucester 1762 

Slit cue, John, Lt. Egg Harbour, aud Katherine Gale, Lt. Egg Harb"r.l745 

Sheepy, Charles, Burlington, and Elizabeth Davis, Burlington 1695 

Sbeels, James, Burlington, and Grace Mullin, Burlington 1758 

Sheldin, Joseph, Bridgetowu, and Rebecca Headdy, Bridgetown 1747 

Shellenbirg, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Green 1778 

Shelley, Abraham, Philadelphia, aud Alary Jenkins 1774 

Shepherd, Daniel, Cumberland, and Sarah Dare 1778 

Shepherd, Elnathan, Cumberland, and Mary Townsend, Cape May . . 1766 

Sbepherd, Enoch, Cumberland, and Martha Sweeney 1757 

Shepherd, Gibbens, Fairfield, and Rebecka Jackson, Fairfield 1778 

Shepherd, James, Cumberland, and Keziah Barber 1 778 

Shepherd, Job, Cumberland, and Rachell Gilhuan, Cumberland 1765 

Shepherd, John, Monmouth, and Martha Taylor, Monmouth 1742 

Shepherd, John, Cumberland, and Temperance Brooks, Cumberland. .1766 
Shepherd, Jonadab, Cumberland, aud Martha Hand, Cumberland... 1770 
Shepherd, Moses, Middletown, aud Rebecca Stillwell, Middletown. .. 1767 
Shepberd, Nathan, Cumberland, and Prudence Shepherd, Cumberland. 1767 

Shepherd, Owen, Cumberland, and Deborah Ireland 1778 

Sbepherd, Philip, Fairfield, aud Sarah Bennett, Fairfield . . 1761 

Shepherd, Thomas, Monmouth, and Saiah Dennis, Monmouth 1747 

Sbeppard, Ananias, Cumberland, and Anna Mills, Cumberland 1775 

Sheppard, Cumberland, Gloucester, and Amey Matlock 1775 

Sbeppard, David, Fairfield, and Phebe Ludlam 1783 

Sheppard, Epbraim, Cumberland, and Rebeckah Barrot, Cumberland. 1778 

Sheppard, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Reeves, Burlington 1776 

Sbeppard, Read, Cumberland, and Milhsent Wood 1778 

Sherer, Gilbert, New York, and Catharine Fitz Randolph, P'th Amboy 1763 

Sherer, Gilbert, Middlesex, and Ann Buckalew 1780 

Sherred, John, Amwell, and Elizabeth Flemming, Hunterdon 1764 

Sberred, John, Alexandria, and Mary Baillie, Alexandria 1774 

Sherid, Samuel, Monmouth, and Abigail Smith, Burlington 1764 

Sherro, John Mather, Burlington, aud Catharine Burkin, Burlington. . 1742 

Sberron, Roger, Salem, and Rebecca Wiggins 1732 

Sherron, Roger, Salem, and Uuis Darvin. . 1754 

Shervell, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Reeve, Burlington 1756 

Sherwin, James, Burlington, and Edith Kemble, Burlington 1748 

Sbibely, Jacob, Shrewsbury, aud Christiu Havins, Shrewsbury 1756 

Shippiu, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Mary Kearney 1736 

Sbipton, John, Burlington, and Sarah Middleton, Burlington 1732 

Shiner, Stephen, Sussex, and Mary Tacher, Sussex 176'J 

Shiuu, Amos, Springfield, and Sarah Cunningham, Springfield 1774 

Shiun, Amos, Springfield, and Ann Cunningham ...1777 

Shiuu Azariah, Gloucester, and Sarah Haines, Gloucester 1760 



Mar. 


8 


Nov. 


16 


Mar. 


1 


Mar. 


3 


Nov. 


2 


April 


18 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


27 


Mar. 


4 


April 


27 


Mar. 


8 


April 


29 


Jan. 


6 


Sept. 


23 


May 


18 


Dec. 


13 


May 


1 


April 


16 


Mar. 


23 


Nov. 


10 


Nov. 


25 


Julv 


6 


Sept. 


8 


Oct. 


26 


Mar. 


7 


May 


24 


April 


3 


May 


16 


Nov. 


12 


Dec. 


28 


Sept. 


19 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


18 


June 


24 


Mar. 


21 


April 


5 


June 


12 


Oct, 


14 


Mar. 


13 


Mar. 


15 


May 


29 


May 


18 


Jan. 


30 


Mar. 


11 


April 


5 


Feb. 


13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 347 

sliinn, Buddell, Burlington, and Sarah Bispham, Mount Holly 1780 Jnne 15 

Shinn, Caleb, Monmouth, and Mehitabel Curbs, Monmouth 1739 Jan. 2 

Sbinn, Caleb, Burlington, jmd Mary Lucas, Burlington 1771 Dec. 23 

Shinn, Burlington, and Elizabeth Webb, Burlington 1740 Aug. 30 

Sliinn, Curliss, Northampton, and Anna Merriot 1777 Nov. 15 

Shinn, Francis, Springfield, and Sarah Bell, Springfield 1763 May 24 

Shinn, Francis, Springfield, and Martha Shinn. Springfield 1766 Dec. 3 

Shinn, George, Burlington, and Rachel Wright, Burlington 17(51 Sept. 1 

Shinn, George, Woolwich, and Elizabeth Kelly, Woolwich 1769 April 3 

Shinn, Henry, New Hanover, and Anne Fort, New Hanover 1770 Nov. 13 

Shinn, Isaiah, Burlington, and Mary Burr, Burlington 1770 Aug. 2 

Shinn, James, Burlington, and Hannah Shinn, Burlington 1737 July 18 

Shinn, James, Springfield, and Laviuah Haines, Springfield 1768 Mar. 7 

Shinn, Job, Springfield, and Elinor Burns 1776 Nov. 4 

Shinn, Job, and Rachel Grimes 1783 July 3 

Shinn, John, Burlington, and Mary Allen, Burlington 1763 June 11 

Shinu, John, Northampton, and Martha Parker . . 1775 Oct. 1 

Shinn, John, Springfield, and Mary Norton 1780 Jan. 18 

Shinn, Joseph, Greenwich, and Ausandona Shivers 1758 Nov. 11 

Shinn, Joseph, Northampton, and Mary Lippincott, Springfield 1783 Jan. 6 

Shhn, Levi, Evesham, and Hannah Reeve, Evesham 1776 Jan. 2 

Shinn, Samuel, Burlington, and Provided Gaskill, Burlington 1737 July 4 

Shinn, Samuel, Springfield, and Elizabeth Starkye, Chesterfield 1766 May 6 

Shinn, Samuel, Burlington, and Christian Wait 1769 Jan. 4 

Shinn, Thomas, Evesham, and Jane Austin 1782 April 15 

Shinn, Vincent, New Haven, and Elizabeth Budd, New Hanover. ... 1772 Sept. 5 

Shinn, William, Burlington, and Exercise Carless, Monmouth 1739 June 6 

Shinn, William, Burlington, and Sarah French, Burlington. . , 17&6 June 24 

Shivers, John, Gloucester, and Mary Clement, Gloucester 1736 July 9 

Shivers, Josiah, Gloucester, and Anna Bate, Gloucester 1729 Feb. 9 

Shoemaker, Conrade, Woolwich, and Susannah Shoulder, Woolwich. .1770 June 23 

Shorts, Michael, Monmouth, and Deborah Fries 1772 Mar. 7 

Shores, James, Burlington, and Hannah Watson 1742 June 30 

Shores, John, Mansfield, and Mary Moore, Mansfield 1747 Feb. 9 

Shotwell, Benjamin, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Shotwell, W'dbridge. 175.3 Dec. 18 

Shotwell, Jacob, Woodbridge, and Esther Gach. Woodbridge 1754 April 3 

Shotwell, Jacob, W T oodbridge, and Elizabeth Kinsey, Woodbridge 1758 Feb. 22 

Shotwell, Manning, Middlesex, and Holly Clarkson 1781 Feb. 27 

Shotwell, Nicholas, and Rachel Fitz Randolph, Woodbridge 1744 June 2 

Shoudy, Henry, Trenton, and Mary Oatman 1781 Feb. 6 

Shourds, Samuel, L Egg Harbour, and Elizabeth Wever 1759 June 11 

Shourds, Thomas, Burlington, and Amey Ruckell 1780 Mar. 25 

Shram, David, Deptford, and Jane Bryant, Deptford 1752 Oct. 19 

Sbreeve, Joseph, Monmouth, and Rachel Hewlett, Middlesex. 1771 Sept. 14 

Shreeve, Amos, Burlington, and Ann Woolstou, Burlington 1737 Aug. 2 

Shreve, Amos, Northampton, and Hannah Peters, Northampton 1750 Aug. 2 



348 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Shreve, Isaac, Burlington, and Lydia Talman, Burlington 1781 

Shreve, Isaac, Mansfield, and Abigail Thorn 1784 

Shreve, Job, Northampton, and Rebecca Brown, Northampton 1764 

Shre\e, Johu, Burlington, and Abigail Ridgway 1786 

Shreve, Joseph, Mansfield, and Elizabeth Hatch, Mansfield 1750 

Shreve, Samuel, Mansfield, and Mira Trout 1771 

Shreve, William, Piscataway, and Catherine Martin, Piscataway 1755 

Shreve, William, Springfield, and Anna Ivius, Springfield 1756 

Shreve, William, Burlington, and Ann Reckless 1779 

Shreviu, George, Burlington, and Mary Hancock 1778 

Shubart, John, Philadelphia, and Mary Hockley, Philadelphia 1733 

Shup, Jacob, Springfield, and Mary Franklin 1775 

Shute, Isaac, Gloucester, and Susannah Hoffman, Gloucester 1703 

Shute, John, Waterford, and Mary Eastwood, Springfield 1 763 

Shute, Joseph, Gloucester, and Sarah Barber 1776 

Shute, Richard, Gloucester, and Martha Sinalwood 1735 

Shute, William, Gloucester, and Ann Hues 1750 

Shute, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Jones, Mount Holly. ....... 1775 

Shute, William, Woolwich, and Sarah Adams 1783 

Shuts, Jacob, Springfield, and Anue Taylor, Springfield 1765 

Shyberd, Furman, Cumberland, and Hannah Maskell 1780 

Sickels, John, Bergen, and Sarah Waldron, Bergen 1769 

Sickels, Thomas, Princeton, and Mary Norwood 1777 

Sickles, Lambert, Piscataway, and Anne Drake, Piscataway 1749 

Sickles, Zicharia, Shrewsbury, and Catharine Wardell, Shrewsbury. .. 1759 

Sidam, Cornelius, Somerset, and Anne Rappelyea 1780 

Siddall, John, Bucks, Pa., and Hester Belford, Bucks, Pa. . . 1765 

Siddol, James, Burlington, and Sarah Bolton, Burlington 1727 

Siddons, Henry, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Sharp, Gloucester 1738 

Sidnel, John, Northampton, and Elizabeth Neal, Northampton 1775 

Sill, Michael, Burlington, and Mary Rose, Burlington 1730 

Sill, Thomas, Jacobstown, and Elizabeth Coward, Monmouth 1754 

Silver, James, Allentown, and Ester Ford, Allentown 1 745 

Silver, John, Jr., Middlesex, and Lydia Mount 1780 

Silver, Joseph, Mannington, and Esther Andrews 1784 

Silver, William, Burlington, and Lucy Carman 1783 

Silvester, Francis, Middlesex, and Sarah Martin 1769 

Silvester, Francis, New York, and Mary Webb, Woodbridge 1748 

Sim, Andrew, Burlington, and Margaret Hutchinson 1700-1 

Sim, John, Philadelphia, and Margaret Moode . . 1732 

Simcock, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Harvery, Bucks, Pa. 1741 

Simds, Jonas, Massachusetts, and Elizabeth Kinney 1777 

Simkins, Dean, and Susannah Right ,1769 

Simpkins, Ephraim, Cumberland, and Hannah Stathem 1784 

Simpkius, George, Penns Neck, and Ann Lafferty, Penns Neck 1779 

Simpkins, Jonathan, Salem, and Hanna Harris 1781 



Mar. 


29 


April 


17 


Aug. 


11 


^ept. 


9 


Aug. 


28 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


10 


May 


8 


Feb. 


17 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


4 


Aug. 


3 


May 


23 


Jan. 


25 


Mav 


23 


April 


21 


May 


20 


Feb. 


23 


Oct, 


21 


Dec. 


20 


Dec. 


14 


July 


3 


July 


21 


July 


28 


Nov. 


28 


Feb. 


15 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 




Aug. 


14 


Sept. 


11 


May 


27 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


19 


Mar. 


2 


Mar. 


18 


Mar. 


29 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


17 


Oct. 


5 


Mar. 


5 


April 


11 


July 


28 


May 


4 


Jan. 


9 


Oct. 


25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Simians, Jonathan, Salem, and Magdalene Dahlbo 17sr> 

Simkins, Nicholas, (it. Egg Earbour, and Sarah Holley 1775 

Siinkine, William, Gape May, and Mary Edmunds, Cape May 1759 

Simmons, David, Hackensack, and Elizabeth Romine, Hackensack. . .1761 

Simmons, John, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Whitaker, Bucks, Pa. 1703 

Simmons, Stephen, Philadelphia, and Hannah Brooks, Philadelphia. .1738 

Simmons, Stephen, Philadelphia, and Mary Warner, Burlington 1775 

Simmons, Thomas, Burlington, and Bathsheba Bozorth, Evesham... 1746 

Simms, Charles, Trenton, and Ann Douglass . . 1778 

Siaionds, Thomas, Orange, N. Y., and Freelove Fowler, Orange, N. Y.1771 
Simons, John, Jr., Northampton, and Sarah Prickett, Northampton. ., 1745 

Simons, Stephen, Monmouth, and Sarah Grant, Monmouth. . 1756 

Sim )us, William, Easthampton, aud Johanna Ehvil!, Salem 1759 

Simonson, Cornelius, Somerset, and Mary Bogarfc, Bridgewater 1779 

Simonson, Johu, Somerset, and Fhoebe Hoagland 1781 

Simonson, Simon, New Yoik, and Mary Ferguson 178(1 

& impking, Daniel, and Margaret Butler 1718 

Simpson, Allan, Bernardstown, and Susannah Boyles 1781 

Simpson, James, Egg Harbour, and Rebecca Uisley, Egg Harbour. . . .1765 

Simpson, James, Gloucester, and Sarah Crawford 1772 

Simpson, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Schenck 1785 

Simpson, William, Somerset, and Mary Lyn, Somerset .... 1770 

Sims, John, Maunington, and Ruth Smith, Salem 1763 

Sims, Joshua, Mannington, and Darcus Smith 1779 

Sims, Samuel, Salem, and Lydia Willis, Alloways Creek 1747 

Simson, Henry, Sussex, and Deborah Cross Somerset. ... 1754 

Simson, James, Burlington, and Susannah Hammock, Burlington. ... 1774 

Simson, Thomas, Bucks, Pa , and Abigail Burleigh, Bucks, Pa 1741 

Singleton, Richard, Burlington, and Elinor Gallagher, Burlington... 1739 

Sink, William, Stow Creek, and Esther Bishop. 1784 

Sinnickson, Sinneck, Salem, and Mary Philpot, Salem 1762 

Sinuic-kson, Thomas, Salem, and Sarah Hancock, Salem 1769 

Sip, Adriean, Acquackanonk, aud Gerritie Sip, Acquackanonk 1767 

Sip, Cornelius, Bergen, and Bettie Vreelandt, Bereen 17(51 

Sisom, John, Pennsylvania, and Aune Bevan, Pennsylvania ... 1727 

Sisom, Johu, Bucks, Pa., and Jane White, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Sitten, David, Salem, and Naomi Weeks, Salem 1770 

Sitzenger, Peter, Salem, and Esther Smith 1762 

Skeltou, Thomas, Amwell, and Elizabeth Lowrey, Amwell 1772 

Skillman, John, Somerset, and Mary Stryker 1778 

Skillman, Thomas, Somerset, aud Elizabeth Striker 1777 

Skinner, Archer, Middlesex, aud Deidamia Carson . . 1780 

Skinuer, Courtlaud, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Kearney, P'th Amb 1751 

Skinner. John, Perth Amboy, and Sally Kearney, Perth Amboy 1774 

Skinner, Nathaniel, aud Martha Frame 1770 

Skiuner, Philip, Shrewsbury, aud Susannah Simson, Shrewsbury. .. 1765 



349 



July 


30 


April 


29 


Dec. 


10 


Sept. 


16 


May 


21 


April 


11 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


19 


Dec. 


17 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


12 


Mar. 


9 


Oct. 


25 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


12 


May 


20 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


6 


Nov. 


9 


May 


16 


Jan. 


12 


Dec. 


10 


June 


25 


June 


17 


Mar. 


25 


Sept. 


20 


Nov. 


18 


Sept. 


2 


July 


4 


Jan. 


14 


June 


27 


Mar. 


27 


Nov. 


13 


Dee. 


19 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


18 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


11 


Nov. 


30 


Feb. 


15 


June 


19 


July 


24 



350 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Skinner, Stephen, Perth Amboy, and Catherine Johnson 1761 

Skinner, Thomas, P'th Amboy, and Elizabeth Hubbell, Elizabethtown.1750 

Slaght, Abram, Hunterdon, and Effie Merukon 1784 

Slaght, Jofcu, Staten Island, and Eleanor Butler, Staten Island 1764 

Slate, Daniel, Greenwich, and Mary Rifner 1786 

Slater, John, Perth Amboy, and Jane Morgan, Perth Amboy. 1761 

Slater, Samuel, Kiugwood, and Ann I ay lor 1767 

Sleeper, John, Jr., Northampton, and Sarah Leeks, Northampton 1783 

Sleeper, Jonathan, Burlington, and Sybilla Lippincott, Burlington . . . 1763 

Sleight, James, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Price, Hunterdon 1732 

Slengerland, Jobn, Bergen, and Aunatie Van Winkle 1789 

Sliu), Peter, Burlington, and Christian Houseman, Springfield 1759 

Sloan, Andrew, Deptford, and Mary Lord, Deptford 1746 

Sloan, Joseph, Gloucester, and Patience Marpole 1778 

Slocuin, Amaziah, Monmouth, and Ann Woolley, Monmouth 1739 

Slover, James, South Amboy, and Mary Bissit 1778 

Slocum, John, Shrewsbury, and Rebekah Wardel), Shrewsbury 1755 

Slocum, Jonathan, Shrewsbury, and Mary Webley, Shrewsbury 1759 

Slocum, Nathaniel, Monmouth, and Susannah Bond, Monmouth 1749 

Slocum, Peleg, Shrewsbury, and Hannar Alliu, Shrewsbury 1755 

Slccum, Peter, and Catharine Webley, Shrewsbury 1748-9 

Slocum, Samuel, Monmouth, and Lydia Cook, Monmouth 1743 

Small, Israel, Evesham, and Ann Hinchmau, Evesham 1763 

Small, John, and Ruth Stockdale 1735 

Small, John, Deptford, and Hope Thomas, Gloucester 1767 

Small, Jonab, Burlington, and Rhoda Sexton, Burlington 1774 

Small, Robert, Evesham, and Elizabeth Morris 1778 

Small, Williarn, Sussex, and Ann Watson 1778 

Smalley, John, Fiscataway, and Susannah Bray, Monmouth 1742 

Smalley, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Sickles, Kiugwood 1769 

Smallwood, John, Gloucester, and Abigal Jennet. . . 1772 

Smallwood, Richard, Gloucester, and Deborah Cheesman, Gloucester.. 1756 

Smallwood, William, Gloucester, and Jemima Down, Deptford 1736 

Smart. James, Burlington, and Honour Shallick, Burlington. 1728 

Smith, Abel, Bergen, and Anne Edsal, Bergen 1763 

Smith, Abei, Salem, and Rachel Kelly, Salem 1765 

Smith, Abel, Hackensack, and Charity Edsall 1783 

Smith, Abijab, Shrewsbury, and Mary Drommon 1751 

Smith, Abraham, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Parrent, Monmouth 1745 

Smith, Alexander, Salem, and Hannah Ashbury, Salem 1687 

Smith, Andrew, Readington, and Elizabeth Smith 1782 

Smith, Anthony, Burlington, and Lydia Willets, Monmouth 1746 

Smith, Asbury, Cumberland, and Lydia Hand 1757 

Smith, Ashbury, Cape May, and Mercy Hughes 1789 

Smith, Benjamin, and Sarah Nicholson 1766 

Smith, Benjamin, Shrewsbury, and Ellinnar Irons, Shrewsbury 1767 



Oct. 


10 


Feb. 


2 


Dec. 


9 


Apiil 


2 


June 


21 


Sept. 


14 


Nov. 


19 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


May 


31 


Nov. 


20 


April 


12 


Dec. 


6 


N ov. 


26 


Nov. 


3 


June 


16 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


17 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


24 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


13 


Dec. 


31 


June 


11 


Mar. 


21 


Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


19 


Feb. 


7 


July 


29 


Sept. 


10 


April 


2 


Mar. 


15 


April 


20 


Oct. 


22 


May 


17 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


25 


Aug. 


8 


Dec. 


21 


May 


16 


Mar, 


8 


Nov. 


9 


Mar. 


20 


Oct. 


20 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 351 

Smith, Charles Bristol, and Mary Hays 1778 

Smith, Christopher, Cape .May, and Esther Ludlam, Cape May 1768 

Smith, Christopher, Capo May, and Lydia Badoock 1774 

Smith, Conrad, New Jersey, and Catharine Miller, Philadelphia 1761 

Smith, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Thaokerell 1757 

Smith, Daniel, Salem, and Dorcas Smith, Salem. ... 1772 

Smith, Daniel, Amwell, and Magdalena Merril, Hopewell 1774 

Smith, Daniel, Salem, and Anne Ewing, Salem 1779 

Smitb, David, Monmouth, and Ann Clark 1768 

Smith, Ebenezer, Cumberland, and Sarah Findlaw, Cumberland 1772 

Smith, Efrani, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Doratha Shaw 1762 

Smith, Elias, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Sarah Ireland, Gt. Egg Harbour.. 1760 

Smith, Elihu, Cape May, and Judith Billings 1774 

Smith, Elihu, Cape May, and Hannah Matthews ,..1780 

Smith, Elijah, Egg Harbour, and Jaue Scull, Egg Harbour 1758 

Smith, Elijah, Gloucester, and Berzilla Somers 1784 

Smith, Elisha, Deerfield, and Rebekah Bowen 1778 

Smith, Elisha, Cumberland, and Loetitia Johnson 1787 

Smith, Enoch, Cape May, and Prksillah Godfrey 1780 

Smith, Evie, Gloucester, and Mary Woodward 1746 

Smith, Ezekiel, Freehold, and Rachel Thomson, Middletown 1752 

Smith, Ezekiel, Monmouth, aud Elizabeth Jackson, Monmouth 1765 

Smith, George, Burlington, aud Hannah Smitb, Burlington 17J1 

Smith, George, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Edwards, Monmouth 1741 

Smitb, George, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Black 1765 

Smith, George, Kingwood, and Mary Woolverton, Kingwood 1770 

Smith, Gilbert, Burlington, and Margaret Stillwell, Chesterfield 1762 

Smith, Hans Michael, Essex, and Sarah Brass 1741 

Smith, Henry, Gloucester, and Sarah Steelman 1774 

Smitb, Hill, Salem, and Ann Nicholson 1775 

Smith, Howell, Salem, and Temperance Y. Keasbey 1786 

Smith, Hugh, ^Nottingham, and Elizabeth Ashmore 1778 

Smith, Isaac, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Morris, Gloucester 1739 

Smith, Isaac, Deeifield, and Sarah Mulford, Cumberland 1768 

Smith, Isaac, Cumberland, and Cynthus Walling 1772 

Smith, Israel, Amwell, and Catherine Smith 177U 

Smith, Jacob, Morris, and Amey Clayton, Freehold 1767 

Smith, Jacob, Somerset, aud Jaue lerks 1778 

Smith, James, BurlingtoD, and Mary Atkinson 1756 

Smith, James, Middlesex, and Mary Johnson, Middlesex 1761 

Smith, James, Shrewsbury, and Auna West 1768 

Smith, James, and Isabel Redstreake 1771 

Smith, James, Burlington, and Hilty Heewlinge, Burlington 1772 

Smith, James, Gloucester, aud Rachel Smith 1778 

Smith, Jasper, Amwell, and Eleanor Governour, Readington 1765 

Smith, Jasper, Amw T ell, and Thcodotia Reid 1767 



Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


'2 


Oct. 


24 


May 


11 


Dec. 


3 


April 


21 


April 


25 


Feb. 


18 


April 


25 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


11 


Sept. 


20 


July 


3 


Sept. 


7 


April 


2 


May 


2 


Mar. 


13 


Sept. 


5 


Nov. 


3 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


15 


Jan. 


22 


Aug. 


28 


July 


27 


May 


5 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


18 


April 


25 


Feb. 


5 


June 


9 


Aug. 


12 


Nov. 


2 


Jan. 


28 


Aug. 


25 


Sept, 


3 


Dec. 


19 


Jan. 


17 


Nov. 


20 


Sept 


. 10 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


25 


Nov. 


27 



352 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Smith 
Smith 

Smith 

Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 



Jeremiah, Philadelphia, and Magdalen KeeD, Salem.. 1738 

Jeremiah, Salem, and Susanna Smith 1750 

Jeremiah, Salem, and Margaret English 1778 

Job, Bergen, and Sarah Edsall, Bergen.. 1748 

Job, Bergen, and Cornelia Vangise.. 1763 

Job, Bergen, and Phebe Smith, Bergen ........ 1767 

John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Ball, Burlington 1685 

John, Gloucester, and Mary Ireland, Gloucester ... .... 1732 

John, Hunterdon, and Margaret Farmer 1733-4 

John, Woodbridge, and Sarah Freeman, Woodbridge 1739 

John, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Iugliss, Perth Amboy 1742 

John, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Mead, Monmouth 1747 

John, Somerset, and Mary Shumaker, Somerset 1751 

John, Shrewsbury, and Marthew Mack Collon, Shrewsbury. . . .1754 
John, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Sarah Hickbee, Egg Harbour. . . . 1758 

John, Freehold, and Marthew Colwell, Middletowu 1763 

John, Middletowu, and Elizabeth Crawford, Middletowu 1766 

John, Cumberland, and Sarah Gruff, Salem 1767 

Johu, Hunterdon, and Sarah Moore 1768 

John, Evesham, and Mary Cyphars, Evesham 1774 

John, Salem, and Sarah Thompson 1778 

John, Amwell, and Anna Tilts 1778 

Johu, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hodgkinson, Burlington. . .. 1780 

Jonathan, Cape May, and Abigail Ludlum 1758 

Jonathan, Cape May, and Alathau Ludlam, Cape May 1761 

Jonathan, Hunterdon, and Abigail Moore, Hunterdon 176 5 

Jonathan, Maideuhead, and Mary Fourman 1779 

Joseph, Monmouth, and Euphan Watson, Monmouth 1741 

Joseph, Middletowu, and Dorothy Smith, Middletowu 1752 

Joseph, Gloucester, and Hannah Shepperd 1754 

Joseph, Middlesex, and Esther Cummings 1764 

Joseph, Nottingham, and Hanah Cornish, Nottingham 1764 

Joseph, Middletowu, and Johaunah Layton, Middletowu 1764 

Joseph, Mauningtou, and Mary Hall 1765 

Joseph, Hunterdon, aud Mary Bonham. . 1769 

Joseph, Amwell, and Anu Pearson, Amwell 1 773 

Joseph, Trenton, and Hanuah Hunt, Maidenhead 1778 

Joseph, Bidiugtown, and Elizabeth Paterson 1782 

Joshua, Cape May, and Naomi Osborn 1762 

Joshua, Gt. Egg Harbour, aud Ann Springer, Gt Egg Harb'r. .1762 

Joshua, Cape May, and Charity Billings 1770 

Joshua, Cape May, and Mary Ireland. . . 1777 

Joshua, Salem, and Elizabeth Edwards 1779 

Josiah, Hunterdon, and Martha Heyde 1782 

Lambert, Orange, N. Y., and Elizabeth Cuyper, Bergen.. ...1761 
Legget, Freehold, aud Alice Ccmton, Freehold 1743 



Sept. 


10 


Feb. 


19 


July 


8 


May 


27 


May 


17 


June 


9 


Aug. 


30 


July 


28 


Jan. 


28 


Feb. 


9 


July 


29 


Aug. 


19 


Juue 


15 


Mar. 


8 


Oct. 


7 


Jan. 


5 


April 


24 


July 


23 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


2 


Oct. 


26 


Sept. 


28 


Juue 


27 


Dec. 


26 


Mar. 


9 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


11 


Mar. 


5 


June 


1 


July 


27 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


29 


Juue 


14 


Nov. 


4 


Jan. 


25 


Sept, 


28 


April 


13 


Feb. 


16 


Nov. 


10 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


8 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 353 

Smith, Legget, Upper Frecliold, and Ellinuor Horn, Upper Freehold.. 1762 Nov. 29 

Smith, Lewis, Shrewsbury, and Ado Vannostewiek, Middletown 1761 Aug. 22 

Smith, Lewis, Cumberland, and Ruth Watson, Cumberland 1769 Jan. 5 

Smith, Mieajah, Egg Harbour, and Sarah Owen, Egg Harbour 1763 June 27 

Smith, Nathau Allen, Burlington, and Joyce Maunington, Burlington 1776 May 3 

Smith, Peter, Salem, and Elizabeth Allen, Salem 1760 Sept. 30 

Smith, Peter, Elizabeth, and Susannah Richards 1771 Aug. 12 

Smith, Philip, Maidenhead, and Terissa Hersing 1786 Oct. 10 

Smith, Pile, Salem, and Rebecca Hedge, Salem 1745 Nov. 4 

Smith, Ralph, Burlington, and Ann Bishop, Burlington 1710 Nov. 3 

Smith, Ralph, Bucks Pa., and Ann Hibbs, Bucks, Pa 1761 Dec. 10 

Smith, Richard, Cape May, and Rachel Hand, Cape May. 1737 Dec. 1 

Smith, Richard, Monmouth, and Deborah Stilwell, Monmouth 1740 Mar. 20 

Smith, Richard, Cape May, and Hannah Soiners, Gloucester 1745 Aug. 20 

Smith, Richard, Chester, and Deborah Simons, Chester 1775 Feb. 11 

Smith, Robert, Bucks, and Jane Teny, Bucks, Pa 1745 Jan. 20 

Smith, Robert, Springfield, and Elizabeth Clothier, Springfield 1764 Apiil 24 

Smith, Robert, Bucks, Pa , and Sidney Brittain, Bucks, Pa 1771 Oct. 28 

Smith, Samuel, Burlington, and Mary Appleton, Burlington 1685 Nov. 25 

Smith, Samuel, Salem, and Sarah Smith 1758 May 20 

Smith, Samuel, Stow Neck, and Sarah Carl], Cumberland 1760 Sept. 29 

Smith, Samuel, Monmouth, and Mary Myers, Monmouth 1767 Feb. 13 

Smith, Samuel, Maniugton, and Sarah Smith 1772 Oct. 2 

Smith, Silvauus, Gloucester, and Esther Adams, Gloucester 1740 Dec. 6 

Smith, Stephen, Salem, and Sarah Simmes 1784 Nov. 24 

Smith, Tallman, Chesterfield, and Anna Anderson 1756 April 27 

Smith, Talraan, Burlington, and Martha Cheesman 1760 Sept. 24 

Smith, Thomas, and Elizabeth Hibbard 1701 June 17 

Smith, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary White, Burlington 1738 Aug. 7 

Smith, Thomas, Burlington, and Rebecca Shreeve, Burlington 1738 Nov. 22 

Smith, Thomas, Cape May, and Sarah Creese, Cape May 1739 Nov. 15 

Smith, Thomas, Evesham, and Elizabeth Sharp, Chester 1744 Nov. 25 

Smith, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Mary Warne 1757 Jan. 31 

Smith, Thomas, Gloucester, and Bathsheba Fortiner 1763 Oct. 1 

Smith, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Sarah Green, Hunterdon 1764 Jan. 25 

Smith, Thomas, Salem, and Hannah Willis 1771 Nov. 12 

Smith, Thomas, Springfield, and Elizabeth Pettit 1773 Mar. 23 

Smith, Thomas, Mansfield, and Meribeth Rockhill, Mansfield 1775 Nov. 6 

Smith, Thomas, Bamards, and Rachel Tingley 1778 July 8 

Smith, Thomas, Northampton, and Frances Haldan 1778 Nov. 4 

Smith, Uriah, Cape May, and Mary Sommers, Gloucester 1758 Aug. 24 

Smith, Waten, Maidenhead, and Jane Vanclift, Maidenhead 1770 Jan. 15 

Smith, William, Gloucester, and Dorothy Birch, Gloucester 1728 Aug. 13 

Smith, William, Burlington, and Mary Compton, Burlington. 1728 Feb. 22 

Smith, William, Perth Amboy, and Jane Taylor ... 1747 May 5 

Smith, William, Middletown, and Mary Utt, Middletown 1751 Sept. 14 

22 



354 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Smith, William, Manington, and Rachel Wood 1759 

Smith, William, Bordentown, and Mary Wild . . 1761 

Smith, William, Burlington, and Michael Aldridge, Burlington 1761 

Smith, William, Maunington, and Rachel Cunningham, Mannington. 1761 

Smith, William, Cape May, and Rachel Hand, Cape May 1762 

Smith, William, Middletown, and Marcy Layton, Middletown 1762 

Smith, William, Penns Neck, and Margaret Vandevere, Penns Neck. . . 1763 

Smith, William, Salem, and Sarah Stretch, Salem 1764 

Smith, William, Mannington, and Sarah Chambless, Salem 1765 

Smith, William, Cape May, and Margaret Rogeis,, Cape May 1768 

Smith, William, Burlington, aud Rebecca Sherrin, Burlington 1776 

Smith, William, Trenton, and Eleonar Huston 1778 

Smith, William, Morris, and Rachel Laurence 1779 

Smith, William, Burlington, and Mary Botenhouse 1780 

Smith, William, Burlington, aud Hannah Lawrence 1784 

Smith, William. Salem, and Elizabeth Lippincott 1784 

Smither, William, Burlington, and Mary Catharine Jeakey 1734 

Smock, Barns, Middletown, and Sarah Williamson. . 1766 

Smock, Hendrick, Monmouth, and Eleanor Vandorn 1761 

Smock, Hendrick, New Jersey, and Sarah Lean 1780 

Smock, John, Middletown, and Sarah Tunis, Middletown 1780 

Smock, Leonard, Somerset, and Anne Fulkarson, Somerset 1749 

Smock, Luyks, Perth Amboy, and Mary Ketcham, Perth Amboy 1752 

Smock, Matthias, and Hannah Stout, Readington 1781 

Stnout, Edward, and Jan Abbott 1691 

Smyth, Adam Charles, Allentown, and Agnes McDonald 1778 

Smyth, John, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Johnston, Perth Amboy. . . 1750 

Smyth, Richard, Pennsylvania, and Mary Nicholson 1773 

Sualbaker, Phillip, Gloucester, and Marcy Burnet ... 1758 

Snape, John, Burlington, and Anne Clark, Burlington 1685 

Sneathen, David, Cumberland, ami Sarah McPeters, Stow Creek 1763 

Sneathen, Jeremiah, Alloways Creek, and Elizabeth Hogben 1747 

Snedeker, Garret, New Brunswick, and Margaret Chambers 1775 

Suedeker, Isaac, Middlesex, and Charity Beekman 1776 

Snethen, James, Cumberland, and Margaret Gillingham ; Alloways C'k. 1766 

Snider, Jacob, Amwell, and Sarah Bams, Amwell 1771 

Suidet, John, Sussex, and Hanah Cain, Sussex 1773 

Snode, John, Waterford, and Esther Butcher 1773 

Snook, Adam, Sussex, ahd Mary Countryman 1768 

Snook, John, Hunterdon, and Elisabeth Marts 1779 

Snook, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Golden 1 783 

Snook, Philip, Amwell, and Margaret Hivener, Hopewell 1773 

Snowden, William, Burlington, and Hannah White, Burlington 1728 

Sninvden, William, Chesterfield, and Rachel Reed. . 1771 

Snyder, Harmon, Middletown, and Mary Golden, Middletown 1767 

Snyder, John, Kingwood, and Margaret Kipell, Amwell. 1781 



July 


20 


Jan. 


22 


Oct. 


28 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


2 


Nov. 


6 


Aug. 


4 


Jan. 


18 


Oct. 


26 


Dec. 


27 


Jan. 


22 


May 


31 


Feb. 


15 


Aug. 


26 


Mar. 


19 


July 


12 


Aug. 


5 


May 


27 


May 


26 


Nov. 


7 


April 


25 


July 


19 


Aug. 


13 


June 


27 


Feb. 


16 


Nov. 


19 


June 


9 


Mar. 


16 


April 


25 


May 


12 


Feb. 


2 


June 


13 


Jan. 


10 


June 


7 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


3 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


4 


Dec. 


8 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


5 


April 


1 


July 


15 


Jan. 


3 


Sept. 


24 


Feb. 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



355 



Snyder, William, Freehold, and Anna Tice, Middletowu . 1757 Sept. 12 

Snyder, William, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Sidinan, New Jersey. .. . 1771 Dec. 16 

Sockwel), Jouadab, Fairfield, and Anne Bowen, Cumberland 1702 June 5 

Soey, Nicholas, Gloucester, and Jean Ingersal, Gloucester 1743 Nov. 9 

Solomon, Jonas, Monmouth, and Hanner Appelgat, Middletown 1757 Dec. 27 

Sollom, Cornelius, New Brunswick, Hannah Wetherill, New Brunsw'k. 1740 July 19 

Sollom, Martin, and Mary DeGroff, New Brunswick 1744 Oct. 6 

Suiter, Henry, Somerset, and Charity Stout .... 1780 Oct. 23 

Somers, Constant, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Sarah Hand 1790 Aug. 20 

Somers, Jacob, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Uness Somers ... .... . 1762 June 17 

Somers, James, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Sarah Somers, Gt. Egg Harb'r. 1750-1 Feb. 20 

Somers, James, Burlington, and Rebecca Steelman 1759 July 20 

Somers, James, Gloucester, and Ann Tarapin, Gloucester 1763 July 6 

Somers, Jesse, Gloucester, and Deborah Ludlam 1790 July 24 

Somers, Job, and Comfort Mackleas 1763 Sept. 6 

Somers, Job, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Esther Little, Gt. Egg Harbour . 1774 Mar. 1 

Somers, John, Evesham, and Mary Austin, Evesham 1761 April 1 

Somers, John, Upper Penns Neck, Debora Battou 1783 Mar. 7 

Somers, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Ludlum 1784 Jan. 31 

Somers, Thomas, New Jersey, and Alice Higby 1780 Jan. 3 

Somervell, George, Salem, and Magdalen Helm, Salem . . 1771 May 11 

Somerville, James, Burlington, and Anne Bath, Burlington 1740 July 19 

Sommers, Job, Gloucester, and Eunice Greeley, Cape May 1732 Jan. 2 

Sommers, John, and Hester Risley 1744 Feb. 9 

Somors, Richard, Cape May, and Suffiah Stillwell 1761 Dec. 3 

Soolen, Andrew, Morris, and Mary Tyson, Morris 1761 Dec. 29 

Sooy, Joseph, Egg Harbour, aud Mary Leek, Egg Harbour 1761 July 15 

Sooy, Luke, Burliugton, and Rebekah Van Guilder. 1786 Dec. 8 

Soper, Joseph, Barnegat, and Mary Wright, Staten Island 1746 June 3 

Soper, Joseph, New Jersey, and Rebecca Howard. . . 1779 Feb. 2 

Soper, Reuben, Monmouth, and Mary Matthis 1779 April 26 

Soper, Richard, Woodbridge, and Jerusha Webb, Woodbridge. . . . 1752 Mar. 9 

Sopers, Jeremiah, Woodbridge, and Catherine Clancey, Woodbridge 1770 Aug. 11 

Sorrel, William, New Barbadoes, and Hannah Earl, New Barbadoes. . . 1774 May 13 

Sorter, John, Somerset, and Epenetus Gordon, Perth Amboy 1753 Dec. 24 

Souder, John, Maurice River, and Julia Miller ... 1781 July 2 

Soullard, John, Deerfield, and Hannah Mulford, Cumberland 1762 Jan. 4 

Souter, John, Cumberland, aud Margaret Miller, Alloways Creek .. . 1771 Mar. 9 

Southard, Benjamin, Cape May, and Pris-sila Hildreth 1789 May 22 

Southard, Elias, Elizabethtown, and Rachel Rattan, Somerset 1760 Oct. 25 

Southard, John, and Catherine Frazie 1761 Oct. 26 

Southard, John, L. Egg Harbour, Hannah Faulkinburg, L. Egg Harb. 1767 Mar. 25 

Southward, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Abigail Hewitt .... 1773 April 21 

Southwick, James, Burlington, and Hannah Powell. 1778 May 4 

Southwick, Jonathan, Burlington, and Elizabeth Green, Burlington. . . 1772 Aug 20 

Southwick, Josiah, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Parker, Burlington. . . 1728 April 23 



356 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Southwick, Maham, Burlington, and Hannah Parker, Burlington 1737 June 7 

South wick, Solomon, Northampton, and Rebecca Rossell, N'thampt'n 1759 April 14 

fcrouthwootl, Edward, Bucks, Pa., and Susannah Beakes 1734 May 30 

Sowe, Joseph, Cape May, and Elizabeth Smith 1737 Dec. 3 

Spachling, Philip, Mansfield, and Prudence Wright, Mansfield 1763 Oct, 22 

Spana, Joseph, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Hall, Monmouth 1765 May 11 

Sparks, George, Deptford, and Magdellen Sealey, Deptford 1765 Oct. 19 

Sparks, George, Gloucester, and Mary Inskeep 1779 April 13 

Sparks, Henry, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Ballinger, Gloucester. . . 1750 Jan. 31 

Sparks, Henry, Fairfield, and Catherine Stratton, Fairfield 1762 Mar. 23 

Sparks, Henry, Deptford, and Rachel Quinton, Salem 1766 Oct. 8 

Sparks, John, Deptford, and Sarah Howell 1773 Jan. 28 

Sparks, Robert, Deptford, and Mary Smallwood, Deptford 1760 April 11 

Sparks, Robert, Salem, and Rachel Sommers, Salem 1770 Aug. 9 

Sparks, Robert, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Gibson 1783 Nov. 24 

Sparks, Simon, Gloucester, and Epioarius Woolston, Gloucester 1761 July 13 

Sparrow, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Shute, Gloucester 1747 May 14 

Spavin, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Blackburn 1739 Jan. 20 

Spear, David, Bucks, Pa., and Phebe Philpot, Bucks, Pa 1765 Sept. 7 

Spence, John, Gloucester, and Rachel Richardson, Gloucester 1727 June 19 

Spencer, Elihu, Essex, and Joanna Fatton, Monmouth. . 1750 Oct. 15 

Spencer, Jacob, Gloucester, and Deborah Leeds. 1773 Jan. 18 

Spencer, James, Burlington, and Sarah Borton, Burlington 1737 Aug. 1 

Spencer, Robert, Hunterdon, and Ann Allison 1733 Feb. 19 

Spicer, Jacob, Cape May, and Judith Hughes, Cape May 1738 June 10 

Spicer, Jacob, Cape May, and Deborah Learning, Cape May 1752 Dec. 10 

Spicer, Samuel, Gloucester, and Abigail Willard, Gloucester 1743 Aug. 3 

Spicer, Thomas, Gloucester, and Rebecca Day, Gloucester 1740 Dec. 29 

Spier, Abraham, Bergen, and Ackey Seekelsop, Bergen 1753 July 28 

Spier, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Richardson. 1773' Nov. 16 

Spining, Ichabod, Hanover, and Mary Person 1779 Mar. 2 

Spofford, George, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Peters, Philadelphia 1728 Oct. 23 

Sprag, James, Barnegat, and Rachel Purkins 1762 Nov. 26 

Sprag, Michael, Barnegat, and Mary Rulong 1762 Nov. 26 

Spraggis, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wiles, Burlington 1736 Dec. 11 

Sprague, John, Burlington, and Mary Key 1786 Dec. 22 

Spratt, Robert, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Hendrickson 1772 April 8 

Springer, Benjamin, Northampton, and Jerushia Tyler, Northampton 1747 Mar. 9 

Springer, Dennis, Burlington, and Ann Prickett, Burlington 1736 Nov. 29 

Springer, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bozworth 1733 Sept. 24 

Springer, Samuel, Great Egg Harbour, and Amy Smith 1773 June 21 

Spriugston, Jacobus, Orange, N. Y., and Mally Osborn 1763 Feb. 20 

Sprang, Bernard, and Jane Post 1779 June 4 

Sproul, Robert, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Paltoon, Perth Amboy. .1758 Feb. 4 

Sprouls, William, Hanover, and Elizabeth King, Hanover 1765 Nov. 9 

Sqnier, Zopliar, Essex, and Anible Williams, Essex 1752 Mar. 30 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Staats, John, Bound Brook, and Hannah Trimbly 1776 

Stackhouse, Amos, Mount Holly, and Mary Powell 1779 

Stackhouse, Benjamin, Bucks, Pa., and Elionar Price, Backs, Pa. .. 1761 

Stackhouse, Benjamin, Bristol, Pa., and Sarah Gale 1782 

Stackhouse, Caleh, Cohausie, and Eleanor Long, Cohansie 1767 

Stackhouse, Job, Bucks, Pa., and Priscilla Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Stackhouse, John, Chester, and Mary Ernest 1783 

Stackhouse, Samuel, Springfield, and Hester Penquite, Evesham 1779 

Stackhouse, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth AVhite, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Stackhouse, Timothy, Bristol, Pa., and Martha Stackhouse 1793 

Stagg, James, Hackensack, and Leah Brower, Hackensack 1765 

Stanbey, Samuel, Essex, and Mary Little, Essex 1771 

Standley, Michael, Nottingham, and Martha Jones, Nottingham 1767 

Stanton, George, Penns Neck, and Ann Mounson, Penns Neck 1760 

Stanton, Jacob, U. Penns Neck, and Rachel Pedric 1785 

Stanton, Richard, New York, and Jane Ryerson, Bergen 1762 

Stapleford, John, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Deckindirson, Burl'gt'n. 1743 
Stapler, William, Philadelphia, and Catherine Read, Philadelphia . . 1730 

Staples, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Rogers, Burlington 1738 

Stapleton, Andrew, Evesham, and Mary Reeves, Evesham 1782 

Stapleton, George, Evesham, and Rhoda Wheatcraf t 1784 

Statesir, John, Shrewsbury, and Mary Palmer, Shrewsbury 1757 

Stathem, Aaron, Cumberland, and Priscilla Pooler 1760 

Stathem, Aaron, Cumberland, and Susannah Leach 1786 

Stathem, Isaac, Cumberland, and Mary Watson, Cumberland ....... 1760 

Stathem, Isaac, Cumberland, and Lydya Anderson, New Castle, Del.. 1769 

Stark, George, Penns Neck, and Mary Scott 1762 

Starkey, David, Freehold, and Elizabeth Emons, Shrewsbury 1764 

Starkey, Jacob, Monmouth, and Mary Harbour. 1761 

Starkey, James, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Thomas, Jr 1762 

Starkey, Nathan, Burlington, and Elizabeth Piatt, Burlington 1736 

Starkey, Nathan, New Hanover, and Edith Willson 1749 

Starkey, Thomas, and Coziah Ashton 1761 

Starus, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth White 1760 

Statton, Ephraim, Cape May, and Mary Foster, Cape May 1763 

Staunton, John, Burlington, and Dinah Gale 1732 

Steacy, John, Burlington, and Anu Cahoon 1787 

Stebius, William, Burlington, and Jane Cribbs 1770 

Steel, James, Gloucester, and Mary Renshaw 1759 

Steel, John, Somerset, and Jane Flood, Somerset 1738 

Steell, John, Somerset, and Margaret Ross, Somerset 1752 

Steelman, Andrew, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Hannah Iugersol, Gloucest'r. 1747 

Steelman, Elias, Gloucester, and Sarah Lake 1730 

Steelman, Elias, Gloucester, and Comfort Creesey, Gloucester 1732 

Steelman, Elias, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Esther Morgan, Gt. Egg H'r. .1760 
Steelman, Frederick, Gloucester, and S:irah Somers, Gloucester 1740 



357 

April 19 
Jarj. 1 3 
Dec. 9 
Nov. 4 
Aug. 22 
Sept. 13 
June 2 
Jan. 4 
Oct. 30 
Mar. 23 
Oct. 1 1 
Nov. 19 
July 30 
Feb. 23 
Sept. 29 
Nov. 23 
Jan. 27 
June 16 
Mar. 25 
June 2 1 
Nov. 17 
Sept. 1 
Oct. 13 
Feb. 2 
Oct. 11 
Nov. 27 
Sept. 8 
Mar. 16 
Aug. 29 
Oct. 7 
Nov. 1 
Oct. 17 
May 23 
June 3 
July 20 
Oct. 6 
April 12 
Dec. 7 
Dec. 19 
May 11 
Feb. 15 
June 3 
Aug. 10 
Dec. 16 
Feb. 27 
Mar. 5 



353 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Steelmau, Frederick, Gloucester, and Hester Risley 1744 Feb. 9 

Steelinan, Frederick, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Neoiny Edwards 1773 Oct. 4 

Steelnran, George, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Phebe Adams, Egg Harbour. 1737 Dec. 12 

Steelinan, Hezekiab, Egg Harbour, and Caty Gant. 1785 April 8 

Steelmau, James, Gloucester, aud Katharine Ouster, Gloucester 1730 June 13 

Steelman, James, Gt. Egg H'rb'r, and Temperance Sayre, Gt. Egg H'r.1756 Dec. 28 

Steelmau, James, Gt. Egg H'b'r, and Sopbia Couenover, Gt. Egg H'b'r..l772 Dec. 23 

Steelman, James, Egg Harbour, and Susaunab Smith 1773 Nov. 19 

Steelman, Jobn, Egg Harbour, and Mary Risley, Egg Harbour 1736 July 17 

Steelman, Jobn, Egg Harbour, and Abigail Adams, Egg Harbour. ... 1755 Jan. 25 

Steelman, Jobn, Gloucester, and Sarab Sooy 1766 April 21 

Steelinan, Ji>hn, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Abigill Soruers 1774 June 13 

Steelman, Jouatbau, Galloway, and Sarab Cordery 1783 Jan. 8 

Steelmau, Matbias, Gloucester, and Sarab Adams, Gloucester 1730 Sept. 14 

Steelman, Uriab, Gloucester, and Rosanab Loring 1770 June 1 

Steelman, Zepbaiab, Gloucester, aud Rebecab Risley 1768 April 1 6 

Steet, James, Philadelphia, and Mary Calaham, Philadelphia 1728 April 23 

Stelle, Benjamin, Woodbridge, and Johanna Shotwell, Woodbridge . . 1739 Oct. 2 

Stelle, Benjamin, Piscataway, and Lydia Shotwell, Woodbridge 1752 Aug. 14 

Stelle, Isaac, Piscataway, and Christian Clarkson 1740 April 22 

Stelle, Isaac, Province of N. J., and Hannah Sheppard, EastN. Jersey. 1747 Oct. 10 

Stelle, Isaac, Middlesex, and Katberine Green. 1780 Jan. 5 

Stelle, Jacob, Monmouth, and Mary West 1759 Mar. 30 

Stelle, John, Piscataway, and Rachel Thomson, Piscataway 1739 June 16 

Stelle, Jobn, Piscataway, and Hannah De Bon Repos, Woodbridge. . . . 1768 Dec. 19 

Stellman, Charles, Gloucester, and Margaret Scull, Gloucester . 1731 Jan. 5 

Stephens, Andrew, Shrewsbury, and Deborah West, Shrewsbury 1759 Sept. 26 

Stephens, Henry, Gloucester, and Margaret Jessope. Newton 1753 Nov. 8 

Stephens, Isaac, Deptford, and Sarah Woolstoj 1772 Aug. 31 

Stephens, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Cook, Hunterdon 1729 April 30 

Stephens, John, Salem, and Barsheba Dunlap, Saiem 1776 Mar. 11 

Stephens, William, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Hare, Bucks, Pa. . . 1775 Nov. 2 

Stephenson, James, Cumberland, and Marcy Hosea 1778 May 10 

Stephenson, Richard Senr., Cumberland, aud Isabel Sharp 1778 Jan. 5 

Sterling, Andrew, Amwell, and Hannah Bjyce, Amwell., 1773 Dec. 18 

Sterling, James, Burlington, and Rebeckah Budd 1785 Nov. 

Stetson, John, Gloucester, and Lettice Chattin 1784 Jan. 15 

Stephens, Ezekiel, Cape May, and Rebekah Stillwell 1763 April 30 

Stevens, Henry, Cape May, and Jane Izzard, Cape May 1761 Aug. 8 

Stevens, Henry, Bridgewater, and Elizabeth Backover, Somerset 1779 Juue 26 

Stevens, John, Stateu Island, and Martha Cregeir, Staten Island 1741 Sept. 8 

Stevens, John, Monmouth, aud Catharine Yanhorue, Monmouth 1745 Dec. 16 

Stevens, John, Junr., Trenton, and Rachel Cox, Bloomsbury. 1782 Oct. 15 

Stevens, Richard, Perth Amboy, and Susanna Kearney, Perth Amboy 1758 Mar. 31 

Stevens, Stephen, Cape May, and Mary Matthews 1774 Sept. 5 

Stevens, William, and Catrine Macleaue 1742 April 29 



Marriage licenses. 359 

Stevenson, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Fenimore, Burlington ..1763 

Stevenson, Elnathan, Burlington, and Mary Riley, Burlington 1756 

Stevenson, Elnathan, Burlington, and Bathsheba Norcross, Burlington. 1767 

Stevenson, James, Middlesex, and ( iattron Gordon 1779 

Stevenson, John, Burlington, and Martha Walton 1739 

Stevenson, John, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Maclure . 1739 

Stevenson, John, New York, and Elizabeth Throckmorton 1754 

Stevenson, John, Philadelphia, and Aune Merril, Morristown 1779 

Stevenson, John, Aruwell, and Catharine Corshon 1782 

Stevenson, Jonathau, Burlington, and Mary Allen, Burlington 1684 

Stevenson, Joseph, and Dovey Webb 1769 

Stevenson, Peter, Springfield, and Mary Burae, Hanover 1774 

Stevenson, Samuel, Amwell, and Mary Seddin, Amwell 1764 

Stevenson, Thomas, Burlington, and Experience Cheshire 1733 

Stevenson, William, Burlington, and Sarah Kimbal 1740 

Steward, Aaron, Burlington, and Hannah Woodward 1780 

Steward, Abner, Burlington, and Mary Rockhill, Burlington 1777 

Steward, Alexander, Middlesex, and Elinir Francis, Freehold. 1757 

Steward, Johu, Jr., Monmouth, and Martha Robbins, Allentown 1757 

Steward, Johu, Bordentown, and Margaret Carman, Bordentown 1773 

Steward, John, New Hanover, and Rhoda Shinn, New Mills 1783 

Stewart, John, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Soviah Smith. 1783 

Steward, Joseph, New Hanover, and Ann Rubins 1767 

Steward, Josiah, Burlington, and Martha Browne, Burlington 1728 

Steward, Josiah, Monmouth, and Sarah Brown, Monmouth 1710 

Steward, Samuel, Burlington, and Susannah Antram, Burlington ... 1774 
Steward, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Robinson, Burlington. . . 1739 

Steward, William, Somerset, and Mary Morgan, Somerset 1745 

Steward, William, Somerset, and Priscilla Laferty, Somerset 1718 

Stewart, Archibald, Sussex, and Margarett Helms 1772 

Stewart, Johu, Somerset, and Elizabeth Arvin, Middlesex 1753 

Stewart, Joseph, Chesterfield, and Martha Down. Chesterfield 1756 

Stewart, Samuel, Alloways Creek, and Sarah Tyler, Alloways Creek. . .1765 

Steyumets, Garret, Essex, and Petertie Tuerse, Bergen 1744 

Stidham, John, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Powell 1779 

Strtes, Benjamin, Jr., Cape May, and Sarah Hands. 1779 

Stiies, Edward, Burlington, and Martha Bishop, Burlington 1761 

Strtes, Eli, Cape May, and Temperance Bowen, Cape May 1769 

Stiles, Ephraim, Chester, and Mercy Lippincott, Chester 1749 

Stiles, Henry, Cape May, and Lydia Eldridge, Cape May 1759 

Stiles, Henry, Cape May, and Pheby Swain, Cape May 1769 

StiTes, Isaac, Evesham, aud Grace Price, Evesham 1776 

Stiles, Isaih, Cape May, and Rhoda Crowell, Cape May 1738 

Stiles, Isaiah, Cape May, and Hannah Cressey 1770 

Stiles, Israel, Cape May, and Phebe Scull, Great Egg Harbour 1775 

Stiles. Joseph, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Channel 1785 



May 


4 


( let. 


21 


Oct. 


24 


April 


24 


April 


21 


May 


12 


June 


14 


Dec. 


16 


June 


11 


July 


17 


Mar. 


29 


June 


8 


Mar. 


27 


Sept. 


17 


April 


19 


Feb. 


20 


Oct. 


24 


Oct. 


25 


Nov. 


12 


May 


12 


Sept. 


22 


Sept. 


22 


May 


6 


Jan. 


21 


Mar. 


8 


May 


7 


Dec. 


31 


Oct. 


29 


April 


11 


Aug. 


29 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


12 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


12 


May 


19 


Jan. 


14 


Mar. 


14 


July 


22 


April 


3 


Jan. 


17 


July 


11 


Oct. 


28 


April 


29 


Dec. 


19 


April 


11 


May 


o 



360 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stites, Nicholas, Chester, and Elizabeth Sherwiu, Chester 1750 

Strife, Richard, Cape May, and Zeruiah Stittwell, Cape May 1748 

Stites, Richard, Cape May, and Ruth Mulford, Cape May 1770 

Stiles, Samuel, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Chew 1783 

Stiles, Thomas, Chester, and Ann Brown, Burlington . . 1772 

Stiles, , Cape May, and Sarah Eldridge, Cape May 1727 

Still, Daniel, Chester, and Mary Dawson, Northampton 1783 

Still, Henry, Burlington, and Pamela Fenton 1777 

Stillman, James, and Helena Codds 1782 

Stillwell, Daniel, Monmouth, and Sarah Ashton, Monmouth 1741 

Stillwell, James, Middletown, and Elizabeth Shaw, Shrewsbury 1762 

Stillwell, Jeremiah, Monmouth, and Mary Woodruff, Shrewsbury 1750 

Stillwell, John, Middletown, and Anna Wall, Middletown 1750 

Stillwell, John, Sussex, and Mary Mallinir, Hunterdon 17G9 

Stillwell, John, Burlington, and Penolipe White, Burlington 1772 

Stillwell, Richard, Cape May, and Sarah Hand 1736 

Stillwell, Richard, Middletown, and Lydia Leonard 1752 

Stillwell, Thomas, Cape May, and Hannah Shaw, Cape May 1761 

Stillwell, Thomas, Cape May, and Sarah Stevens, Cape May 1781 

Stillwell, William, Shrewsbury, and Anna Jobs, Shrewsbury 1762 

Stillwell, William, Monmouth, and Catherine Nott, Monmouth 1756 

Stillwell, Enoch, Cape May, and Sarah Savage 1768 

Stilwell, Daniel, Hunterdon, and Hannah Titus 1780 

Stilwell, John, Middletown, and Elizabeth Watson, Middletown 1764 

Stilwell, Joseph, Middletown, and Mary Ogborne, Middletown 1761 

Stilwell, Joseph, Somerset, and Patience Brewer, Somerset 

Stilwell, Nathaniel, New Brunswick, and Mary Cjx, New Brunswick. .1740 

Stilwell, Obadiah, Monmouth, and Phebe Ketcham, Monmouth 1761 

Stilwell, Sias, Somerset, and Margaret Van Nortwick 1783 

Stilwell, Charles, Great Egg Harbour, and Phebe Coxe, Cape May ... 1761 

Stine, Martain, Monmouth, and Mary Voorhees, Somerset 1780 

Stinger. Solomon, Salem, and Gwyn Blumer 1771 

Stoakes, John, Gloucester, and Ann Champion, Gloucester 1751 

Stockam, William, Burlington, and Susannah Paine 1778 

Stocketon, Robert, Somerset, and Rebecca Philips, Maiden Head. . . 1740 
Stockton, Abraham, Burlington, and Susannah Kembie, Burlington. . 1774 

Stockton, Benjamin, Burlington, and Hannah Cowperthwaite 1779 

Stockton, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Fisher, Burlington 1728 

Stockton, Daniel, Burlington, and Jane Peake 1780 

Stockton, David, Burlington, and Ruth Lippincott 1733 

Stockton, David, Springfield, and Elizabeth Treton, Springfield 1761 

Stockton, James, Somerset, and Mary Searls 1778 

Stockton, Job, and Anne Munrow, New Hanover 1757 

Stockton, Job, New Jersey, and Polly Bates 1780 

Stockton, Job, Springfield, and Nancy Ridgway 1791 

Stockton, Job, Springfield, and Hannah Jones, Burlington 1750-1 



Jan. 


23 


Sept. 


9 


Nov. 


28 


April 


2 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


9 


Feb. 


13 


Nov. 


7 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


23 


April 


26 


Feb. 


21 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


24 


Feb. 


11 


Jan. 


10 


June 


5 


Sept. 


18 


Aug. 


26 


Mar. 


23 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


19 


Aug. 


28 


June 


13 


Nov. 


23 


Dec. 


18 


Feb. 


21 


June 


15 


July 


8 


Aug. 


29 


Mar. 


5 


June 


6 


Nov. 


29 


July 


1 


Jan. 


8 


Oct. 


3 


Mar. 


7 


June 


6 


June 


9 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


23 


Feb. 


4 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Stockton, John, Hunterdon, and Amy King, Kingwood 1764 

Stockton, John, Burlington, and Mary Gardner 1777 

Stockton, John, Somerset, ami Rebecca Fit/. Randolph 1780 

Stockton, Philip, Somerset, ami Catharine Gumming, Freehold.. .. 1767 

Stockton, Richard, Burlington, and Sarah Stockton 1768 

Stockton, Richard, Burlington, and Hannah Crispin, Burlington 1768 

Stockton, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Gardiner 1784 

Stockton, William, Burlington, and Hannah Elkinton, Burlington... 1775 

Stogdill, John, Staten Island, and Mary Downey, Staten Island 1750 

Stokes, Jacob, Waterford, and Hester Wilkins, Evesham 1774 

Stokes, Jarvis, Burlington, and Elizabeh Rogers, Burlington 1773 

Stokes, John, Gloucester, and Anne Champion, Gloucester 1751 

Stokes, Joshua, Gloucester, and Selena Bishop 1777 

Stoll, Henry, New Jersey, and Hannah Vanmiddleswart 1743 

Stolts, Jacob, Middlesex, and Margaret Outcalf 1780 

Stone, Robert, Woodbridge, and Deliverance Heard, Woodbridge 1757 

Stone, William, Burlington, and Sarah Moore, Burlington 1741 

Stone, William, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Stille, Piscataway 1750 

Stone, William, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Thomson, Perth Amboy..l752 

Stone. William, Woodbridge, and Lucy Walker, Piscataway 1758 

Stookey, Jacob, Shrewsbury, and Lydia Allen, Shrewsbury 1755 

Stoops, Eliakim, Burlington, and Mary Phares, Burlington 1754 

Stoothoff, Albart, Somerset, and Nelly Nephews 1784 

Stoothoff, William, Somerset, and Sarah Stoothoff, Somerset 1741 

Storm, Frederick, and Catherine Vandervoort 1762 

Storms, Henry, Bergen, and Elisabeth Vanderhoof 1789 

Storms, Isaac, Bergen, and Elizabeth Parlmen 1790 

Storrow, William, Burlington, and Mary Vanu, Burlington 1780 

Story, John, Middlesex, and Esther Hull, Middlesex . . 1740 

Story, John, Staten Island, and Rebecca Andrewvet 1744 

Story, Joseph, Perth Amboy, and Rebecka Perine, Perth Amboy 1750 

Story, Patrick, Sussex, and Agnes Hueston 1777 

Story, Thomas, Middlesex, and Margaret Carr, Middlesex 1739 

Stotesburg, John, Sussex, and Sarah Hughes 1783 

Stoughton, Edward, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Lorton, Middlesex .... 1754 

Stout, Abraham, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Herbert, Monmouth 1755 

Stout, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Alee Houghton 1774 

Stout, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Ann Stout, Somerset 1775 

Stout, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Jean Pettit 1777 

Stout, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Sarah Morgan 1777 

Stout, Benjamin, Jr., Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Anderson, Amwell. . .1765 

Stout, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Marthew Schihok 1772 

Stout, David, Burlington, and Margaret Vollow, Bergen 1743 

Stout, David, Middletown, and Hannar Cumton, Middletown 1759 

Stout, David, Amwell, and Mercy Vaughn, Monmouth 1768 

Stout, Elijah, Hunterdon, and Sarah Runyan 1778 



36l 

Mar. 17 
Oct. 1 1 
June 24 
April 9 
Jan. 22 
April 28 
June 11 
Sept. 5 
June 9 
Feb. 1 
Nov. 27 
July 8 
Mar. 3 
Nov. 12 
Dec. 20 
Feb. 17 
May 10 
Jan. 1 
Aug. 19 
April 1 
Nov. 19 
Sept. 27 
Feb. 9 
May 9 
June 19 
Oct. 10 
Feb. 27 
Dec. 20 
Aug. 1 
Mar. 8 
June 4 
Dec. 6 
Oct. 25 
July 12 
Nov. 25 
Sept. 27 
Jan. 19 
Oct. 26 
May 10 
June 22 
Dec. 11 
Sept. 17 
Jan. 1 
April 9 
May 6 
April 8 



362 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stout, Elisha, Manasquan, and Hannah Moorhouse 1751 

Stout, Elisha E., Shrewsbury, and Lidy Johnston, Shrewsbury 17 GO 

Stout, Grover, Amwell, and Frances Mitchel, Amwell 1775 

Stout, Isaac, Amwell, and Mary Quimby, Amwell 1765 

Stout, James, Amwell, and Louisa Hart, Hopewell 1775 

Stout, James, Amwell, and Anna Vaumater 1780 

Stout, Jediah, New Jersey, and Philina Chamberlain, Monmouth . .1744-5 

Stout, Jediah, Hunterdon, and Mary Stout 1781 

Stout, John, Hunterdon, and Katherine Stout, Hunterdon 1730 

Stout, John, Shrewsbury, and Ruth Ellison, Shrewsbury 1750-1 

Stout, John, Shrewsbury, and Ruth Ellison, Freehold 1753 

Stout, John, Jr., Hunterdon, and Keziah Brush 1782 

Stout, Jonathan, Hopewell, and Sarah Phillips . 1775 

Stout, Joseph, Hunterdon, and Theodosia Hoff, Kingwood .-. . 17G5 

Stout, Joseph, Burlington, and Sarah Hancock 1771 

Stout, Joseph, Amwell, and Elizabeth Stout, Amwell 1774 

Stout, Levi, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Furman 1778 

Stout, Levi. Somerset, and Mary Elberson 1782 

Stout, Moses, Hunterdon, and Abegal Hart, Hunterdon 1773 

Stout, Nathan, Amwell, and Esther Ketcham, Monmouth 17G7 

Stout, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Sarah Skillman 1764 

Stout, Peter, Middletown, and Charity Williams, Freehold 1767 

Stout, Richard, Middletown, and Anna Tinnbrooks 1751 

Stout, Robert, Monmouth, and Catherine Ellison, Monmouth 1761 

Stout, Samuel, minor, Somerset, and Helenah Crusee 1779 

Stout, William, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hutchinson 1780 

Stout, Zebulon, Somerset, and Sarah Stout, Amwell 1762 

Stout enbrough, Anthony, Staten Island, and Mary Segang 1745 

Stowe, John, Salem, and Hannah Ward, Gloucester 1735 

Strackan, William, Saddle River, and Helem Bogart 1782 

Straton, Manuel, Burlington, and Mary Joyce, Burlington 1741 

Strattan, Daniel, Burliugton, and Mary Sharp, Evesham 1739 

Strattan, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Prickett 1778 

Strattan, Isaac, Evesham, and Mary Bullen, Evesham 1782 

Strattan, John S., Evesham, and Phebe Iuman 1779 

Strattan, Josiah, Evesham, and Mary Brady 1777 

Strattan, Josiab, Evesham, and Sarah Alloways 1784 

Strattan, William, Burlington, and Hannah Antram 1777 

Stratton, Emanuel, Gloucester, and Sara Shute, Gloucester 1774 

Stratton, James, Cumberland, and Anne Harris 1779 

Stratton. John, Evesham, and Aun Prickett, Chester 1744 

Stratton, Jonathan, Salem, and Elizabeth Thrackrey 1779 

Stratton, Joseph, Evesham, and Naomi Guinn 1765 

Stratton, Manuel, Burlington, and Martha Joyce 1741 

Stratton, Samuel, Evesham, and Elizabeth Price, Evesham 1771 

Stratton, Thomas, Evesham, and Sarah Matlack 1777 



28 
7 
1 

26 



Sept. 30 
Mar. 29 
Mar. 16 
Sept. 30 
April 25 
April 12 
Jan. 13 
Mar. 21 
Nov. 2 
Jan. 24 
Nov. 28 
Dec. 7 
April 1 
Dec. 11 
Oct. 
Jan. 
Dec. 
Jan. 
Mar. 17 
Oct. 24 
June 4 
Nov. 16 
Nov. 20 
April 6 
April 24 
Dec. 27 
Oct. 11 
July 26 
Mar. 5 
Mar. 20 
Feb. 20 
May 1 
Mar. 4 
Dec. 25 
June 14 
Sept. 15 
Feb. 20 
July 28 
June 6 
July 15 
Nov. 13 
Mar. 17 
Mar. 30 
Feb. 20 
Aug. 24 
Feb. 23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 363 

Sfcratton, Joseph, Salem, and Sarah Stretch 1779 

Streaker, Elias, Burlington, and Mary Blair 1779 

Streaker, Lovit, Bristol, Pa., and Ann Crauson, Bristol, Pa 1776 

Streaker, Philip, Jr., Pennsylvania, and Rebecca Eayre 1779 

Strek, John Read, Salem, and Isabella Dunlap 1752 

Stretch, Aaron, Salem, and Elizabeth Reeves, Salem 1765 

Stretch, David, Salem, aud Esther Bacon, Salem 1759 

Stretch, John, Salem, and Esther Hancock, Salem 1751 

Stretch, John, Salem, and Rebecca Stretch 1790 

Stretch, Joseph, Salem, and Deborah Smith, Salem 1727 

Stretch, Nathan, Salem, aud Mary Mannering 1768 

Stretch, Peter, Salem, and Temperance Smith, Salem 1766 

Stretch, Samuel, Salem, and Hannah Fogg, Salem 1762 

Stretch, William, and Abigail Maskell 1754 

Stretchburg, Robert, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Hewitt, Bucks, Pa.. ..1729 

Strieker, John, Somerset, and Neltie Quick, Somerset 1744 

Strickland, Henry, Middletown, aud Mary Eldridge, Middletown 1752 

Stright, Lawrence, Somerset, and Margaret Roy, Somerset 1773 

Stright, Leonard, Somerset, aud Catharine Ryemer, Somerset 1748 

Striker, John, New Brunswick, and Elizabeth Stryker 1779 

String, Conlass, Great Egg Harbour, aud Barsheba Hosher 1762 

String, Jeremia, Gloucester, and Jemimy Hewet 1782 

Striug, Peter, Gloucester, and Joaunah Williams, Gloucester 1762 

Stringer, Benjamin, Burlington, and Anne Budd, Burlington 1731 

Stringer, Humphrey, Bucks, Pa , aud Comfort Dyer, Bucks .1734 

Strycker, Pieter, Somerset, and Catherina Vantine, Somerset 1750 

Stryker, Barnt, Somerset, and Mary Voorhees 1779 

Stryker, Denis, Somerset, and Magdeliu Hogeland, Somerset 1746 

Stryker, Domenicus, Somerset, and Jean Vauderveer 1778 

Stryker, James, Somerset, and Sarah Bogart 1779 

Stryker, Johannes, Somerset, and Eva Perrine 1782 

Stryker, John, Somerset, and Phebe Suydam 1781 

Stryker, Peter, Somerset, and Juliet Low 1779 

Stryker, Peter, Middlesex, and Nelly Voorhees, Middlesex 1784 

Stuart, Robert, Monmouth, and Mary , Monmouth 1736 

Stukel, Peter, Orange, N. Y., and Elisabet Parlmau 1763 

Stutsou, Joshua, Philadelphia, and Polly Wilbert 1778 

Styles, John, Upper Freehold, and Acsha Mingin 1765 

Styles, John, Upper Freehold, and Elizabeth Stewart 1773 

Suffrins, David, Burlington, aud Deborah Morrit 1 786 

Suiter, John, Gloucester, and Abigail Bell 1783 

Sulb, Abel, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Elsy Collings 1784 

Sulisan, James, Cape May, and Mary Robins, Cape May 1739 

Sulker, Henry, New York, and Sarah Stevens, Perth Arnboy 1753 

Summei-ill, Alexander, Pennsylvania, and Jennet Lindsay, Peuu 1737 

Summers, Edmond, Gloucester, and Mary Steehuan, Gloucester 1730 



July 


30 


Oct. 


14 


June 


20 


Oct. 


20 


April 


8 


Sept. 


26 


July 


24 


May 


7 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


9 


May 


26 


Mar. 


24 


May 


22 


June 


4 


Oct. 


16 


July 


24 


Mar. 


14 


Nov. 


3 


July 


29 


July 


10 


Dec. 


6 


Mar. 


20 


Sept. 


15 


Dec. 


29 


April 


29 


Oct. 


1 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


1 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


25 


May 


25 


July 


21 


Mar. 


5 


April 


17 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


21 


May 


4 


May 


15 


Jan. 


7 


June 


2 


Feb. 


23 


May 


4 


Oct. 


15 


April 


20 


Jan. 


8 



364 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sunderland, Peter, Somerset, and Catherine Holman 1778 

Smliv, Lawrence, Burlington, and Mary Vanbome, Burlington.. .. 1738 

Surly, Francis, Burlington, and Mary Beeves, Burlington. 1737 

Sutphen, Arther, Somerset, and Mary Houghten 1779 

Sutphen, Barnet, Middlesex, and Cornelia Lambertson, Middlesex 1719 

Sutphen, Guisbert, Roxbury, and Mary Allen 1778 

Sutphen, Isaac, Freehold, and Jane Barkelow, Freehold 1753 

Sutphen, Jacob, Hunterdon, and Mary Sutphen, Hunterdon 1788 

Sutphin, James, Somerset, and Elizabeth Voorhees 1778 

Sutphin, John, Freehold, and Garcha Aumack, Shrewsbury 1757 

Sutphen, Richard, Somerset, and Hannah Vanpelt 1773 

Sutphin, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Ida Yanmater, Monmouth 175-4 

Sutphin, John, Amwell. and Sarah Garrison, Amwell 1773 

Sutton, Daniel, Burlington, and Agnes Carre 1688 

Sutton, Daniel, Burlington, and Mary Jackson 1732 

Sutton, Henry, Piscataway, and Mary Langstaff, Piscataway 1751 

Sutton, Jacob, Piscataway, and Anne Campbell, Woodbridge 1756 

Sutton, John, Mansfield, and Susannah Ivins 1781 

Sutton, Jonas, Amwell, and Elizabeth Kunyon, Middlesex 1761 

Sutton, Joseph, and Sarah Jones 1779 

Sutton, Julius, Monmouth, and Catherine Eson, Monmouth 1711 

Sutton, Robert, Burlington, and Elizabeth Hardeman, Burlington 1729 

Sutton, Robert, Burlington City, and Mary Sands, Burlington City 1747 

Sutvin, John, Hunterdou, and Janitie Vandoren, Somerset 17C1 

Suydam, Hendrick, Somerset, and Neeltie Fisher, Somerset 175 L 

Suydam, Ryke, Monmouth, and Sarah Lupter, Monmouth 1711 

Swaim, John, Staten Island, and Cornelia Veghte, Rocky Hill 1771 

Swaim, John. S imerset, and Sarah Stockton 1779 

Swaim, Joseph, New Windsor, and Mary Conner 1772 

Swaim, Matthias, Jr., Middlesex, and Rachel Hankius 1760 

Swain, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Rebeckah Orsborn, Shrewsbury 1756 

Swain, David, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Sheer, Bucks 1775 

Swain, Gabriel, Mansfield, and Hannah Brown 1778 

Swain, Jacocks, Cape May, and Hannah Tcwnsend, Cape May 1771 

Swain, John, Cape May, and Rebecca Hands 1780 

Swain, Reuben, Cape May, and Martha Hughes, Cape May 1766 

Swain, Reuben, Cape May, and Elizabeth Eldridge, Cape May 1772 

Swain, Samuel, Evesham, and Isabell Brown, Evesham 1765 

Swain. Samuel, Burlington, aud Hannah Borden, Burlington, 1780 

Swaine, Mathias, Middlesex, and Sarah Vanroome 1738 

Swallow, John, Amwell, and Catharine Servey, Amwell 1769 

Sw anger, Isaac, Hunterdon, and Sally Mackright 1768 

Swart, John, Middletown, and Catharine Tunisou, Middletown 1764 

Swartwout, Cornelius, New York, and Catholyntie Spier, New York. . .1763 

Sweatman, James, Cumberland, and Mary Price 1787 

Sweeny, Dennis, and Nancy Stephens 1760 



May 

June 

Mar. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Sept. 

Sept. 

Sept. 

Sept. 

Mar. 

Oct. 

June 

Dec. 

April 

Mar. 

Oct, 

Sept. 

Mar. 

Sept. 

July 

July 

Mar. 

Nov. 

April 

June 

June 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Sept. 

Mar. 

Feb. 

June 

Nov. 

May 

Oct. 

Mar. 

May 

April 

Dec. 

June 

June 

Aug. 

Mar. 



25 
12 
22 

14 

1 
10 
24 
10 
12 
28 

3 

3 
18" 
10 
11 

1 
27 
27 
22 
12 
17 
24 
11 

9 

1 

2 
21 
12 
10 
28 
22 
11 
12 
10 

6 

3 
12 

3 
30 
12 
29 
27 
11 

6 
24 
24 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 365 

Sweetnian, Thomas, Freehold, and Sarah Korr, Freehold 1765 

Swen, Jedidiah, Elizabethtown, and Phebe Stanbery, Elizabothtown . 1703 

Sweze, Caleb, Morris, arid Mary Trimmer, Morris 1768 

Swift, Samuel, Burlington, and Ann Hancock, Burlington 1738 

Swift, William, Mansfield, and Elizabeth Shreve, Mansfield 1772 

Swiger, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Patterson 1758 

Swiger, Jacob, Burlington, and Elizabeth King 176(3 

Swinden, Robert, Monmouth, and Mary Van Brockles, Monmouth 174i 

Swingler, Henry, Freehold, and Mary Clayton 1746 

Swinney, Elisha, Cumberland, and Eunice Jenkins, Cumberland 1771 

Swinney, Valentine, Cumberland, and Susanna Whitaker 1783 

Swiim, Anthony, Middlesex, and Margaret Throp, New Windsor. .... 1764 

Swiim, John, Upper Freehold, and Hannah Peterson, Freehold 1745 

Syers, Gerard, and Jane Webb, Perth Amboy 1741 

Symmonds, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Ann Newberry 1730 

Symmons, Peter, Burlington, and Sarah Sidnaham, Burlington 1763 

Symons, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Nail, Burlington 1759 

FEMALES. ^ 

Sack, Charlotta, and Henry Sevel, Gloucester 1756 

Sailor, Mary, Burlington, and John Irick, Burlington 1761 

Saint, Elizabeth, and Micajah Carter, Burlington 1741 

Saint, Elizabeth, and Mijali Carter, Burlington 1741 

Saint, Elizabeth, and Thomas Edgerton, Gloucester 1759 

Salar, Barbara, and Samuel Cox, Burlington 1756 

Salcker, Ann, and William Humphreys, Bucks, Pa 1760 

Salman, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Evan Evans, Philadelphia 1736 

Salnave, Abigail, Elizabethtown, and Josiah Wynants, Elizabethtown. 1760 

Saltar, Alice, Staten Island, and James Lisk, Staten Island 1757 

Saltar, Lucy, Monmouth, and James Johnston, Monmouth 1739 

Saltar, Sarah, Monmouth, and Robert Hartshorne, Monmouth. ..... 1743 

Salter, Elizabeth, and John Shaw, Upper Freehold 1739-40 

Salter, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Eseck Hartshorne, Monmouth. . 1764 

Salter, Lidia, and Richard Duglass, Monmouth 1739-40 

Salter, Sarah, and Nathan Allen, Monmouth 1743 

Saltore, Margaret, and John Hepburn, Somerset 1771 

Sanderlin, Mary, Salem, and Edward Moore, Salem 1764 

Sands, Jane, Salem, and Thomas Beans, Bucks, Pa 1739 

Sands, Mary, Burlington City, and llobert Sutton, Burlington City. . . 1747 

Sanford, Katherine, and John Garlan, New Jersey 1782 

Sankey, Lydia, and Thomas Scattergood, Bristol, Pa 1789 

Sargeant, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Dunlap, P. Amboy. . . . 1762 

Sarjant, Ann, and Poole, England, 47th Reg. of Foot 1774 

Satterthwaite, Elizabeth, and Aaron Wright, Burlington . 1779 

Saul, Ann, Philadelphia, and Devenport Marott, Philadelphia 1770 

Saul, Mary, Burlington, and John Pittmau, Burlington 1731 



April 


15 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


2 


May 


20 


Nov. 


18 


Sept. 


18 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


12 


Feb. 


24 


Feb. 


12 


Feb. 


17 


Sept. 


22 


Dec. 


23 


June 


8 


April 


23 


Aug. 


8 


Dec. 


11 


Sept. 


2 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


7 


Dec. 


7 


April 


27 


Dec. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


June 


14 


Feb. 


18 


Aug. 


16 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


10 


Oct, 


6 


Dec. 


18 


Feb. 


7 


April 


9 


Nov. 


5 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


2 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


1 


Apri 


1 


Oct. 


1 


Mar. 


25 



366 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Saunders, Elizabeth, and James Caruthers, Gloucester 1785 

Saunders, Mary, and John Wilkason, Burlington 1759 

Saunders, Sarah, Burlington, aud Benjamin Lncus, Burlington 1750 

Saunders, Victorina, and William Batemau, Cumberland 1780 

Savage, Anne, and Gideon Lyon, Somerset 1778 

Savage, Martha, and Silas Newcomb, Cumberland 1784 

Savage, Mary, Somerset, and Andrew Barton, Somerset 1771 

Savage, Sarah, and Enoch Stillwill, Cape May 1768 

Savery, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Thomas Rinnan, Perth Amboy. . . 1749 
Sawins, Lydia, Gt. Egg Harb'r, and Daniel Townsend, Gt. Egg Harb 17G9 

Saxton, Ann, and Jonathan Budd, Burlington . 1777 

Saxton, Elizabeth, Freehold, and William Emly, Burlington 1746 

Sayre, Damaris, and Robert Murphy, Cumberland 1780 

Sayre, Hannah, and Wade Barker, Cumberland 1768 

Sayre, Lydia, Cumberland, and Samuel Hannah, Cumberland 1768 

Sayre, Martha, Stow Creek, and John Wood, Upper Alloways Creek. . . 1776 

Sayre, Mary, Cumberland, and Isaac Bacon, Cumberland 1764 

Sayre, Rachel, and Job Tyler, Cumberland 1782 

Sayre, Ruth, Salem, and Nathaniel Jenkins, Salem 1743 

Sayre, Temperance, Gt. Egg Harb'r, James Steelman, Gt. Egg Harb . . 1756 

Sayre, Theodotia, and Moses Remington, Cumberland 1778 

Sayres, Patience, and Christopher Rapes, Gloucester . 1766 

Scaife, Ellen, Pennsylvania, and Hammel Edwards, Pennsylvania. . . 1730 

Scandlon, Sarah, Middlesex, and Peter Perrine, New Jersey 1760 

Scantlin, Bridget, Hunterdon, and Cornelius Carney, Hunterdon 1769 

Scattergood, Elizabeth, Burlington, and James Fennimore, Burlington. 1775 

Scattergood, Mary, and Thomas Broom, Bristol, Pa 1782 

Scattergood, Rebecca, Burlington, and Aaron Aronsen, Burlington .. 1730 

Scattergood, Rebecca, Burlington, and Isaac Pearson, Burlington 1746 

Scattergood, Sarah, and Job Talman, Burlington 1736 

Scattergood, Sarah, Burlington, and Levi Murrell, Burlington 1757 

Scattergood, Sarah, and Joseph Beck, Burlington ... 1779 

Schambers, Margaret, and William King, Jr 1780 

Schanell, Lydia, and John Gorman, Hunterdon 1768 

Schanck, Eleanor, Monmouth, and Edmund Harris, Monmouth 1765 

Schanck, Eleanor, and Cornelius Quick, New Jersey 1779 

Schanck, Nelley, Monmouth, and Garret Covenhoven, Monmouth . . 1744 
Schanck, Patience, Freehold, and William Vanschayne, Freehold. . . . 1754 

Schanck, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Bowne, Monmouth 1757 

Schanck, Agnes, Freehold, aud John Vandorn, Freehold 1756 

Schellenger, Sarah, and Fulkerd Fulkerson, Morris 1780 

Schenk, Ann, Hunterdon, and David Bishop, Hunterdon 1775 

Schenk, Margaret, Monmouth, and Abraham Emmans, Hunterdon. ..1750 
Schenck, Mary, Monmouth, and Daniel Hendrickson, Jr., Monmouth 1767 

Schenck, Mary, and John Simpson, Hunterdon 1785 

Schenck, Nellie, Monmouth, and Christophel Longstreet, Monmouth. 1753 



May 


12 


July 


10 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


15 


Oct. 


22 


June 


18 


Aug. 


26 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


3 


Oct, 


15 


July 


15 


Mar. 


1 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


20 


Feb. 


29 


Oct. 


21 


April 


21 


Dec. 


28 


July 


30 


Jan. 


4 


July 


31 


July 


7 


April 


16 


July 


20 


Dec. 


30 


Dec. 


11 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


25 


July 


21 


April 


24 


May 


15 


Dec. 


2 


Jan. 


2 


June 


26 


July 


17 


Dec. 


26 


June 


13 


June 


30 


Jan. 


12 


Oct. 


16 


Dec. 


12 


Sept. 


2 


Dec. 


6 


Nov. 


28 






MARRIAGE LICENSES. 367 

Scheuck, Sarah, and < Mike Wikoff, Monmouth 1769 Dec. 29 

Schenok, Willeinentje, Freehold, and Elbert Williamson, Freehold. ... 1752 Dec. 6 

Schermerhorn, Phebe, Hunterdon, and Michael Demott, Hunterdon. 1749 Mar. 5 

Schihok, Marthew, and Benjamin Stout, Hunterdon 1772 Sept. 17 

Schillinks, Sarah, Cape May, and Thomas Crowell, Cape May 1771 Jan. 15 

Schwissen, Catharine, and Nicholas Leonard, Burlington 1761 May 12 

Schooley, Frances, Burlington, and John Leonard, Monmouth 1769 May 26 

Schooley, Jehoshebah, and John Thompson, Burlington 1759 Aug. 22 

Schoonmaker, Catharine, Morris, and William Devoor, Morris 17-10 June 13 

Schureman, Anne, and Isaac Vantine, New Brunswick 1779 Aug. 7 

Schureman, Elizabeth, and David Nevius, Somerset 1781 Nov. 2 

Schuyler, Ann, and Richard Degray, Bergen 1786 Aug. 1 

Schuyler, Christian, New Brunswick, John Yoorhees, New Brunsw'k . . 1749 April 26 

Schuler, Christinia, and Andrew Abel New Jersey 1779 Jan. 26 

Schuyler, Elenor, Somerset, and David Williamson, Middlesex 1752 Aug. 13 

Schuyler, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Benjamin Van De Linde, Bergen. . .1748 Nov. 9 

Schuyler, Esther, and William Colfax, Bergen 1783 Aug. 27 

Schuyler, Esther, and Peter Carr, Bergen 1786 Sept. 23 

Schuyler, Hester, Bergen, and Tunis Dey, Bergen 1749 Dec. 12 

Schuyler, Jane, and Joseph Crozer, Bucks, Pa 1787 Dec. 19 

Schuyler, Joanna, Bergen, au<1 Isaac Kingsland, Bergen 1741 June 3 

Scigolet, Mary, Middletown, and John Ciser, New York 1764: Sept. 12 

Scoby, Hannah, Middlesex, and Peter Brown, Middlesex 1760 Mar. 26 

Scoggin, Elizabeth, and Wentzell Gezell 1758 May 20 

Scoker, Bachel, and Jacob Demaree, Essex 1748 Jan. 10 

Scomp, Kenestie, and John Pittinger, Readingtown. ... 1767 April 14 

Scooley, Martha, and Joseph Phillips 1785 Feb. 11 

Scothom, Mary, and David Clayton, Monmouth 1759 April 6 

Scott, Abigail, Cumberland, and John Barker, Cumberland 1770 Feb. 20 

Scott, Alice, Mansfield, and Thomas Page, Burlington 1767 April 20 

Scott, Ann, Burlington, and John Batten, Gloucester 1766 Mar. 23 

Scott, Anne, Gloucester, and Thomas Maffett, Gloucester 1770 Oct. 30 

Scott, Elizabeth, and Joseph Bobinson, Gloucester 1772 April 25 

Scott, Elizabeth, Springfield, and Eleazer Watkina, Springfield 1773 May 5 

Scott, Hannah, Shrewsbury, and John Williams, Shrewsbury 1751 July 18 

Scott, Hannah, Burlington, and Thomas Boulton, Burlington 1774 Mar. 31 

Scott, Hannah, Cumberland, and John Brown, Cumberland 1774 May 4 

Scott, Hanuar, Shrewsbury, aud William Pintard, Shrewsbury. . . .. 1761 Jan. 5 

Scott, Hester, Burlington, and Ezekiel Johnson, Burlington 1782 April 1 

Scott, Mahitable, and John Melrose, Somerset 1779 Aug. 27 

Scott, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Tuly, Burlington 1729 Sept. 13 

Scott, Mary, Burlington, and Benjamin Gilbert, Burlington 1761 Aug. 18 

Scott, Mary, and George Stark, Penus Neck 1762 Sept. 8 

Scott, Mary, aud Samuel McNiuch, S'issex 177',) Jan. 7 

Scott, Mary, and Richard Barker, Cumberland 1782 Jan. 30 

Scott, Mary, and John Gleeson, Gloucester 1786 Jan. 9 



368 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Scott, Rachel, and George Gardner, Gloucester 1771 

Scott, Ruth, Cumberland, and Charles Clark, Cumberland 1769 

Scott, Sidnea. and James Burch, Cumberland 1789 

Scott, Susanna.. Salem, and John Holsten, Salem . . . 1770 

Scroggin, Jane, and Samuel Applegate, Burlington 1777 

Scroggy, Elizabeth, and George Fenton, Jr., Burlington 1777 

Soroggy, Hannah, Burlington, and Matthew Willson, Burlington 1771 

Scudder, Abigail, and Nathaniel Hart, Hunterdon 1778 

Scudder, Anne, Elizabeth Town, and Benjamin Force, "Woodbridge. . .1758 

Scudder, Rebecca, and Titus Hart, Hunterdon.. 1779 

Scull, Abigail, Cape May, and Joseph Ludlam, Jr., Cape May 1757 

Scull, Ann, Gloucester, and Northrup Marple, Gloucester 1763 

Scull, Catharine, and Nathaniel Champion, Gloucester . 1762 

Scull, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Joseph Townsend, Burlington . . . . 1735 

Scull, Elizabeth, Cape May, and John Baker, Cape May 1760 

Scull, Hannah, and John Vaugelder, Cape May 1757 

Scull, Jane, Egg Harbour, and Elijah Smith, Egg Harbour 1758 

Scull, Margaret, Gloucester, and Charles Stillmann, Gloucester 1731 

Scull, Mary, and Ebenezer Ingersol, Cape May 1761 

Scull, Phebe, Cape May, and Joshua Garretson, Cape ilay 1763 

Scull, Phebe, and John May, Gloucester. 1764 

Scull, Fhebe, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Israel Stiles, Cape May 1775 

Scull, Rachel, Gloucester, and Caleb Bickham, Gloucester 1762 

Scull, Rachel, Salem, and James Lewis, Salem 1774 

Scull, Rachel, and Absolam Heigby, Gloucester. 1784 

Scull, Rebecca, Cape May, and Henry Schillinger, Cape May 1775 

Scull, Temperance, Cape May, and Jacob Richardson, Cape May 1740 

Scull, Zibich, Cape May, and Levi Hand, Cape May 1772 

Scyssum, Lydia, Bucks, Pa., and Daniel Burgis, Bucks, Pa 1751 

Seabring, Antie, Middlesex, and William French, Middlesex 1742 

Seabrook, Hannah, Monmouth, and Cornelius Vanhorne, Monmouth.. 1730 

Seabrook, Mary, and Richard Herbert, Monmouth 1767 

Seagrave, Arabella, Deerfield, and Joseph Richardson, Deerfield., 1751 

Sealey, Magdillan, Deptford, and George Sparks, Deptford 1766 

Sealoff, Alice, Staten Island, and Itchecomb deader, Staten Island. . . . 1748 

Seamens, Peggy, Staten Island, and Joseph North, New York 1746 

Sear, Sarah, and Jeremiah Daniels, Cape May 1780 

Searl, Hannah, Bucks, Pa., and Isaac Winner, Bucks, Pa 1776 

Searle, Grace, Bucks, Pa., and John Frost, Bucks, Pa — 1732 

Searle, Grace, Pennsylvania, and John Dawson, Pennsylvania 1768 

Searle, Susanna, and John Harris, Gloucester 1733 

Searls, Mary, and James Stockton, Somerset 1778 

Sears, Anne, Shrewsbury, and Longfield Cox, Shrewsbury 1751 

Sears, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Stephen Vaubrackel, Monmouth.. 1747-8 

Sears, Hannah, Salem, and Wade Barker, Cumberland 1779 

Stbring, Anne, and Dennis Vandine Bice, Middlesex . . 1765 



Oct. 


28 


Nov. 


21 


Feb. 


3 


Feb. 


8 


Jan. 


20 


Mar. 


12 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


14 


April 


2 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


21 


July 


24 


Mar. 


6 


Jan. 


9 


July 


21 


Sept. 


7 


Jan. 


5 


Apiil 


24 


Nov. 


23 


July 


7 


April 


11 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


7 


Nov. 


30 


May 


in 


June 


17 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


15 


Mav 


19 


Dec. 


30 


Oct. 


19 


July 


23 


Sept. 


19 


Sept. 


22 


Nov. 


9 


June 


6 


April 


5 


Feb. 


1 


June 


6 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


9 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


26 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 369 

Sdbring, Servia, and Jeremiah Field, Middlesex 1770 

Stildon, Deborah, Salem, and Samuel Thompson, Salem 1765 

Sedman, Rachel, and Edward Lushley, Gloucester 1758 

Seed, Mary, Burlington, and -lames Burnsides, Burlington 1729 

Seed, Sarah, Chester, and Darley Welsh, Chester 1757 

Seeds, Deborah, and Jacob Spencer, Gloucester . 1773 

Seeds, Margaret, and William Tate, Gloucester 1766 

Seeds, Rebecca, Gloucester, and John Coneley, Gloucester 1765 

Seekelsoh, Achey, Bergen, and Abraham Spier, Bergen 1753 

Seeker, Catherine, and David Demarest, Bergen 1748 

Seeley, Esther, Cumberland, and John Gibbon, Cumberland 1761 

Seeley, Sarah, Deerheld, and William Ramsey, Fairfield 1759 

Seely, Magdelena, and Gunnar Fox, Gloucester 1758 

Seenian, Abigail, and Joseph Parker, Little Egg Harbour 1761 

Segang, Mary, and Anthony Stoutenborough, Staten Island 1745 

Seins, Christina, and Morris Covert, Hunterdon 1773 

Sellers, Hannah, and Isaac Peirce 1759 

Sellers, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Miles Harrison, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Selover, Lytic, Middlesex, and William Cox, Middlesex 1752 

Senicks, Ann, and Jacob Noniman, Salem 1740 

Seolse,i Abigail, 26 Regt. of Foot, and Patrick Bligh, 26 Reg. of Foot. 1768 

Sermon, Margaret, Burlington, and Francis Girting, Hunterdon 1731 

Serrin, Elizabeth, Staten Isiaud, and Joseph Wood, Staten Island 1758 

Servey, Catherine, Ainwell, and John Swallow, Amwell 1769 

Severns, Mary, and Phillip Phillips, Hunterdon 1769 

Severns, Abigail, Burlington, and James Neilson, Hunterdon 1729 

Severns, Phebe, Hunterdon, and Isaac Johnson, Hunterdon 1771 

Sevill, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Alexander, Burlington 1774 

Seward, Mary, Sussex, and Richard Edsall, Sussex 1770 

Sexton, Elizabtth, and Aaron Houghton, Hunterdon 1780 

Sexton, Rhoda, Burlington, and Jonah Small, Burlington 1774 

Sexton, Temperance, Hunterdon, and Nathaniel Hixson, Hunterdon 1775 

Seysum, Lydia, Bucks, and Daniel Burgess, Bucks 1751 

Shadager, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Woolman, Pennsylvania .. 1749 

Shadaker, Elizabeth, and John Gallogher 1764 

Shaf er, Elizabeth, and John Peake, Monmouth 1759 

Shakeshaft, Hannah, New York, and Peter Avell, New York 1764 

Shall, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and John Sargent, Shrewsbury. . . 1763 

Shallick, Honour, Burlington, and James Smart, Burlington 1728 

Shanks Margaret, and Elias Loofbourrow, Middlesex 1766 

' Sharoe, Kathariue, Burlington, and William Kelly, Burlington 1745 

Sharp, Agnes, Perth Amboy, and David Weeks, Perth Amboy 1765 

Sharp, Anna, and Joseph Costive, Burlington 1759 

Sharp, Deborah, Burlington, and Benjamin Allen, Burlington 1744 

1 Or Scolse. 
23 



Oct. 


1 


Mar. 


22 


Aug. 


28 


( )ct. 


22 


Sept. 


17 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


12 


•Ian. 


22 


July 


28 


July 


5 


Mar. 


31 


Feb. 


•jo 


April 


24 


May 


21 


July 


26 


May 


11 


June 


19 


June 


22 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


16 


Mar. 


28 


Jan. 


7 


Oct, 


26 


April 


29 


July 


29 


June 


26 


Aug. 


13 


Mar. 


22 


Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


23 


Mar. 


21 


Feb. 


25 


June 


17 


Nov. 


14 


April 


5 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


30 


Sept. 


7 


April 


1 20 


July 


15 


Aug. 


32 


June 


29 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


25 



370 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sharp, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Benjamin Sharp, Burlington 1728 Sept. 30 

Sharp, Elizabeth. Gloucester, and Henry Siddens, Gloucester 1738 Mar. — 

Sharp, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas Smith, Burlington 1744 Nov. 20 

Sharp, Elizabeth, Chester, and Thomas Smith, Evesham 1744 Nov. 25 

Sharp, Elizabeth, and Michael Wooster 1769 Jan. 3 

Sharp, Elizabeth, Burlington, and George Hains, Burlington 1771 June 4 

Sharp, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Daniel Jones, Burlington. . . . 1781 Jan. 29 

Sharp, Esther, Burlington, and Job Atkinson, Gloucester 1780 Aug. 17 

Sharp, Hannah, and John Kentie, Newtown 1733 Sept. 25 

Sharp, Hannah, Burlington, and George Hammitt, Gloucester 1757 April 28 

Sharp, Isabel, and Richard Stephenson Sr., Cumberland 1778 Jan. 5 

Sharp, Lydia, Burlington, and John Lewis, Burlington 1784 Aug. 3 

Sharp, Margaret, South Amboy, and George Series, South Amboy 175G Feb. 11 

Sharp, Margaret, Salem, and Abia Brown, Burlington 1765 Mar. 12 

Sharp, Mary, Gloucester, and Isaac Hoel, Gloucester. 1727 Jan. 29 

Sharp, Mary, Evesham, and Daniel Strattan, Burlington 1739 May 6 

Sharp, Mary, Piscataway, and Elijah Dunham, Piscataway 1751 April 6 

Sharp, Mary, Burliugton, and Thomas Garwood, Burlington 1763 Nov. 12 

Sharp, Mary, and David Chumard 1784 Feb. 4 

Sharp, Rachel, Burlington, and Isaac Busby, Burlington 1743 April 5 

Sharp, Rebecca, Burlington, and Solomon Haines, Burlington 1749 Oct. 17 

Sharp, Rebeckah, and William Mason, Burlington 1786 Jan. 9 

Sharp, Rose, .and George Monrow, Burlington 1769 Jan. 14 

Sharp, Sarah, Burlington, and Peter Phillips, Burlington 1729 Sept, 11 

Sharp, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and John Disbrow, Perth Amboy 1743 Oct. 6 

Sharp, Sarah, Woodbridge, aud Job Thorp, Woodbridge 1750 Jan. 10 

Sharp, Sibella, and Edward London, Burlington 1779 Aug. 1 1 

Sharp, Susannah, aud James Nayler, Burlington 1787 Nov. 28 

Sharpe, Anna, and Isaac Phillips, Arnwell., 1778 April 25 

Sharpenstein, Anna, Hunterdon, and Coonrod Bickle, Hunterdon ...1752 April 11 

Sharpenstein, Mary, and David Welsh, Roxbnry 1778 May 26 

Shaver, Margaret, aud Isaac C mvert, Sussex 1768 Oct. 22 

Shaver, Sarah, and Levi Ewan, Burlington 1784 Mar. 29 

Shaw, Alice, and Joseph Hildreth, Cumberland 1777 Nov. 12 

Shaw, Angeltie, Middlesex, and William Disbrow, Middlesex 1769 Jan. 23 

Shaw, Ann, Burlington, and Ellis Wright, Burlington 1776 Oct. 1 

Shaw, Anne, and Edward Mullen, Burlington 1783 Nov. 25 

Shaw, Anne, and William Leonard, Middlesex 1779 June 25 

Shaw, Dorathia, and Efram Smith, Gt. Egg Harbour 1762 ' Aug. 5 

Shaw, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and James Stillwell, Middletown 1762 Dec. 4 

Shaw, Elizabeth, aud Joshua Townsend, Cape May 1787 Nov. 23 

Shaw, Hannah, Cape May, and Thomas Stillwell, Cape May 1761 Feb. 11 

Shaw, .Jane, and Robert Townsend, Cape May , 1763 Oct. 4 

Shaw, Lydda, aud Gideon Johnston, Cape May 1767 April 24 

Shaw, Marcy, aud Nathan Goff, Cape May 1780 Jan. 19 

Shaw, Mary, Cumberland, and Daniel Elmer, Cumberland. 1761 Sept. 28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 37 I 

Shaw, Nehomy, and Benjamin B. Cosure, Gloucester 1784 Nov. 16 

Shaw, Rebecca, Salein, and Willis Nicholas, Salem 1774 Feb. 22 

Shaw, Rebecca, and John Morgan, Cumberland 1785 Sept. 13 

Shaw, Sarah, Salem, and Joseph Hodge, Salem 1746 April 5 

Shaw. Sarah, Cumberland, and Elias Boys, Gloucester 1760 July 14 

Shaw, Sarah, Somerset, and Robert Lee, Somerset 1770 June 5 

Shaw, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Adams, Philadelphia 1781 Dec. 24 

Shaw, Sarah, and Ambrose Page, Cumberland 1784 Jan. 20 

Shawcross, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Pugh, Bucks, Pa 

Shearman, Patience, Monmouth, and Silas Cook, Monmouth. 1761 May 25 

Shears, Elizabeth, and Darby ( >'Bryan, Salem 1766 Dec. 25 

Sheckels, Elizabeth, and James Farrill, Cumberland 1780 July 24 

Shemely, Mary, and Thomas Johnson, Burlington 1783 June 14 

Shenck, Gesha, Freehold, and Aaron Vandorn, Freehold 1765 May 8 

Shephard, Rhoda, Cumberland, Richard Wheat Craven, Cumberland. 1766 Oct. 10 

Shephard, Sarah, and William Young, Alloways Creek 1777 Aug. 26 

Sheppard, Catharine, and Richard Crawford, Jr., both Middletown. . .1757 Sept. 17 

Shepherd, Deborah, Middletown, and Edward Burrows, Middletown. .1750 April 2 

Shepherd, Hannah, and Joseph Smith, Gloucester 1754 June 1 

Shepherd, Kerenhappuch, and David Long, Cumberland 1757 Jan. 10 

Shepherd, Lucy, Cumberland, and David Bowen, Cumberland 1763 Sept. 15 

Shepherd, Margaret, and John Bowden, Burlington 1789 July 27 

Shepherd, Mary, Middletown, and James Winter, Middletown 1755 Oct. 21 

Shepherd, Mary, Cumberland, and Benjamin Mulford, Cumberland. . 1760 Oct. 4 

Shepherd, Nancy, South Amboy, and Obadiah King, Middlesex 1767 Feb. 7 

Shepherd, Phebe, aud Wade Barker, New Jersey.. 1774 Sept. 21 

Shepherd, Prudence, Cumberland, and Nathan Shepherd, Cumberland. 1767 Nov. 10 

Shepherd, Rachel, and Obadiah Robins, Cumberland 1754 Feb. 28 

Shepherd, Rachel, and Jeremiah Bacon, Jr.. Cumberland 1757 April 10 

Shepherd, Sarah, Cumberland, and Abner Hall, Cumberland 1774 Aug. 15 

Shepherd, Sarah, Cumberland, and Richard Coles, Philadelphia 1759 Jan. 22 

Shepherd, TJnis, and Coustaut Long, Cumberland 1778 June 16 

Sheppard, Deborah, Monmouth, and John Leonard, Monmouth 1759 Dec. 17 

Sheppard, Hannah, East Jersey, and Isaac Stelle, Province of N. J 1747 Oct. 10 

Sheppard, Pleasant, and Matthias Taylor, Down 1781 Jan. 1 

Sheppard, Rachel, Monmouth, and Thomas George, Monmouth 1758 Mar. 2 

Sheppard, Sarah, Middlesex, aud James Letts, Middlesex 1760 Feb. 20 

Sheppard, Sarah, and Thomas Remington, Cumberland 1778 Sept. 30 

Sherard, Anne, and John Dunham, Morris. 1780 May 22 

Sherim, Mary, and William McGallird, Hunterdon.. 1779 May 5 

Sherlock, Bridget, and William Wilkison, Upper Freehold 1749-50 Feb. L0 

Sherman, Mary, Bucks, Pa., aud Henry Cooper, Bucks, Pa . 1732 July 8 

Sherrar, Abigail, Burlington, and William Evingham, Burlington 1773 Feb. 2 

Sherriu, Hannah, aud John Cann, Gloucester 1789 Jan. 17 

Sherrin, Rebecca, Burlington, and William Smith, Burlington 1776 Jan. 22 

Sherron, Jane, Salem, and Martin Carter, New Castile, Del 1759 June 11 



372 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sherry, Mary, Pilesgrove, and John Thompson, Pilesgrove 1765 Aug. 10 

Shewin, Elizabeth, Chester, and Nicholas Stiles, Chester 1750 Jan. 23 

Sherwin, Mary, and Alexander Peacock, Burlington 1759 Mar. 7 

Sherwin, Rebecca, Chester, and Benjamin Allen, Burlington. 1749 Dec. 7 

Sheward, Lydia, and Chamless Allen, both Wilmington, Del 1766 Sept. 29 

Sbewriug, Lydia, and John White .1735 Nov. 3 

Sheydecker, Barbara, Burlington, and John Baker, Burlington 1712 Mar. 7 

Shin, Sara, and Daniel Hooper, Gloucester 1785 May 4 

Shinn, Abigail, Burlington, and Henry Reeves, Burlington 1728 Feb. 2G 

Shinn, Abigail, and Joseph Budd, Burlington 1778 Aug. 6 

Shinn, Ann, and John Davidson, Burlington 1778 Dec. 7 

Shinn, Anne, Northampton, and Isac Islow, Northampton 1784 Sept. 15 

Shinn, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Armstrong, Burlington 1764 July 11 

Shinn, Elizabeth, and Charles Ford, Burlington 1768 Dec. 12 

Shinn, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Alloways, Burlington 1774 June 13 

Shinn, Elizabeth, and Jacob Lamb, Burlington 1 777 Mar. 3 

Shinn, Hannah, Burlington, and James Shinn, Burlington 1737 July 18 

Shinn, Hannah, and Frederick Foy 1784 Sept. 8 

Shinn, Hope, Burlington, and Aaron Beck, Burlington 1774 July 11 

Shinn, Jemima, and Caleb Lippincott, Burlington 1782 Mar. 10 

Shinn, Lucretia, Evesham, and Abraham Proud, Evesham 1784 Oct. 4 

Shinn, Martha, Springfield, and Francis Shinn, Springfield 1766 Dec. 3 

Shinn, Mary, and Daniel Willis, Jr 1695 Mar. 12 

Shinn, Mary, Burlington, and Abraham Bonnel, Burlington 1731 Nov. 28 

Shinn, Mary, Chesterfield, and William Taylor, Jr., Chesterfield 1745 Jan. 14 

Shinn, Mary, Burlington, and Jonathan Oliphant, Burlington 1764 June 25 

Shinn, Mary, and Jacob Lamb, Burlington 1768 April 19 

Shinn, Mary, Hunterdon, and Jonathan Bunn, Hunterdon 1776 June 3 

Shinn, Mary, and John Irick, Burlington 1781 Feb. 26 

Shinn, Mary, and Samuel Wright, Springfield 1784 Dec. 1 

Shinn, Mehitabell, Burlington, and Ebenezer Doty, Burlington 1770 July 10 

Shinn, Rebecca, Burlington, and George Clapp, Burlington 1761 Sept. 23 

Shinn, Rhoda, New Mills, and John Steward, New Hanover 1783 Sept. 22 

Shinn, Sarah, Burlington, and Philo Leeds, Burlington 1740 Nov. 1 

Shinn, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Jones, Burlington. 1704 Aug. 3 

Shinn, Sarah, Burlington, and John Myers, Burlington 1775 Oct. 31 

Shinn, Susannah, Burlington, and Bartholomew West, Monmouth 1727 Oct. 5 

Shinn, Unity, Springfield, and Joseph Pancoast, Mansfield 1767 Feb. 11 

Shino, Nancy, and Hugh Mooney, Gloucester 1781 July 3 

Shipperd, Rebecca, and Jonathan Bowen, Cumberland 1758 Dec. 4 

Shippey, Anne, Burlington, and Joseph Hopkins, Burlington 1745 Mar. 20 

Shippey, Susannah, Woodbridge, and Gach Bloodgood, Woodbridge. .1755 Nov. 15 

Shipman, Margaret, and David Kinney, Sussex 1784_ Feb. 13 

Shivers, Ann, and Daniel Cartey, Burlington 1777 Nov. 4 

Shivers, Ansandona, and Joseph Shinn, Greenwich 1758 Nov. 11 

Shivers, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Isaac Tomlinson, Gloucester 1766 Aug. 20 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 373 

Shivers, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Matlack, Gloucester 173G 

Shivers, Hester, Gloucester, and Edward Ycst, Salem 1762 

Shivers, Hope, Gloucester, and Daniel Cartey, Burlington 1775 

Shivers, Letitia, and Benjamin Graisburg, Gloucester 177G 

Shivers, Martha, and Abel Scull, Jr., Gloucester 1758 

Shivers, Mary, Gloucester, and Thomas Bate, Gloucester 1732 

Shivers, Rosanna, and John Budd, Salem 1758 

Shivers, Susannah, Gloucester, and Edward Hollinshead, Gloucester. .1748 

Shoomaker, Mabel, and Thomas Hall, Mansfield 1750 

Shores, Hannah, Burlington, and Andrew Duclu, Philadelphia 1731 

Shords, Susanna, Burlington, and Adam Pevey, Burlington 1742 

Shores, Mary, and John Elliss, Middlesex 1770 

Shores, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Chambers, Burlington 1736 

Short, Elenor, and John Dyer, Salem 1730 

Shotwell, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and James Bishop, Middlesex 1748 

Shotwell, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and Benjamin Shotwell, Woodb'dge. 1753 

Shotwell, Elizabeth, Essex, and Henry Ludlam, Middlesex 1772 

Shotwell, Johanna, Woodbridge, and Benjamin Stelle, Woodbridge . . 1739 

Shotwell, Lydia, Woodbridge, and Benjamin Stelle, Piscataway 1752 

Shotwell, Mary, Woodbridge, and Gabriel Ogden, Morris 1753 

Shotwell, Mary, and David Morris, Middlesex 1769 

Shoulder, Susannah, Woolwich, and Conrade Shoemaker, Woolwich. .1770 
Shourds, Mary, Egg Harbor, and Adam Pettit, i Little Egg Harbor. . . 1747 

Shourds, Mary, Springfield, and Jonathan Taylor, Springfield . , 1772 

Shreaves, Sarah, and David Scattergood, Mansfield.. 1768 

Shreeve, Martha, and John Reushaw, Burlington 1759 

Sbreeve, Rachel, Burlington, and Moses Atkinson, Burlington 1761 

Shreeve, Rebecca, Burlington, and Thomas Smith, Burlington 1738 

Shreve, Annah, and John Page, Burlington 1760 

Shreve, Elizabeth, Mansfield, and William Swift, Mansfield 1772 

Shreve, Hope, Burlington, and William Cowperthwaite, Burlington. . . 1767 

Shreve, Mary, and John Negus, Burlington 1779 

Shreve, Rebecca, Burlington, and George Eyre, Burlington 1754 

Shreve, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Biddle, Jr., Burlington 1763 

Shropshire, Jane, Maurice River, and John Petersen, Maurice River. . 1760 

Shubb, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Kenton, Burlington 1757 

Shull, Catharine, and John Vandeford, Cumberland 1778 

Shumaker, Mary, Somerset, and John Smith, Somerset 1751 

Shute, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Sparrow, Gloucester : . . . . 1747 

Shute, Sara, Gloucester, and Etnanuel Stratton, Gloucester 1774 

Shykels, Christina, and Abraham Reeves, Cumberland 1787 

Sicgelse, Aeltye, Bergen, and Johannis Van Houte, Bergen 1761 

Sickells, Sarah, and Thomas Powell, Borden Town 1770 

Sickels, Elizabeth, Kingwood, and Samuel Smalley, Monmouth 1769 

1 Jonathan Pettit in the bond. 



Jan. 


13 


Aug. 


30 


Nov. 


16 


Dec. 


26 


Nov. 


2 


Mar. 


6 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


23 


Dec. 


17 


June 


21 


Aug. 


1 


April 


17 


Nov. 


17 


Mar. 


26 


June 


11 


Dec. 


18 


Jan. 


3 


Oct. 


2 


Aug. 


14 


May 


26 


Dec. 


6 


June 


23 


Nov. 


5 


June 


3 


May 


4 


Aug. 


10 


Feb. 


22 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


4 


Feb. 


15 


April 


10 


Nov. 


7 


Sept. 


24 


Feb. 


9 


Jan. 


29 


June 


15 


May 


14 


June 


6 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


21 


Aug. 


21 


July 


29 



374 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Sickles, Elizabeth, and Daniel Thorn, New Jersey 1777 Aug. 5 

Sickles, Susannah, and Joseph Fleming, Jr., Gloucester 1784 Aug. 20 

Sidden, Mary, Amwell, and Samuel Stevenson, Am well. ... 1764 Mar. 27 

Siddon, Rachael, Philadelphia, and Moses Tenuant, Maryland 1730 June 3 

Siden, Mary, Salem, and Azel Peirson, Cumberland 1762 Dec. 4 

Sidman, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and William Snyder, New Jersey 1771 Dec. 16 

Sidman, Jane, Burlington, and Mathew Force, Burlington 1772 Aug. 15 

Sidnaham, Sarah, Burlington, and Peter Symmons, Burlington 1763 Aug. 8 

Signet, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Haukins, Burlington 1754 Sept. 3 

Sikes, Johannah, Burlington, and Haran Bryan, Burlington 1751 Aug. 21 

Sikes, Mary, Burlington, and Jacob Toukin>, Burlington 1778 Feb. 11 

Sile, Mary, Burlington, and John Bim, Burlington 1763 Sept. 12 

Siler, Barbara, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Barris, Bucks, Pa 1749 April 10 

Sill, Catharine, Burlington, and Patrick Coahlan, Burlington 1750 July 23 

Silver, Anne, and Thomas Wilson 1693 July 6 

Silver, Jane, Salem, and Joseph Burgiu, Salem 1691-2 Mar. 23 

Silver, Mary, Middlesex, and John Rogers, Upper Freehold 1768 Nov. 12 

Silver, Sophiah, and Isaac Murphy, Gloucester 1783 Sept. 25 

Silverthorn, Sarah, and John Little, Hunterdon 1780 April 27 

Simason, Mary, Freehold, and William Devall, Freehold 1748 June 24 

Simkins, Sarah, and John Connel, Cape May 1763 "Sept. 28 

Simmes, Sarah, and Stephen Smith, Upper Alloways Creek 1784 Nov. 24 

Simmons, Rachel, Cape May, and Hance Peterson, Cumberland .... 1750 Sept. 19 

Simmons, Sarah, and Arthur Irwin, 29 Regt. of Foot 1770 Nov. 9 

Simons, Bethena, and Michael Asay, Burlington 1783 Dec. 16 

Simons, Deborah, Chester, and Richard Smith, Chester 1775 Feb. 11 

Simons, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Thomas King, Burlington 1764 Sept. 10 

Simons, Jemima, Monmouth, and Elias Traeaxe, Monmouth 1760 Jan-. 26 

Simons, Joanna, Northampton, and John Pettit, Northampton 1768 Jan. 2 

Simons, Mary, Burlington, and Abraham Perkins, Burlington 1730 Jan. 25 

Simonsou, Jennet, New York, and Anthony Vanpelt, New York 1746 April 25 

Simpkin, Mercy, and Amariah Hogbin, Cumberland 1757 Aug. 16 

Simpkius, Hannah, and Thomas Pratten, Cape May 1766 Aug. 27 

Simpkins, Jane, Salem, and Henry Guest, Gloucester 1775 Sept. 15 

Simpkius, Mary, and Isaac Willets, Cape May 1771 Oct. 7 

Simpson, Catharine, and Hugh Boyle, New Jersey 1777 July 14 

Simpson, Elizabeth, and Jeremiah Basset, Hunterdon 1782 May 30 

Simpson, Sarah, and James McQuillen, Sussex 1777 May 22 

Sims, Jane, Salem, and George Oakeley, Salem 1766 Mar. 17 

Simson, Rebeckah, and Hasadiah Sampson, Burlington 1769 Mar. 3 

Simson, Susannah, Shrewsbury, and Philip Skinner, Shrewsbury 1765 July 20 

Siucher, Mary, and James Young, Cumberland 1757 June 30 

Sinclair, Catherine, and Daniel Caffery, Hunterdon. 1783 Jan. 19 

Sinclair, Sarah, Bristol, Pa., and William Tosh, Bristol, Pa 1765 Oct. 12 

Sincleair, Mary, and Thomas Maybery, New Jersey 1781 Mar. 12 

Singer, Johannah, and George Campbell, Philadelphia 1732 Sept. 17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



375 



Sink, Mary, and Barney McSkinner, Burlington 1784 Mar. 3 

Sinnickson, Elinor, Salem, and William Mecuin, Salem 17G1 Sept. 22 

Sinnickson, Surah, Salem, and Samuel Dick, Salem 

Sioggin, Hannah, Salem, and Jacob Holliushead, Salem 1766 Dec. 9 

Sip, Gerritie, Acquackannock, and Adrian Sip, Acquacanonck 17G7 Jan. 14 

Sip, Nancy, and Jerj Van Winkel, Bergen 1783 Aug. 31 

Simian, Rachell, and Timothy Hancock, Burlington 1684 Nov. 6 

Sisl-y. Helen, Middlesex, and Simon Horn, Middlesex 1743 May 26 

Sisen, Agnes, Burlington, and Isaac Homer, Burlington. 1730 Aug. 4 

Sivil, Susanna, and John Firestone, Salem 1774 Nov. 20 

Skank, Catharine, Freehold, and Arthur Vandyke, Freehold 1755 Oct. 18 

Skank, Nelle, Middletown, and Hendrick Van Brunt, Shrewsbury ...1756 Dec. 21 

Skeech, Elizabeth, and Alexander McCloud, Gloucester 1734 June 29 

Skeene, Katharine, Salem, and Samuel Hunter, Salem 1695 Oct. 31 

Skeer, Sarah, and Charles Green, Kent, Del 1764 April 9 

Skelton, Hannah, and William Scudder. ... 1779 April 29 

Skelton, Susannah, Bucks, Pa., and Isaac Hogland, Hunterdon 1772 Oct. 26 

Skidmore, Mary, and John Dawsorj, Burlington 1732 Aug. 31 

Skillman, Anne, and James Hageman, Somerset 1778 Aug. 13 

Skillmau, Elizabeth, and Thomas Johnson, Somerset 1778 Sept. 17 

Skillmau, Mary, and Matthew Chum, Hunterdon 1768 April 2 

Skillman, Sarah, and Nathaniel Stout, Hunterdon 1764 June 4 

Skinner, Elizabeth, and William Terrill, Perth Amboy 1771 Nov. 7 

Skinner, Gertrude, Perth Amboy, and James Parker, Perth Amboy. . .1763 Feb. 12 

Skinner, Mary, Middlesex, and Samuel Kempton, Middlesex 1775 Feb. 2 

Skinner, Susanna, Perth Amboy, and Jasper Farmer, Perth Amboy. . .1771 Nov. 7 

Skinner, Susanna, and John Cathcart, Gloucester '. 1779 July 27 

Bkirm, Elizabeth, and Philip Dennis, Burlington 1761 Nov. 27 

Skirm, Tace, and John Thorn, Jr., Nottingham 1785 Mar. 29 

Slacght, Christina. Richmond, N. Y., Peter Wuiants, Richmond, N. Y.1763 May 17 

Slack, Else, and Joseph Hogeland, Hunterdon 1729 June 26 

Slack, Heletiah, and Daniel Peterman, Staten Island 1770 April 20 

Slack, Mary, and Stephen Mapel, Middlesex 1780 Nov. 2 

Slaght, Susannah, Staten Island, and Anthony Van Pelt, Staten Island. 1758 Nov. 13 

Slanson, Dinah, Burlington, and Jacob Jones, Burlington 1763 Sept. 28 

Slape, Sarah, and William Harvey, Salem 1771 Dec. 12 

Slatham, Sarah, Cumberland, and Jeremiah Boweu, Cumberland 1769 Dec. 20 

Slaught, Catherine, and John Fulkerson, Morris 1781 April 13 

Slaught, Elenor, Hunterdon, and John Bake, Hunterdon 1772 Dec. 15 

Sleeper, Leah, and John Parr, Burlington 1788 June 5 

Sleesman, Catherine, and Michael Bowers, Cumberland. 1779 Aug. 3 

Sheer, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and David Swain, Bucks, Pa 1775 Sept. 11 

Slide, Mary, and Cornelius Wilsey, Upper Penns Neck 1784 July 21 

Slide, Zilah, Gloucester, and Isaac Justason, Gloucester 1770 Aug. 21 

Slight, Catharine, and Philimon Elmer, Essex. . . • 1781 Nov. 

Slight, Mary, Reading, and John Ryerson, Reading 1774 Feb. 2 



376 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sliu, Meriam, and Josiah Lippincott, Burlington 1790 

Slim, Rebecca, and Arthur Yennable, Chester 1783 

Sloan, Sarah, and David Chambers, Allentown, Pa 1768 

Sloaue, Hannah, and Caleb Gibson, Gloucester 1774 

Slocom, Athaliah, and William Jackson, Monmouth 1751 

Slocom, Meribe, Shrewsbury, and Isaac Vandyk, Shrewsbury 1760 

Slocum, Anne, Monmouth, and Daniel Williams, Shrewsbury 1759 

Slocuin, Susannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Holmes, Monmouth. . ..1739 

Sloot, Effie, and Isaac Harlenbeck, Bergen 1763 

Slott, Mary, and James Westervelt, Bergen 1788 

Slover, Sophia, Hunterdon, and William Allen, Somerset 1749 

Slown, Margaret, Somerset, and Samuel McCrea, Albany, N. Y 1776 

Small, Amy, Evesham, and John Wilkinson, Evesham 1784 

Small, Esther, and Charles Tonkin 1734 

Small, Mary, and John Matthews, Burlington 1784 

Stnalley, Anne, Piscataway, and Thomas Davis, Piscataway 1750 

Smallwood, Ann, and John Izburn . . 1767 

Smallwood, Mary, Gloucester, and James Hillman, Gloucester 1754 

Smallwood, Mary, Deptford, and Robert Sparks, Deptford 1760 

Smallwood, Mary, and Michael Roe, Gloucester 1784 

Smallwood, Sarah, and Michael Morgan, Gloucester 1784 

Smallwood, Sidney, and James Dinlop, Gloucester 1782 

Smallwood, Martha, and Richard Shute, Gloucester 1735 

Smart, Abigail, and Hugh Creby, Burlington 1765 

Smart, Alley, and Abraham Collins, Burlington 1787 

Smart, Euphemia, and Francis Mills, Burlington 1782 

Smart, Nancy Evans, and Nathaniel Coleman 1777 

Smit, Catiina, and Jacobus Blauvelt, Bergen 1763 

Smit, Rebecca, Bergen, and Samuel Bourdett, Bergen 1764 

Smith, Abigail, Burlington, and Samuel Sherid, Upper Freehold 1764 

Smith, Abigail, and Andrew Godfrey, Cape May 1770 

Smith, Abigail, Middlesex, and John Melvan, Middlesex 1774 

Smith, Abigail, and, John Vannoy, Hunterdon 1780 

Smith, Abigail, and Jonas Morse, Gloucester 1784 

Smith, Alice, Burlington, and Thomas Herd, Burlington 1741 

Smith, Alathare, and Joseph Ludlam, Cape May 1732 

Smith, Amy, and Samuel Springer, Great Egg Harbour 1773 

Smith, Ann, and Thomas English, Burlington 1733 

Smith, Ann, Middletown, and John Burdge, Middletown 1754 

Smith, Ann, Monmouth, and Ragan Hull, Monmouth 1764 

Smith, Ann, Alloways Creek, and Abuer Penton, Alloways Creek 1764 

Smith, Anne, Monmouth, and Zebulon Beard, Monmouth 1749 

Smith, Anne, Burlington, and James Orr, Burlington 1757 

Smith, Anne, and Amos Moore, Hunterdon 1769 

Smith, Anne, and Isaac Thomas, Salem 1784 

Smith, Barbara, Burlington, and William Kays 1743 



Aug. 


15 


May 


24 


April 


13 


Nov. 


7 


Nov. 


23 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


19 


May 


10 


April 


8 


June 


21 


Sept. 


26 


April 


6 


Nov. 


30 


Aug. 


7 


Oct. 


30 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


8 


April 


11 


April 


20 


Nov. 


6 


Feb. 


14 


May 


23 


June 


19 


Mar. 


19 


July 


29 


July 


3 


Oct. 


1 


Dec. 


29 


June 


24 


Jan. 


5 


Sept. 


17 


Feb. 


19 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


23 


June 


21 


Feb. 


17 


Feb. 


18 


Mar. 


29 


Aug. 


25 


Feb. 


1 


May 


19 


Aug. 


22 


Dec. 


1 


May 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 377 

Smith, Bractye, Orange Co., N. Y., and Isaac De Pue, Orange Co., N. Y.1765 

Smith, Catherine, and George Campbell, Hunterdon 1779 

Smith, Catherine, and Israel Smith, Amwell — 1779 

Smith, Christian, (It. Egg Harbour, and Arthur Wescote, Gt. Egg H'r. .1759 

Smith, Christian, Hunterdon, and Joseph Dorsett, Monmouth 1764 

Smith, Deborah, Salem, and Joseph Stretch, Salem 1727 

Smith, Deborah, and Peter Vandeventer, Monmouth 1747 

Smith, Deborah, Middletown, and William Van Cleaf, Middletown. . . L762 

Smith, Deborah, Bergen, ami Outwater, Hackensack 1768 

Smith, Dorcas, and John Holme, Salem 1749 

Smith, Dorcas, Stow Creek, and Daniel Smith, Alloways Creek 1772 

Smith, Dorcus, and Joshua Sims, Mannington 1779 

Smith, Dorothy, Middletown, and Joseph Smith, Middletown 1752 

Smith, Edith, and Benjamin Weatherby, Gloucester 1772 

Smith, Eleanor, Monmouth, and Richard Clark, Monmouth 1750 

Smith, Elisabet, and George Vangeson 1772 

Smith. Elizabeth, Salem, and John Bacon, Salem 1688 

Smith, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and John Waller, Middlesex 1732 

Smith, Elizabeth, and William Bums, Trenton 1733 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Joseph Sowe, Cape May 1737 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Thomas Wright, Bucks, Pa 1739 

Smith, Elizabeth, Salem, and Thomas Flanegan, Salem 1739 

Smith, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Hinchman, Gloucester 1747 

Smith, Elizabeth, Raritau Landing, and George Thomas, New York. .1748 

Smith, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Samuel Gaith, Perth Amboy 1749 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Richard Vicker}', Salem 1757 

Smith, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Isaac Pearson, Burlington 1761 

Smith, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Lucas Gibbs, Gloucester 1762 

Smith, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Coles, Monmouth 1767 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Joshua Bennet, Monmouth 1768 

Smith, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Gifford, Burlington 1774 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Shamgar Hewit, Cape May 1778 

Smith, Elizabeth, and James Holliday, Salem 1780 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Andrew Smith, Readington 1782 

Smith, Elizabeth, and Joseph Brackney, Burlington 1787 

Smith, Ester, and Jeremiah Higbee, Gloucester 1773 

Smith, Esther, and Peter Sitzenger, Penns Neck 1762 

Smith, Experience, Cape May, and Elisha Hand, Cape May 1731 

Smith, Experience, and Philip Cressie, Cape May 1763 

Smith, Grace, Jr., Mannington, and Joseph Sharp, Pilesgrove 1758 

Smith, Grace, and Edward Field, Bucks, Pa 1784 

Smith, Hanna, Cape May, and Richard Osborne, Cape May 1762 

Smith, Hannah, Burlington, and George Smith, Burlington 1731 

Smith, Hannah, Burlington, and George Vaughn, Gloucester 1735 

Smith, Hannah, and Marius Glanvill, Hunterdon 1747 

Smith, Hannah, Cumberland, and Joseph Dickinson, Salem 1765 



Oct. 


28 


Mar. 


23 


Au- 


25 


Dec 


17 


Oct. 


2 


Mar. 


9 


Jan. 


13 


April 


7 


May 


16 


Jan. 


11 


April 


21 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


5 


Feb. 


6 


July 


26 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


17 


Dec. 


16 


Sept. 


25 


Dec. 


3 


Feb. 


23 


Dec. 


1 


Jan. 


6 


Feb. 


7 


June 


13 


Aug. 


18 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


13 


Jan. 


14 


Mar. 


28 


April 


12 


April 


24 


Feb. 


9 


Dec. 


21 


Mar. 


10 


Oct, 


13 


Mar. 


18 


Jan. 


22 


Feb. 


20 


Dec. 


2 


Aug. 


13 


May 


3 


Nov. 


15 


June 


30 


April 16 


July 


18 



373 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Smith 
Smith 

Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith, 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 
Smith 



Hannah, Hunterdon, and Joseph Lee, Hunterdon 1767 July 2 

Hannah, Salem, and Llisha Allen, Salem 1771 Oct. 18 

Hannah, Cape May, and Henry Ludlam, Cape May 1772 June 30 

Hannah, Burlington, and John Cox, Burlington 1780 Oct. 25 

Hannah, and Isaac Hawthorn, Cumberland 1786 May 18 

Hetchbell, Hunterdon, and Jacob Binge, Hunterdon 1728 April 9 

Hope, and Aaron Padgitt, Cumberland 1768 Mar. 15 

Jean, Salem, and Benjamin Holme 1750 Dec. 24 

Jemima, Middlesex, and Ambrose Green, Middlesex 1758 Feb. 13 

Jennet, Burlington, and William Talbot, Burlington 1711 Mar. 31 

Jerusha, and David Larason 1780 Sept. 15 

Katharine, Burlington, and George Noble, Burlington 1730 Nov. 16 

Lydia, Cape May. and Shamgar Hand, Cape May 1761 Sept. 5 

Marah, Monmouth, and Thomas Hartshorn, Monmouth 1751 Jan. 22 

Margaret, Burlington, and Edward Tennet, Burlington 1711 Nov. 3 

Margaret, and William-Bennit, Middletown 1751 Dec. 10 

Margaret, Middlesex, and Thomas Howard, Middlesex 1754 Dec. 9 

Margaret, Burlington, and John Cramer, Burlington 1757 June 23 

Margaret, and John Hill, Salem 1760 May 30 

Margaret, Bucks Pa., and William McPherson, Bucks, Pa. ....1764 June 5 

Margaret, Salem, and George Dickinson, Salem 1769 Nov. 14 

Martha, Burlington, and Thomas Thornton, Burlington 1735 June 2 

M irtha, M mmouth, and David Meirs, Monmouth 1763 May 28 

Martha, Cape May, and Elijah Matthews, Cape May 1770 Oct, 10 

Martha, Evesham, and Alexander Peacock, Evesham 1783 April 22 

Mary, Salem, and John Walker, Salem 1683-4 Feb. 19 

Mary, Burlington, and George Eyres, Burlington 1729 May 15 

Mary, and John Holloway, Trenton 1733 Mar. 23 

Mary, Burlington, and Daniel Holland, Burlington 1739 Aug. 20 

Mary, Monmouth, and James Conner, Monmouth 1739 Aug. 25 

Mary, Burlington, and Peter Hyrlin, Burlington 1740 Sept. 29 

Mary, Middlesex, and Andrew Myer, Middlesex 1744 Sept, 28 

Mary, Middlesex, and Alexander Edgar, Middlesex 1746 Mar. 3 

Mary, Perth Amboy, and William Compton, Freehold 1749 June 15 

Mary, Burlington, and Seymore Cramer, Burlington 1757 June 23 

Mary, Gloucester, and John Higbee, Gloucester 1758 May 22 

Mary, and Daniel Khine, Chesterfield 1759 Oct. 20 

Mary, Cape May, and Jesse Hand, Cape May 1759 Nov. 7 

Mary, Shrewsbury, and William Wardell, Shrewsbury 1762 Jan. 19 

Mary, Bergen, and Robert Earle, Bergen 1763 Dec. 12 

Mary, Salem, and Elisha Allen, Salem 1765 Oct. 16 

Mary, and St th Carver, Egg Harbour 1766 June 21 

Mary, Gloucester, and Thomas Hewitt, Gloucester 1768 Jan. 15 

Mary, aud John Iszard, Cape May 1770 Dec. 11 

Mary, Cape May, and Abner Corson, Cape May 1773 April 5 

Muy, and Samuel Foster, Cape May 1774 April 25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 379 

Mary, Hunterdon, and John Egbert, Hunterdon. 1775 

Mary, Burlington, find Isaac Evans, Jr., Burlington 1777 

Mary, and William Moore, Hunterdon 1778 

Mary, and Samuel Rradhurst 1778 

Mary, and Lawrence Corn, Cumberland 1781 

Mary, and Edward Higbe, Gloucester 1782 

Mary, and Stephen Titus, Hopewell 1 782 

Mary, and John White, Windsor 1782 

Massey, and William Palmer, Maidenhead 1782 

Michael, and Moses Myers, Burlington 1774 

Naomi, and George Hand, Cape May 1774 

Phebe, Monmouth, and John Hendricks, Monmouth 1759 

Phebe, and Samuel Crowell, Cape May 1759 

Phebe, and John Craven, Salem 176 1 

Phebe, Bergen, and Job Smith, Bergen 1767 

Phebe, and Philip Godfrey, Cape May 1775 

Fhebe, and Charles Thomson, Cape May '. . . 1780 

Pheby, and Thomas Champion, Gloucester 1784 

Pinea, and George Tice, Cumberland 1788 

Priscilla, Gloucester, and Peter Covenoven, Gloucester 1761 

Rachel, and James Smith, Gloucester ; 1778 

Rachel, and William Coxe, Jr., Philadelphia •• . • 1789 

Rebecca, Salem, and John Haynes, Salem 1745 

Rebecca, Monmouth, and Vanbrok Debow, Monmouth 1759 

Rebekah, and John Willets, Cape May 1763 

Rebecca, Cape May, and Frederick Modlaer, Cape May 1774 

Rebecca, and Ezekiel Jobes, Burlington. . . .* 1779 

Rebekah, and Ralph Lanning, Hunterdon 1782 

Rhoday, and Henry Foster, Cape May 1777 

Rhode, Monmouth, and William Blake, Monmouth 1769 

Rumab, and John Molloy, Gloucester 1777 

Ruth, Upper Freehold, and Timothy Robins, Upper Freehold 1745 

Ruth, Alloways Creek, and John Sims, Mannington 1763 

Ruth, and William Currey, Salem 1786 

Sally, Bergen, and John Brinckerhoff, Bergen 1 773 

Sarah, and John Briggs . ■ 1701 

Sarah, Gloucester, and John Addoms, Burlington 1729 

Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Bishopp, Burlington 1730 

Sarah, Middletown. and Peter Wilson, Freehold. . 1749 

Sarah, and Samuel Smith, Salem. 1758 

Sarah, Gloucester, and Joseph Hugg, Gloucester 1761 

Sarah, Monmouth, and Nicholas Dorn, Monrnouth 1761 

Sarah, Monmouth, and George Hopkins, Monmouth 1764 

Sarah, Lower Alloways Creek, John Vanculiu L'r Alloways C'k.1771 

Sarah, and Samuel Smith, Maniugton 1772 

Sarah, Hopewell, and James Wilson, Amwell 1774 



May 


— 


April 


28 


Aug. 


22 


Dec. 


16 


Nov. 


27 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


4 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


5 


May 


20 


Aug. 


1 


Oct, 


31 


Nov. 


7 


April 


18 


June 


9 


Feb. 


4 


June 


15 


June 


11 


Oct. 


14 


Sept. 


4 


Oct, 


19 


April 


4 


Nov. 


4 


June 


30 


June 


25 


April 


26 


Mav 


18 


July 


30 


Sept. 


18 


July 


25 


July 


31 


Mar. 


7 


May 


16 


Feb. 


8 


Mar. 


19 


Aug. 


30 


May 


26 


Dec. 


29 


July 


24 


May 


20 


Mar. 


24 


Aug. 


27 


Mar. 


29 


Sept. 


11 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


24 



380 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Smith, Sarah, and William Young, New Jersey 1775 

Smith, Sarah, Salem, and Ephraim Loyd, Salem 1775 

Smith, Sarah, Cape May, and John Scull, Cape May 1776 

Smith, Sarah, Cumberland, and Jeremiah Foster, Cumberland 1778 

Smith, Sarah, and Joseph Few, Philadelphia 1779 

Smith, Sarah, and John Brognard, Burlington 1781 

Smith, Sarah, and John Carpenter, Trenton 1785 

Smith, Soviah, and John Steward, Gt. Egg Harbour 1783 

Smith, Susannah, and Jeremiah Smith, Salem. 1750 

Smith, Susannah, and James Steelman, Egg Harbour 1773 

Smith, Susanna, Cumberland, and Stephen Lester, Cumberland 1773 

Smith, Zilphia, and Thomas Ludlam, Cape May 1790 

Smith, Temperance, Alloways Creek, and Peter Stretch, Alloways Ck 1766 
Smock, Catharine, Monmouth, and Garret Longstreet, Monmouth . . 1763 

Smock, Eleanor, Monmouth, and Gilbert Lane, Monmouth 1741 

Smock, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Derk Field, Middlesex 1749 

Smock, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Ezekiel Applegate, Middlesex 1760 

Smock, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Bennet, Monmouth 1749 

Smout, Jane, Philadelphia, and Thomas Beech, Philadelphia 1732 

Smyth, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Herbert, Monmouth 1749 

Smyth, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and William Rockwell, Shrewsbury. . . 1761 

Smyth, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Fulcard Fisher, Somerset 1763 

Snecks, Bridgitta, Salem, and Ephraim Friend, Salem 1731 

Snedeker, Martha, and Derrick Demott, Hunterdon 1780 

Snell, Susannah, and Abel Lee, Cape May 1783 

Snider, Sarah, and Peter Kacklein, Jr., Sussex 1774 

Snider, Sarah, and Richard Corwine, Hunterdon 1779 

Snippen, Mary, Burlington, and Alexander McClean, Burlington .... 1773 

Snodgrass, Mary, and James Dunlop, Bucks, Pa 1790 

Snowdon, Marat, and Elias Matson, Gloucester 1784 

Snyder, Catharine, Middletown, Hendrick Vanderbelt, Middletown. . .1765 

Snyder, Mary, Hunterdon, and Aaron Hankiuson, Hunterdon 1764 

Soarding, Rachel, Goodluck, and James Wells, Goodluck 1763 

Sobriske, Rachel, and Johaunis Hardwick 1750 

Sockwell, Leah, Cumberland, and Samuel Scudder, Alloways Creek. . . 1760 

Solmon, Marget, and James Reeves, Deptford 1785 

Somers, Abigail, and Samuel Risley, Gt. Egg Harbour 1784 

Somers, Abigail, and John Steelman, Gt. Egg Harbour 1774 

Somers, Berzilla, and Elijah Smith, Gloucester 1784 

Somers, Elsey, and Peter Frambes, Gloucester 1784 

Somers, Hannah, Gloucester, and Richard Smith, Cape May 1745 

Somers, Rebecca, Gloucester, and John Badcock, Gloucester 1750 

Somers, Sarah, Gloucester, and Frederick Steelman, Gloucester 1740 

Somers, Sarah, Gt. Egg Harb'r, and James Somers, Gt. Egg Harbo'r. 1750-1 

Somers, Saviah, and Isaac Higbee, Gloucester 1785 

Somers, Uness, and Jacob Somers, Gt. Egg Harbour 1762 



Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


25 


Nov. 


22 


Oct. 


19 


May 


20 


Jan. 


7 


Jan. 


26 


Sept. 


22 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


19 


Nov. 


24 


Aug. 


1 


Mar. 


24 


Dec. 


27 


June 


6 


Nov. 


15 


Oct. 


6 


Jan. 


16 


May 


27 


Aug. 


5 


Mar. 


30 


June 


7 


June 


5 


Nov. 


11 


July 


24 


Feb. 


5 


Jan. 


14 


Mar. 


30 


April 


26 


May 


25 


July 


4 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


4 


Aug. 


25 


Jan. 


8 


May 


26 


Aug. 


14 


June 


13 


AjDril 


2 


Mar. 


9 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


11 


Mar. 


5 


Feb. 


20 


Feb. 


28 


June 


17 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 38 I 

Sommers, Elizabeth, ami John Butler, Cape May 1762 

Summers, Mary, Gloucester, and Uriah Smith, Cape May 1758 

Sommers, Millicent, Great Egg Harbour, and Edward Doughty 1749 

Sommers, Rachel, Salem, and Robert Sparks, Salem 1770 

Sooy, Mary, and George Bevis, Burlington 1771 

Sooy, Sarah, and Johu Steelman, Gloucester 1766 

Soper, Mary, Middletowu, and Walter Vanpelt, Middletowu 1746 

Soper, Mercy, Stafford, and David Rnleu, Stafford 1707 

Sopers, Martha, and John Malsbury, Burlington 1716 

Souder, Christiana, and Jonas Venaman, Cumberland 1785 

South, Joan, Burlington, and William Lee, Burlington 1683 

South, Rachel, Burlington, and John Miers, Burlington 1763 

Southard, Charity, Burlington, and Henry Cayler. Burlington 1767 

Southard, Hannah, and Philip White, Burlington 1777 

Southard, Phebe, Burlington, aud Jacob Faulkenburg 1764 

Southard, Sarah, Morris, and Samuel Cobb, Morris 1773 

Southwick, Priscilla, Burlington, and Abram Hooper, Burlington 1767 

Southwick, Hannah, Burlington, and Daniel Zilley, Burlington 1776 

Southwick, Rebecca, Northampton, and Nathaniel Powell, North'mp'n. 1774 

Southwick, Sarah, Burlington, and John Price, Burlington 1731 

Sowdeo, Elizabeth, Burlington, and George Cowgill, Burlington 1776 

Sparbum, Cathrine, Burlington, and Robert Fulton, Burlington 1756 

Sparks, Appikaris, Deptford, and Benjamin Rarrebo, Deptford 1766 

Sparks, Ann, Gloucester, and John Hedger, Gloucester 1769 

Sparks, Mary, Evesham, and John Driver, Burlington 1749 

Sparks, Mary, Salem, and Abraham Lord, Salem 1758 

Sparks, Rebecca, and Joseph Hillman, Gloucester 1784 

Speace, Margret, and George Becstolzseimer, Amwell 1772 

Spence, Mary, and Elias Brown 1781 

Spencer, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Samuel Gilbert, Middlesex 1741 

Spencer, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Levi Clark, Gloucester 1764 

Sppes, Hannah, and Joseph Richardson, Burlington 1785 

Spicer, Abigail, Gloucester, and William Rudderow, Burlington 1758 

Spicer, Judith, Cape May, aud Elijah Hughes, Cape May 1773 

Spicer, Sarah, Cape May, and Christopher Leamyng, Cape May 1761 

Spicer, Sarah, and Joseph Copperthwaite, Monmouth .... 1778 

Spier, Ann, Bergen, and Isaac Montaine, New York City 1760 

Spier, Catholyntie, New York, and Cornelius Swartwout, New York . . 1763 

Spier, Lea, and Isaack Yangieson, Newark 1746 

Spike, Catharine, Burlington, and Nathan Folwell, Burlington. ....... 1761 

Spiriar, Abalonia, Gloucester, and Francis Redcap, Gloucester 1762 

Sprag, Mele, Monmouth, and Francis Letts, Monmouth 1762 

Spragg, Charity, and Stephen Innman, Monmouth 1782 

Spragg, Mary, Staten Island, and Jacob Vanderbilt, Staten Island . . . 1746 

Spragg, Mary, and Thomas Thompson, Burlington 1759 

Spring, Mary, Philadelphia, and Thomas Maybery, Mount Holly. ... 1780 



Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


24 


Nov. 


16 


Aug. 


9 


Jan. 


6 


April 


21 


Aug. 


4 


July 


1 


Feb. 


2 


Aug. 


8 


Sept. 


23 


Dec. 


8 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


16 


Mar. 


8 


Nov. 


17 


Sept. 


23 


Mar. 


21 


Sept. 


10 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


24 


Oct. 


4 


May 


21 


April 


25 


May 


13 


April 


4 


Nov. 


18 


Oct. 


27 


Jan. 


9 


Aug. 


27 


Dec. 


14 


Jan. 


18 


May 


4 


Oct. 


26 


Aug. 


8 


Nov. 


27 


July 


1 


June 


6 


Nov. 


1 


April 


6 


Mar. 


23 


Nov. 


2 


April 


8 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


31 



3 82 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Springer, Ann, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Joshua Smith, Gt. Egg Harb'r . . 1762 

Springer, Dorothy, and Jacob Prickett, Evesham 1745 

Springer, Elizabeth, and Aaron Peak, Burlington 1779 

Springer, Lucy, and Jared Taylor, Willingborough 1751 

Springer, Mary, Burlington, and Absalom Thomas, Burlington 1750 

Springer, Phebe, Burlington, and Philippo Tasso, Burlington 1732 

Springer,' Sarah, Burlington, and William Yard, Burliugton 1739 

Spriugsten, Jane, and John Morrell, Middlesex 1764 

Springstien, Derickie, Orange, N. Y., Garret Eckerson, Orange, N. Y. .1763 

Sprogle, Rebecca, and Benjamin Barger, Philadelphia 1732 

Staats, Margaret, Somerset, and Thomas Ring, Somerset. 174 L 

Stabalier, Martha, and Juseph Justici, Hunterdon 1786 

Staekhouse, Agues, and Zachariah Prickett, Northampton 1783 

Stackhouse, Alee, and Israel Wright, Bardentown 1773 

Staekhouse, Elizabeth, New Hanover, Benjamin Wright, New Hanover. 1771 
Stackhouse, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and William Powell, Bucks, Pa . . 1781 

Stackhouse, Elizabeth, and Joseph Tolkinton, Bristol . 1781 

Staekhouse, Grace, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Broom, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Stackhouse, Jane, Pennsylvania, and David Davies, Burlington 1731 

Stackhouse, Martha, and Timothy Stackhouse, Bristol, Pa 1793 

Staekhouse, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and James Wright 1744 

Stackhouse, Priscilla, Bucks, Pa., and Job Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Stackhouse, Ruth, Pennsylvania, and John Welsh, Burlington 1776 

Stacy, Elizabeth, and Eleazer Fenton 1690 

Stacy, Mary, Burlington, and John Renshawe, Burlington 1686 

Stag, Mary, Bergen, and Garrit Ackerman, Bergen 1761 

Stagg, Dorcas, and Thomas Sanford, Essex. 1778 

Stanbery, Phebe, Elizabethtown, and Jedidiah Swen, Elizabethtown, . 1763 

Stanbury, Orphie, and Andrew McNichol, Mannington 1785 

Standley, Deborah, Monmouth, and Mathew McDogal, Monmouth 1761 

Staudly, Mary, and James Thomas, Saiem 1730 

Stanford, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Jacob Mapel, Middlesex 1769 

Stanley, Grace, Middletown, and Thomas Tyte, Middletown 1753 

Stanton, Charity, and John Green 1765 

Stanton, Deborah, Gloucester, and Mieajah Covenover, Cape May . . 1751 

Stanton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Yincent Rewbart, Burlington 1762 

Stanton, Mary, and John Thomas 1756 

Staples, Ann, Burliugton, and Thomas Rogers, Burlington 1736 

Staples, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Thompson, Burlington 1730 

Staples, Martha, Burlington, and John Jones, Jr., Burlington 1763 

Starkey, Anna, and Jonathan Braman, Burlington 1779 

Starkey. Catherine, South Amboy, and Barnaby Carter, South Amboy.1760 

Starkey, Eleanor, and Edward Able, Gloucester 1779 

Starkey, Elizabeth, and Daniel Abel, Gloucester 1780 

Starkey, Margaret, Monmouth, and Robert Iinlay, Monmouth 1741 

Starkey, Mary, and John Wilkinson, Monmouth 1758 



Nov. 


10 


May 


11 


May 


24 


May 


11 


April 


28 


Mar. 


6 


Feb. 


21 


Nov. 


29 


June 


11 


Mar. 


7 


Aug. 


5 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


6 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


11 


Mar. 


24 


May 


15 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


23 


Nov. 


2 


Sept. 


13 


Oct. 


5 


Feb. 


2 


April 


17 


July 


8 


July 


9 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


28 


May 


23 


Dec. 


1 


Jan. 


27 


Oct. 


26 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


21 


Aug. 


3 


Oct. 


30 


June 


11 


Dec. 


28 


Jan. 


11 


Oct. 


3 


April 


20 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



383 



Starkey, Rachel, and Peter Queckenbush, Burlington 1757 Aug. 1 

Starkey, Ruth, Burlington, and Charles Collins, Burlington 1748 Sept. 2!) 

Starkey, Sarah, New Hanover, and William Mount, Monmouth 1716 Mar. 25 

Starky, Beulah, Burlington, and Samuel Bossell, Burlington 1777 April 22 

Starkye, Elizabeth, Chesterfield, and Samuel Shinn, Springfield 1760 May (i 

States, Mary, Middlesex, and Nathaniel Parmer, Richmond Co., X. Y 1764 Dec. 20 

Stathem, Hannah, and Ephraim Simkins, Cumberland 1784 May 4 

Stebbins, Martha, Burlington, and Gabriel Puuner, Burlington 1756 Aug. 3 

Stedaru, Kezire, Salem, and Benoni Dear, Salem 1745 Nov. 8 

Stedham, Mary, Gloucester, and Zebulon Pearson, Gloucester 1770 Dec. 28 

Steel, Anne, Somerset, and John King, Philadelphia 1769 Feb. 14 

Steele, Margate, Salein, and John Burgin, Salem 1728 July 3l 

Steelman, Barbery, and Samuel Burton, Gloucester 1777 Dec. 1 1 

Steelman, Catherine, and Obadiah Bead, Egg Harbour 1764 Sept. 26 

Steelman, Comfort, Gloucester, and Peter Macklus, Gloucester 1740 Jan. 16 

Steelman, Gartara, Gloucester, and Daniel Lake, Gloucester 1730 Sept. 14 

Steelman, Judith, and Jeremiah Leeds, Gloucester 1776 Dec. 8 

Steelman, Mary, and Daniel Allen, Gloucester 1728 Dec. 25 

Steelman, Mary, Gloucester, and Edmund Summers, Gloucester 1730 Jan. 8 

Steelman, Mary, Gloucester, and Elias Champion, Gloucester 1735 Dec. 15 

Steelman, Mary, and Daniel Leeds, Gloucester 1775 Jan. 3 

Steelman, Phebe, and Daniel Ireland, Gloucester 1771 July 15 

Steelman, Rebecca, Gloucester, and Daniel Leeds, Gloucester 1750-1 Jan. 9 

Steelman, Rebeckah, Gloucester, and Daniel Leeds, Gloucester 1751 Jan. 29 

Steelman, Rebecca, and James Somers, Burlington 1759 July 20 

Steelman, Sarah, and Henry Smith, Gloucester 1774 Nov. 18 

Steelman, Susannah, and Benjamin Ingerson, Gloucester 1738 June 23 

Steelman, Susannah, Cape May, and John Kelle, Cape May 1764 Oct. 24 

Steinson, Dinah, Burlington, and Jacob Jones, Burlington 1763 Sept. 28 

Stelle, Catharine, and John Glackon, Monmouth 1738 Nov. 14 

Stelle, Catherine, Monmouth, and Richard Lawrence 1747 Sept. 16 

Stelle, Elisabeth, Monmouth, and John Warded, Monmouth 1748 Jan. 9 

Stelle, Elizabeth, Piscataway, and William Stone, "Woodbridge 1750 Jan. 1 

Stelle, Experience, Middlesex, and Justin Dunn, Middlesex 1760 Oct. 3 

Stelle, Rachel, Piscataway, and Ephraim Fitzrandolph, Piscataway. . .1752 July 11 

Stelle, Rachel, Piscataway, and Benjamin Dunn, Piscataway 1757 June 1 

Stephens, Hannah, Morris, and Thomas Dickson, Morris. 1751 Dec. 11 

Stephens, Nancy, and Dennis Sweeny 1760 Mar. 24 

Stephens, Rachel, Deptford, and Thomas Sanders, Deptford 1768 Sept. 12 

Stephenson, Ann, and Aaron Bunting, Burlington 1770 Feb. 21 

Stevens, Aune, Hunterdon, and Timothy Mershou, Hunterdon 1775 April 1 

Stevens, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Charles Raggley, Burlington 1682 May J7 

Stevens, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Lewis Mitchell, Monmouth 1740 May 6 

Stevens, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Charles Mackuight, Monmouth. .. 1746 Aug. 19 

Stevens, Elizabeth, and Daniel Scull, Gt. Egg Harbour 1762 July 23 

Stevens, Lovice, and Abraham Bennet, Cape May. . 1759 Nov. 6 



3S4 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stevens, Mary, and Robert R. Livingston, Jr., New York City 1770 

Stevens, Phebe, Burlington, and John Kindall, Burlington 1741 

Stevens, Bhoda, Cumberland, and Reuben Dare, Cumberland 1760 

Stevens, Sarab, Pertb Amboy, and Henry Sulker, New York 1753 

Stevens, Sarab, Cape May, and Tbomas Stillwell, Cape May 1781 

Stevenson, Abigail, and Stepben Foster, Cape May 1762 

Stevenson, Abigail, Burlington, and Francis Witt, Burlington 1766 

Stevenson, Alice, and Sith Gibbs, Burlington 1788 

Stevenson, Ann, and Josepb Clayton, Burlington . . 1769 

Stevenson, Aune, Burlington, and Jobn Norcross, Burlington 1756 

Stevenson, Charity, Burlington, and William Pettit, Evesham 1716 

Stevenson, Charity, and John Kemble, Burlington 1778 

Stevenson, Dorothy, Burlington, and Joseph Pearson, Burlington. .. 1731 
Stevenson, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Aaron Carman, Burlington. . . 1759 

Stevenson, Elizabeth, and Joseph Anderson, Hunterdon. ... 1787 

Stevenson, Mary, and Francis Ralph, Burliugton 1766 

Stevenson, Mary, and Samuel Holcomb, Bucks, Pa 1768 

Stevenson, Mary, Middlesex, and Hezekiah Hall, Middlesex 1771 

Stevenson, Sarah, Gloucester, and Jonas Cattell, Gloucester 1710 

Stevenson, Sarah, and Elton Kemble, Burlington 1761 

Stevenson, Sarah, Burliugton, and Thomas Winner, Philadelphia 1780 

Stevenson, Susannah, Burliugton, and Benjamin Matson, Burliugton. 1764 

Steveuson, Susanna, and Henry Page, Burlington 1776 

Steward, Alice, and Benjamin Fowler, Monmouth 1749-50 

Steward, Catherine, and Thomas Osgood, Burliugton ... 1732 

Steward, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Bunting, Burliugton. 1772 

Steward, Mary, Burlington, aud John Doron, Burlington 1773 

Steward, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Emley, Burlington 1767 

Stewart, Anne, and William Bunting, Burlington 1779 

Stewart, Elizabeth, and Thomas Bullock, Burlington 1767 

Stewart, Elizabeth, and John Styles, Upper Freehold 1773 

Stewart, Jaue, and Timothy Craig, Elizabethtown 1746 

Stewart, Jaue, Sussex, and Reuben Kemp, Sussex 1762 

Stewart, Margret, and Daniel Fitz Randolph, Monmouth 1760 

Stewart, Martha, aud Joseph Chapman, Burlington 1757 

Stewart, Martha, aud Robert Wilson, Philadelphia 1775 

Stewart, Mary, Somerset, and James McCleury, Somerset , 1740 

Stewart, Mary, and John Wilson, Hunterdon 1785 

Stewart, Sarah, Middlesex, and Patrick McGee, Monmouth 1752 

Stewart, Sarah, aud Jacob Kemper, Morris 1785 

Stewart, Susannah, Burlingtou, aud Joseph Mears, Monmouth 1764 

Stewart, Ursula, Woodbridge, and Nathaniel Fitz Randolph, W'db'ge 1748 

Stidden, Mary, Philadelphia, and James Crawford, Philadelphia 1761 

St temetz, Leah, Essex, and Hendrick King, Essex , 1761 

Stien, Bramer Sarah, Bergen, and Jacob Day, Bergen 1773 

Stiles, Abigail, Cape May, and David Bancroft, Cape May 1752 



Sept. 


8 


Aug. 


3 


Dec. 


6 


Oct. 


15 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


4 


Jan. 


18 


Oct. 


20 


Jan. 


4 


Oct. 


4 


Feb. 


17 


Sept. 


24 


June 


2 


April 


7 


Feb. 


10 


Sept. 


25 


Oct. 


26 


Feb. 


16 


July 


10 


Sept. 


14 


May 


3 


June 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Feb. 


19 


June 


17 


Sept. 


8 


Sept. 


7 


Feb. 


13 


Nov. 


15 


Feb. 


14 


May 


15 


Feb. 


17 


May 


31 


Feb. 


25 


Mar. 


24 


Dec. 


30 


Mar. 


12 


Jan. 


21 


July 


25 


May 


7 


April 


5 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


5 


Mar. 


11 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


6 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 385 

Stiles, Ann, and Amos Collins, Gloucester 1771 

Stiles, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Jerediah .Mills, Cape May 1757 

Stiles, Elizabeth, Cape May, and Richard Janvier, Cape May 1761 

Stiles, Elizabeth, and Philip Scull, ('ape May 1769 

Stiles, Esther, Cape May, and Nathaniel Jenkins, Cape May 1755 

Stiles, Hannah, Cape May, and Elijah Hughs, Cape May 1740 

Stiles, Margaret, and Jonathan Learning, Cape May 1763 

Stiles, Margaret, Essex, and James Manning, Essex 1763 

Stiles, Martha, Cape May, and John NickelsoD, Cape May 1763 

Stiles, Mary, Cape May, and Silas Lupton, Cape May 1756 

Stiles, Patience, Cape May, and David Cresse, Cape May 1769 

Stiles, Rachel, Salem, and John Vail, Salem 1768 

Stiles, Rhoda, Cape May, and Matthew Whildin, Cape May 1768 

Stiles, Sarah, Cape May, and Dan Bowen, Cumberland 1766 

Stiles, Temperance, and Samuel Matthews, Cape May 1771 

Stiles, Willeramina, Cape May, and Nathaniel Jenkins, Cape May . . . 1765 

Stillwel, Catey, and John Day, Bergen. . . 1772 

StUlwell, Alice, and Israel Burrows, Hunterdon 1777 

Stillwell, Anne, Monmouth, and Joseph Mount, Monmouth 1761 

StUlwell, Deborah, and Job Moore, Trenton 1768 

Stillwell, Elizabeth, and Aaron Eldridge, Cape May 1761 

Stillwell, Elizabeth, and Moses Vancourl, Trenton 1777 

Stillwell, Hannah, and Rem Coursen, Cape May 1759 

Stillwell, Hester, Woodbridge, and Phillip Pain, Elizabeth Town 1769 

Stillwell, Mary, Monmouth, and Joseph Ashton, Monmouth 1740 

Stillwell, Rebecca, and Thomas Heady, New Jersey 1749 

Stillwell, Rebekah, and Ezekiel Stevens, Cape May 1763 

Stillwel], Rebecca, Monmouth, and Benjamin Haviland, Monmouth. . 1764 
Stilwell, Rebecca, Middletown, and Moses Sheppard, Middletown. . ..1767 

Stilwell, Sarah, and Moses Griffing, Cape May 1770 

Stilwell, Suffiah, and Richard Somers, Cape May 1761 

Stilwell, Zerial, Cape May, and Richard Stiles, Cape May 1748 

Stillwil, Mecil, Monmouth, and Bryant Higgins, Monmouth 1750 

Stilwell, Alice, Middletown, and James Wolling, Middletown 1752 

Stilwell, Alice, Monmouth, and Isaac Hoffmeier, Monmouth.. 1755 

Stilwell, Ann, Monmouth, and David Jones, Monmouth 1762 

Stilwell, Catherine, and William Mager.l Sussex 1768 

Stilwell, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and James Wilson, Freehold 1765 

Stilwell, Deborah, Monmouth, and Richard Smith, Monmouth 1740 

Stilwell, Deborah, Middletown, and Gabriel Winter, Middletown. 1717 

Stilwell, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Albert Mason, Monmouth 1767 

Stilwell, Margaret, Chesterfield, and Gilbert Smith, Burlington 1762 

Stilwell, Martha, and Joseph Hildredth, Cape May 1789 

Stilwell, Mary, Staten Island, and John Moore, Staten Island 1758 

1 or Magee. 
24 



Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


24 


April 


18 


May 


15 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


25 


Mar. 


22 


Oct. 


25 


May 


11 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


11 


Dec. 


8 


Mar. 


28 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


7 


July 


13 


Jan. 


25 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


17 


May 


8 


Feb. 


5 


June 


24 


April 


30 


April 


9 


Mar, 


23 


Oct. 


17 


Dec. 


3 


Sept. 


9 


Oct. 


29 


Dec. 


26 


Aug. 


4 


Feb. 


15 


Oct. 


8 


June 


1 


Mar. 


20 


Mar. 


8 


Nov. 


10 


May 


5 


Jan. 


28 


Mar. 


13 



386 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stilwell, Mary, Middletowu, and John Anderson, New York 17G3 

Stilwell, Pbebe, and John Daniels, Gloucester 1788 

Stilwell, Eebecka, Middlesex, and Thomas Laytou, Monmouth 1758 

Stilwell, Sarah, and Abraham Brittan, Monmouth 1757 

Stilly, Hannah, Gloucester, and David Chew, Gloucester 1767 

Stimers, Catherine, Bergen, and Johannis Po3t, Bergen 1753 

Stiner, Anne, and Jacob Bollinger, Gloucester 1784 

Stoakes, Deliverance, Burlington, and Daniel Conrow, Burlington 1733 

Stoakes, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Josiah Blackham, Burlington 1729 

Stoakham, Merriam, and William Corammore, Jr., Egg Harbour 1746 

Stoaks, Sabella, and Charles French, Gloucester 1783 

Stockdale, Ruth, and John Small. 1735 

Stockdon, Anne, Burlington, and John Carman, Burlington. 1744 

Stockham, Phebe, Stafford, and Nathan Colver, Stafford. 1749 

Stockham, Phebe, Lt. Egg Harb., Josiah Pennington, Lt. Egg Harb. .1750 

Stockton, Abigail, Burlington, and James Gaskill, Burlington 1754 

Stockton,, Abigail, Hunterdon, and Bedkar Ireton, Hunterdon 1765 

Stockton, Dorothy, and William Bellanger, Burlington 1781 

Stockton, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Edwards Higgins, Middlesex 1763 

Stockton, Elizabeth, and James Hall, Burlington 1784 

Stockton, Hannah, Burlington, and John Ireton, Burlington 1762 

Stockton, Hannah, Burlington, and Philip Akerman, Burlingtou 1771 

Stockton, Mary, and John Bishop, Burlington 1783 

Stockton, Mary, and Thomas Green, Burlington 1786 

Stockton, Mary, and Asher Gauntt, Burlington 1787 

Stockton, Patience, and Andrew Anderson, Burlington 1791 

Stockton, Rachel, Somerset, and John Riddell, Somerset 1741 

Stockton, Rebeckah, Burlington, and David Lippincott, Burlington. . . 1731 

Stockton, Rhoda, and Abraham Kimsey, Burlington 1779 

Stockton, Ruth, Prince Town, and John Scott, Prince Town 1746 

Stockton, Ruth, Middlesex, and John Hill, Middlesex 1765 

Stockton, Sarah, Burlington, and William Davis, Burlington 1761 

Stockton, Sarah, and Richard Stockton, Burlington 1768 

Stockton, Sarah, Benjamin Nailor, Burlington 1778 

Stockton, Sarah, and John Swain, Somerset , 1779 

Stockton, Susanna, and Frettwell Warren, Hanover 1760 

Stogdill, Mary, and Aunanias Rose, Middlesex 1769 

Stokes, Anne, Gloucester, and Samuel Murrell, Gloucester 1761 

Stokes, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Isaac Rogers, Burlington 1765 

Stokes, Hannah, Burlington, and Thomas Coles, Gloucester 1732 

Stokes, Hannah, Gloucester, and Hadden Hopkins, Gloucester 1766 

Stokes, Judith, Burlington, and Nathan Middleton, Burlington 1777 

Stokes, Mary, Burlington, and John Wilkins, Burlington 1776 

Stokes, Sarah, Burlington, and John Rogers, Jr., Burlington 1734 

Stikesbury, Rebecca, and M>ses Ewau, Burlington 1782 

Stoll, Hannah, Hunterdon, and John Dalley, Somerset 1772 



Dec. 


16 


Nov. 


10 


April 


15 


June 


10 


Sept. 


29 


July 


11 


April 


2u 


Mar. 


16 


Feb. 


1 


Nov. 


21 


May 


27 


Dec. 


31 


Feb. 


15 


June 


15 


July 


3 


Oct. 


30 


Mar. 


29 


Mar. 


20 


May 


14 


April 


6 


May 


23 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


24 


April 


27 


June 


26 


April 


9 


May 


11 


June 


1 


Sept. 


27 


Sept. 


29 


May 


21 


Jan. 


9 


Jan. 


22 


April 


13 


Jan. 


12 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


11 


Mar. 


27 


Oct. 


29 


July 


29 


Nov. 


21 


July 


26 


Aug. 


24 


Jan. 


14 


May 


1 


Mar. 


3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 387 

Stoll, Jane, Reading, and Jemes Van Dyke, Reading 1771 

Stone, Aim, Woodbridge, and David Coddiugton, Woodbridge 1750 

stone, Elizabeth, Woodbridge, and Benjamin Williams, Essex 1757 

Stone, Mary, Middlesex, and Jonathan Moore, Middlesex 1 7 ' '. 1 

Stone, Rebecca, Woodbridge, and Richard Wright, Jr., Woodbridge .. 1762 

Stoohof, Sarah, and Gen-it Yoorhees, Somerset 1783 

Stoothoff, Hannah, Somerset, and Abraham Homeland, Middlesex ...1711 

Stoothoff, Ida, Somerset, and Ahram Low, Somerset 1753 

Stoothoff, Sarah, Somerset, and William Stoothoff, Somerset 1741 

Story, Anne, and Aaron Holman, Staten Island 1745 

Story, Hannah, Perth Amboy, and Joseph Wilson, Cranberry 1746 

Storr, Antje, Bergen, and Albert Ackerman, Bergen 1771 

Stothof, Neiltje, Middlesex, and James Perrine, Somerset 1745 

Stotbaff, Elizabeth, and John Wycoff, Somerset 1784 

Stout, Ann, Somerset, and Abraham Stout, Hunterdon 1775 

Stout, Anna, and Johnson Titus, Hunterdon 1778 

Stout, Anne, Somerset, and Ichabod Leigh, Hunterdon 1 744 

Stout, Anne, and William West, Nottingham 1778 

Stout, Charity, and Henry Solter, Somerset 1780 

Stout, Dorothy, Burlington, and John Marns, Burlington 1759 

Stout, Elizabeth, and Nathaniel Hart, Hunterdon ... 1770 

Stout, Elizabeth, Amwell, and Joseph Stout, Amwell 1774 

Stout, Elizabeth, and William Debow, Middlesex 1779 

Stout, Hannah, Monmouth, and Arthur Van Kirk, Monmouth 1743 

St' »ut, Hannah, and James Wikoff, Hunterdon 1765 

Stout, Hannah, Readington, and Mathias Smock 1781 

Stout, Helen, Monmouth, and John Hoff, Monmouth 1758 

Stout, Jemima, Hunterdon, and Francis Labau, Hunterdon 1772 

Stout, Katherine, Hunterdon, and John Stout, Hunterdon 1730 

Stout, Leah, and Samuel Taylor, Middletown 1761 

Stout, Lucy, and Robert Douglass, Burlington 1778 

Stout, Margaret, Hunterdon, and Peter Latorat, Hunterdon 1777 

Stout, Mary, Middletown, and Samuel Holmes, Middletown 1749 

Stout, Mary, Monmouth, and Herrich Benjamin, Morris 1764 

Stout, Mary, Somerset, and Francis Carbines, Somerset 1790 

Stout, Mary, Hunterdon, and John Howell, Hunterdon 1772 

Stout, Mary, and Jared Sexton, Hunterdon. 1779 

Stout, Mary, and Jediah Stout, Hunterdon 1781 

Stout, Mary, and Charles Horn, Hunterdon 1787 

Stout, Rachel, Somerset, and Stephen Barton, Somerset 1747 

Stout, Rachel, Middletown, and James Patterson, Middletown 1764 

Stout, Rachel, Hunterdon, and James Fitch, Hunterdon 1764 

Stout, Rachel, and John Manners, Hunterdon 1780 

Stout, Rebecca, Middletown, and Alexander Grant, New York 1763 

Stout, llebeka, Middletown, and John Robins, Upper Freehold 1779 

Stout, Ruth, and Ralph Phillips, Hunterdon 1778 



Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


10 


Aug. 


12 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


19 


May 


9 


Jan. 


23 


May- 


9 


July 


18 


Nov. 


27 


Jan. 


22 


May 


13 


Mar. 


7 


Oct. 


26 


Dec. 


30 


July 


23 


Mar. 


26 


Oct. 


23 


Nov. 


13 


May 


2 


Jan. 


7 


Feb. 


17 


Aug. 


22 


April 


2 


June 


27 


May 


2 


July 


27 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


12 


Nov. 


16 


Nov. 


21 


Jan. 


27 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


14 


June 


5 


Feb. 


15 


Mar. 


21 


June 


12 


Dec. 


'22 


Jan. 


18 


July 


25 


Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


5 


Mar. 


31 


Oct. 


16 



388 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stout, Sarah, Arnwell, and Zebulon Stout, Somerset 1762 

Stout, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Pierson, Burlington 1 766 

Stout, Sarah, and Jonathan Hunt, Jr., Hunterdon 1778 

Stout, Sarah, and Azariah Higgins, Hunterdon 1779 

Stout, Sarah, and Abraham Runkle, Hunterdon 1779 

Stoutenburgh, Elenor, Staten Island, Abraham Cruse, Staten Island. .1768 
Stovelstump, Margaret, Up. Alloways Cr'k, James Pogue, Up. Al. C'k.1776 

Stowe, Rebecca, and Thomas Powell 1776 

Strattan, Hannah, and Seth Crispin, Burlington 1779 

Strattan, Jane, Burlington, and Joshua Norcross, Burlington 1754 

Strattan, Ruth, and Thomas Sharp, Evesham 1778 

Strattein, Rebecca, Burlington, and Ephraim Cliuhuff, Burlington . . . 1762 

Stratton, Abigail, Burlington, and John Bates, Burlington 1782 

Stratton, Amy, Burlington, and Garret Groff, Salem 1764 

Stratton, Anne, Evesham, and Hugh Sharp, Evesham 1748 

Stratton, Catherine, Fairfield, and Henry Sparks, Fairfield 1762 

Stratton, Hannah, and Samuel Phillip3 1769 

Stratton, Hester, Burlington, and Isaiah Hunt, Burlington 1766 

Stratton, Jane, and Benjamin Sever, Evesham 1783 

Stratton, Martha, Burlington, and Thomas Goforth, Gloucester 1762 

Stratton, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Lewis, Burlington 1733 

Stratton, Mary, and Simeon Haines, Burlington 1766 

Stratton, Mary, Burlington, and John Hunter, Burlington 1773 

Stratton, Phebe, and John Woodruff 1757 

Stratton, Rhoda, and Stephen Bowen, Cumberland 1786 

StrattoD, Sarah, Burlington, and Conrad Devo, Burlington 1765 

Streamback, Elizabeth, and Stephen Van Sickel, Middlesex 1782 

Streat, Mary, Salem, and Joseph Fogg, Salem 1775 

Street, Lydia, Salem, and Joseph Hildreth, Salem 1759 

Stretch, Deborah, and Jacob Corliss, Salem 1791 

Stretch, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Charles Lyon, Philadelphia 1770 

Stretch, Elizabeth, aud Asa Jefferis, Salem 1788 

Stretch, Hannah, Salem, and John Blackwood, Salem 1770 

Stretch, Martha, and Aaron Daniel, Salem 1791 

Stretch, Mary, and Josiah Noble 1774 

Stretch, Rebecca, and John Stretch, Salem 1790 

Stretch, Sarah, and Jonah Platts 1751 

Stretch, Sarah, Alloways Creek, and William Smith, Alloways Creek. .1764 

Stretch, Sarah, and Joseph Straughn, Salem 1779 

Strechery, Christine, and Oswald Bush, Gloucester 1782 

Strieker, Mary, Somerset, and John Vanderveer, Middletown 1762 

Strieker, Mary, Bristol, Pa., and Samuel Scattergood, Burlington 1764 

Strickland, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and Jonathan Abbot, Bucks, Pa 1738 

Strickling, Margaret, Freehold, and Peter Conrey, Freehold 17C0 

Striker, Elizabeth, and Thomas Skillman, Somerset 1777 

String, Rachel, and Paul Prickett, Gloucester . . 1785 



Oct. 


11 


May 


15 


Dec. 


30 


June 


20 


April 


19 


Nov. 


21 


Mar. 


20 


June 


9 


Dec. 


8 


April 


10 


Dec. 


7 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


20 


Nov. 


15 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


23 


April 


3 


May 


28 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


9 


Oct. 


18 


May 


28 


Nov. 


3 


Aug. 


15 


May 


13 


Oct. 


23 


April 


24 


May 


11 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


28 


June 


5 


May 


— 


April 


28 


Mar. 


29 


Feb. 


24 


Jan. 


15 


Aug. 


27 


Jan. 


18 


July 


30 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


18 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


13 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 3X9 

String, Sarah, and Joseph Cheeseman, Gloucester 1782 

Stritch, Sarah, aud Ephraim Worthington, Salem 1757 

Strueher, Neiltie, Somerset, aud Luke Van Voorhie3, Somerset 1747 

Stryker, Altie, and Stephen Terhune, Somerset 1782 

Stryker, Anne, Middlesex, and John Schureman, Middlesex 1750 

Stryker, Catherine, aud Derrick Longstreet, Somerset , 1778 

Stryker, Elizabeth, and John Stryker, New Bruuswick 1779 

Stryker, Mary, and John Skillmau, Somerset 1778 

Strycker, Auue, Somerset, aud Curt Williamson New Jersey. ....... 1747 

Stuart, Elly, and Thomas Hines, Burlington 1784 

Stuart, Jane, Bergen, and David Anderson, Bergen 1768 

Stuart, Mary, Burlington, and George Taylor, Burlington 1742 

Stall, Elizabeth, and James Butler 1749 

Stull Patience, Gloucester, and Peter Truax, Gloucester 1730 

Suchum, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., aud Peter Williamson, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Saidam, Mary, Somerset, and Leonard Boyce, Middlesex 1752 

Sukelse, l Clautie, Bergen, and Gerrit Krose, Staten Island 1739 

Sullivan, Abigail, Burlington, and John Ogg, Burlington . 1746 

Sullivan, Ann, Salem, and Jonathan Bilderbacke, Salem 1771 

Sullivan, Elinor, Burlington, and Thomas Bringinham, Burliugton. . . .1740 
Sulwant, Sarah, Pennsylvania, and Soloman Headly, Pennsylvania.. . .1761 

Summerell, Kachel, and Henry Hewitt, Salem. . 1773 

Suppler, Isabell, Gloucester, and Thomas Bright, Gloucester 1768 

Surrell, Mary, aud Abraham Hosier, Hunterdon , 1768 

Sutrin, Anna, and Andrew Voorhees, Freehold 1757 

Sutfin, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Hulse, Monmouth 1763 

Sutrin, Yocamoncha, Monmouth, and Benjamin Greggs, Monmouth.. . 1763 

Sutphen, Anna, and Adam Bellis, Hunterdon 1778 

Sutphen, Arianche, and Abraham Vanduyn, Somerset 1778 

Sutphen, Charity, and Gereet Veghte, Somerset 1764 

Sutphen, Maria, Freehold, Chryne Vanmater, Monmouth 1752 

Sutphen, Mary, Hunterdon, and Jacob Sutphen, Hunterdon 1788 

Sutphin, Aida, and John Schanck, Amwell. ... 1770 

Sutphin, Antey, and Richard Vanlew, Somerset 1779 

Sutphin, Sarah, and John Freeman, Middlesex 1772 

Sutton, Christian, and Joseph Giberson, Middlesex 1774 

Sutton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Daniel Larsen, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Sutton, Martha, Piscataway, and Benjamin Foster, Piscataway 1751 

Sutton, Priscilla, Piscataway, aud Samuel Sharp, Piscataway . . 1759 

Sutton, Rhode, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Pearce, Shrewsbury 1765 

Sutts, Mary, and Samuel Core, Burlington 1780 

Suydam, Anne, and William Williamson, Middlesex 1782 

Suydam, Phebe, and John Stryker, Somerset 1781 

Suydam, Sarah, Monmouth, and William Covenhoven, Monmouth 1754 

1 Qy: Sickelse. 



Dec. 


18 


May 


18 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


2 


Feb. 


22 


July 


28 


July 


10 


Dec. 


25 


Mar. 


22 


July 


31 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


3 


Sept. 


13 


Dec. 


4 


May 


22 


Aug. 


22 


June 


16 


Nov. 


19 


Sept. 


30 


Nov. 


3 


May 


22 


Feb. 


27 


July 


29 


Jan. 


20 


May 


13 


June 


11 


June 


11 


July 


18 


May 


18 


Mar. 


31 


June 


12 


Sept. 


10 


Oct, 


10 


April 


27 


June 


16 


Mar. 


3 


May 


21 


July 


8 


July 


2 


Mar. 


13 


Dec. 


20 


Feb. 


18 


May 


25 


May 


28 



390 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Suydam, Sarah, and Benjamin Hegeman, Somerset 1778 

Swain, Mary, and Nathaniel Robins, Jr., Burlington 1779 

Swain. Pheby, Cape May, and Henry Stile?, Cape May 17G9 

Swain, Elizabeth, and John Yates, Cape May. 17G8 

Swain, Jane, Cape May, and George Taylor, Cape May 1775 

Swain, Jude, Cape May, and George Taylor. Cape May 1758 

Swain. Martha, Cape May, and Elijah Godfrey, Cape May 1769 

Swain, Mary, and John Hunt, Jr., Cape May 1773 

Swain, Sarah, Cape May, and John Townsend, Jr., Cape May 1777 

Swallow, Mary, Auiwell, and William Taylor, Amwell 1768 

Swallow, Mary, Amwell, and Frederick Weaser, Amwell 1769 

Swart, Sarah, Mcnmouth, and Johannis Luyster, Monmouth. ....... 1758 

Swayze, Elizabeth. Oxford, and William Armstrong, Sussex 1778 

Sweed. Sarah. Middletown, and William Compton, Jr., Middletown. . . 1762 

Sweem, Gertruyd, Staten Island, and Christian Vroom, Lebanon 1757 

Sweesey, Lidia, and Henry Dusenbery, Hunterdon 1784 

Sweet, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Amaziah Lewis, Monmouth 1748 

Swem, Micha, and William Walton, Nottingham 1760 

Swem, Euth, Burlington, and Peter Losey, Burlington 1771 

Sweeney, Martha, and Enoch Shepard, Cumberland 1 757 

Swezey. Anna, and Richard Robbarts, Roxbury 177s 

Swezey, Susanna, and Anthony Sharp, Roxbury 1778 

Swift, Ann, and James Williams, Burlington 1777 

Swim, Ann, Middlesex, and John Baker, Middlesex 1736 

Swindon, Anna, Monmouth, and Enoch Davis, Monmouth 1762 

Swing, Sarah, and Joshua Eaton, Salem 1779 

Swinney, Catherine, Salem, and Philip Rice, Salem 1769 

Swinney, Ruth, and Dan Bowen, Cumberland 1785 

Swort, Rebecca, Monmouth, and James Hubbard, Monmouth 1765 

Sydam, Lena, Somerset, and George Boyce, Somerset 1751 

Symeson, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Henry Marsh, Bergen 1773 

Symonds, Hannah, Burlington, and John Peters, Burlington 1736 

Syinonds, Sarah, Burlington, and Samuel Bozworth, Burlington 1747 

Symons, Lettis, New Hanover, and Godfrey Estow, Burlington 1785 



Nov. 


■1 


Mar. 


26 


July 


11 


April 


9 


Oct. 


3 


Feb. 


9 


Nov. 


8 


Feb. 


13 


Jan. 


8 


April 


30 


Jan. 


17 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


19 


Mar. 


o 


April 


5 


Mar. 


29 


July 


30 


June 


2 


Nov. 


11 


April 


29 


May 


17 


Sept. 


7 


July 


2 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


20 


June 


12 


Oct. 


19 


April 


6 


Oct. 


24 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


20 


May 


24 


July 


14 


Jan. 


9 



MALES. 



T 



Taber, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Hannah Tallman, Shrewsbury 1763 Nov. 5 

Taber, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Webley, Shrewsbury 1765 Oct. 1 

Taber, Jesse, Monmouth, and Margaret West, Monmouth 1749 Dec. 16 

Taber, Thomas, Gloucester, and Margaret Ragan, Gloucester 1764 April 5 

Tabor, Noah, Monmouth, and Meribah Wilcott, Monmouth 1748 April 12 

Tagart, Joshua, Pilesgrove, and Ellonor Nealson 1756 July 31 

Tagg, Edward, Burlington, and Patience Wainwright, Burlington 1739 Jan. 3 

Taggart, Jacob, Salem, and Rachael Marshall, Mansfield 1775 June 24 

Talbert, William, Mansfield, and Rachel Antram, Mansfield 1767 Feb. 13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 39 1 

Talbot, William, Burlington, ami Jennet Smith, Burlington 1711 

Talbott, James, Cape May, ami Elizabeth Quinton, Alloways Creek. . . 17G0 

Tallman, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Mary Jeffery, Shrewsbury 1766 

Tallman, Samuel, Monmouth, and Rachel Curtis, Monmouth 1765 

Talmage, Abraham, Moiristown, and Phebe Fairchild, Morristown 1768 

Talman, Job, Burlington, and Sarah Scattergood 1736 

Talman, Joseph, Burlington, and Mary Woodward 1736 

Talman, Thomas, Evesham, and Hannah Austin, Evesham 1763 

Tantum, Francis, Windsor, and Sarah Hepburn 1762 

Tappen, Abraham, Woodbridge, and Sarah Runalls, Woodbridge. .. 1750 
Tappen, Abraham, Woodbridge, and Leah Andrew Vet, Staten Island 1758 

Tappen, Asher, Morris, and Mary Crinden Valt, Staten Island 1762 

Tappen. Isaac, Middlesex, and Sarah Wilkison, Middlesex 1715-6 

Tappen, William, Woodbridge, and Johanna Ayers, Woodbridge 1762 

Tapscott, James, Upper Freehold, and Sarah Baird 1772 

Tapscott, William, Upper Freehold, and Mary Watson 1762 

Tarry, Ephraim, Cumberland, and Judith Piatt, Cumberland 1761 

Tasso, Philippo, Burlington, and Phebe Springer, Burlington 1732 

Tate, v\ illiam, Salem, and Frances Daily 1733 

Tate, William, Gloucester, and Margaret Seeds 1766 

Tatem, William, Gloucester, and Mary Bonnell, Somerset 1730 

Tathum, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Lord, Gloucester 1729 

Tatom, John, Gloucester, and Mary Payne 1784 

Taulman, David, Orange. N. Y., and Rachel Harring 1781 

Taylor, Aaron, Chesterfield, and Abigail Xutt 1703 

Taylor, Benjamin, Somerset, and Mary Brokaw, Somerset .... 1742 

Taylor, Benjamin, Mansfield, and Rachel Taylor, Willingborow. .... 1751 

Taylor, William, Burlington, and Anna Taylor, Burlington 1751 

Taylor, Benjamin, Cape May, and Hannah Holden, Cape May 1768 

Taylor, Beriah, Springfield, and Keziah Gaskill, Springfield 1767 

Taylor, Charles, Burlington, and Rachel Horner 1736 

Taylor, Daniel, Cape May, and Rebecca Paulling 1760 

Taylor, Daniel, Bridgeton, and Mary Davis. 1778 

Taylor, David, Salem, and Margaret Hawthorn 1773 

Taylor, Edward, Freehold, and Abigail Ogborn, Middletown 1757 

Taylor, Edward, Upper Freehold, and Hannah Forman, Up. Freehold 1762 

Taylor, Edward, Kingwood, and Sarah Curtis, Kingwood 177-1 

Taylor, Ezra, Chesterfield, and Mary Potter 1768 

Taylor, Francis, Cape May, and Rachel Hewet, Cape May 1770 

Taylor, George, Burlington, and Mary Stuart, Burlington 1712 

Taylor, George, Burlington, and Susannah Clarke, Burlington 1745 

Taylor, George (minor), Middletown, Deborah Carman. Middletown. .1752 

Taylor, George, Cape Mat*, and Jude Swain, Cape May 1758 

Taylor, George, Monmouth, and Sally Crowell, Monmouth 1766 

Taylor, George, Amwell, and Mary Berdine, Amwell 1774 

Taylor, George, Cape May, and Jane Swain, Cape May 1775 



Mar. 


3] 


April 


9 


Nov. 


3 


June 


26 


Dec. 


2 


Feb. 


25 


May 


18 


Aug. 


18 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


22 


Jan. 


9 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


28 


June 


25 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


6 


Aug. 


11 


Aug. 


12 


Jan. 


14 


Aug. 


4 


May 


27 


Sept, 


30 


July 


25 


Nov. 


29 


April 


11 


June 


24 


Oct. 


3 


Mar. 


12 


June 


15 


Sept. 


3 


Feb. 


21 


Feb. 


2 


Oct. 


17 


May 


21 


April 


16 


Dec. 


19 


June 


1 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


14 


Nov. 


30 


Feb. 


9 


July 


29 


June 


oil 


Oct. 


3 



392 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Taylor, George, Pennsylvania, and Mariby Renear 1779 

Taylor, George, Springfield, and Annie Carman 1785 

Taylor, Henry, Northampton, and Keziah "Wills, Northampton 1764 

Taylor, Israel, Willingborough, and Lucy Springer, Willingborough. . . 1751 

Taylor, Isaac, Lancaster, Pa., and Jane Jones, Lancaster, Pa 1739 

Taylor, Jacob, Burlington, and Hannah Lame, Burlington 1781 

Taylor, James, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Jackson, Shrewsbury 1759 

Taylor, James, Trenton, and Elizabeth Henry 1779 

Taylor, Jared, Willingborough, and Lucy Springer 1751 

Taylor, Joel. Nottingham, and Aun Vanderbeke 1780 

Taylor, John, Burlington, and Deliverance Robins, Burlington 1739 

Taylor, John, Chesterfield, and Sarah Quicksell, Chesterfield 1748 

Taylor, John, Monmouth, and Mary Hankinson, Monmouth 1750 

Taylor, John, Cape May, and Marcy Buck 1759 

Taylor, John, New York, and Catherine Wessels, New York 1760 

Taylor, John, Cape May, and Sarah Towmend, Cape May 1760 

Taylor, John, Cape May, and Mary Hedges, Cape May 1777 

Taylor, Jonathan, Burlington, and Aun Clifton, Burlington 1740 

Taylor, Jonathan, Springfield, and Mary Shourds, Springfield 1772 

Taylor, Joseph, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Ashton, Monmouth 1743 

Taylor, Joseph, Monmouth, and Anne Hankinson, Monmouth 1747-8 

Taylor, Joseph, Willingborough, and Elizabeth Dean, Willingborough. 1751 

Taylor, Joseph, Lower Freehold, and Ann Bennum 1762 

Taylor, Lawrence, Princetown, and Amy Potts 1767 

Taylor, Matthias, Down, and Pleasant Sheppard 1781 

Taylor, Nicholas, Waterford, Elizabeth Brooks, Chester, Burl'g'n Co. .1747 

Taylor, Peter, Ainwell, and Jerusa Lambert, Amwell 1770 

Taylor, Robert, Burlington, and Sarah Woodward, Burlington 1728 

Taylor, Robert, Willingborough, and Jane Birdsall, Willingborough. . .1751 

Taylor, Robert, Springfield, and Susannah Tonkin 1762 

Taylor, Samuel, Jr., Burlington, and Rebecca Field, Burlington 1741 

Taylor, Samuel (minor), Burlington, and Mary Halloway 1760 

Taylor, Samuel, Middletown, and Leah Stout 1761 

Taylor, Samuel, Evesham, and Hannah Peacock 1779 

Taylor, Stacy, Bucks, Pa., and Frances Hoff 1785 

Taylor, Thomas, Burlington, and Anna Lippiucott, Burlington 1746 

Taylor, Thomas, Salem, and Helleuah Gardener, Salem 1769 

Taylor, Willett, Somerset, and Jane Bogart 1783 

Taylor, William, Jr., Chesterfield, and Mary Shinn, Chesterfield 1745 

Taylor, William, Jr., Freehold, and Ester Rullin, Middletown 1762 

Taylor, William, Amwell, and Mary Swallow, Amwell 1768 

Taylor, William, Upper Freehold, and Lucy Imley 1768 

Taylor, Zephaniab, Springfield, and Rachel Kelley .*. 1785 

Teal, Cornelius, Middlesex, and Lena Gidderaan, Middlesex 1750 

Tearman, William, Bergen, and Margaret Doremus 1788 

Teate, Anthony, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Torbert, New Jersey 1739 



Nov. 


13 


Oct. 


10 


Mar. 


3i 


May 


11 


June 


11 


Mar. 


27 


June 


23 


Mar. 


10 


May 


11 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


24 


May 


10 


April 


3 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


15 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


26 


Feb. 


12 


June 


3 


May 


12 


Feb. 


20 


May 


8 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


5 


Jan. 


1 


Dec. 


21 


Oct. 


18 


May 


14 


April 


11 


Mar. 


10 


Oct. 


3 


Feb. 


6 


Oct. 


12 


Aug. 


23 


Jan. 


1 


Aug. 


6 


Aug. 


11 


May 


29 


Jan. 


14 


April 


13 


April 


30 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


25 


Dec. 


19 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 39: 

Teeton, John, Gloucester, and Hannah Briggs, Gloucester 1730 

Temple, Nathaniel, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Tiudall 1769 

Tenbell, Michael, Burlington, and Martha Clutch, Burlington 1767 

Ten Broeck, John, Middlesex, and Patience Williamson 1745 

Ten Brook, Jacob, Somerset, and Anne Ten Eick 1781 

Tenbrook, Peter, Hunterdon, and Amy Chamberlain 1782 

Teneick Andres, Somerset, and Marretie Vrooin, Somerset 1746 

Ten Eick, Andries, Somerset, and Sarah Burger 1781 

Ten Eick, Coanrod, Somerset, and Elizabeth Thompson 1783 

Ten Eick, Conrad, Earitan, and Sarah Rappleyea, Piscataway 1751 

Ten Eick, Conrad, Jr., Somerset, and Alice Bergen, Somerset 1751 

Ten Eick, Jacob, Jr., Somerset, and Elizabeth Lagrange, Somerset. . .1768 

Ten Eick, Matthew, Raritan, and Neltie Tunison, Baritan 17-40 

Ten Eick, Peter, Somerset, and Deborah Vanderbeck, Somerset 1751 

Ten Eick, Peter, Somerset, and Judah Angle 1768 

Ten Eick, Tobias, Hunterdon, and Anna Vanhorne, Hunterdon 1746 

Tennant, Moses, Maryland, and Rachel Siddon, Philadelphia 1730 

Tennant, Richard, Trenton, and Margaret Yard, Trenton 1763 

Tennent, Gilbert, New Brunswick, and Cornelia Clarkson, Somerset. .1741 

Tennet, Edward, Burlington, and Margaret Smith, Burlington 1741 

Terheun, Johannes, New Barbadoes, and Catherine Bowert, l Bergen . . 1766 

Terhuen, Stephen, Bergen, and Mariah Bokert, Bergen 1744 

Terhuene, William, Somerset, and Mary Van Nuise 1781 

Terhune, Garret, Hillsborough, and Catherine Van Huise 1778 

Terhune, Jacob, Bergen, and Mary Zabriskie 1781 

Terhune, Michael B., Bergen, and Marechie Houseman 1790 

Terhune. Nicasie, Hackensack, and Leah Powelse, Hackensack 1762 

Terhune, Stephen, Somerset, and Altie Stryker 1782 

Terrill, Ephraim, Essex, and Ann Heard, Middlesex 1763 

Terrill, John, and Anne Johnston, Perth Amboy 1748 

Terrill, John, Perth Amboy, and Sophia Waterhouse 1768 

Terrill (?), Moses. See Ferrill. 

Terrill, William, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Skinner 1771 

Terry, Jasper, Falls Township, Pa., Mary Hart, Falls Township, Pa. .1735 

Terry, William, Bucks, Pa., and Eleanor Holmes . . 1756 

Test. Edward, Piles Grove, and Jane McKoan, Piles Grove 1761 

Test, Edward, Salem, and Hester Shivers, Gloucester 1762 

Test, Edward, Salem, and Susanna Hancock, Salem 1765 

Test, Edward, and Susanna Bilderback 1770 

Test. Francis, Salem, and Mary Morgan, Salem 1765 

Test, John, Philadelphia and Mary Trenchard, Salem 1749 

Test, John, Monmouth, and Ann Kearl, Monmouth 1767 

Tew, Edward, Philadelphia, and Mary King, Philadelphia 1734 

Tew, Samuel, Gloucester, and Susanna Collins, Philadelphia 1739 

i Query. Bogert. 



Sept. 


21 


Aug. 


21 


May 


22 


Jan. 


28 


April 


30 


July 


4 


Nov. 


10 


Feb. 


15 


Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


27 


Dec. 


7 


Feb. 


25 


Feb. 


12 


June 


21 


Oct. 


25 


April 


29 


June 


3 


Aug. 


25 


Feb. 


9 


Nov. 


3 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


24 


Sept. 


3 


May 


6 


July 


24 


Dec. 


15 


Dec. 


2 


Mar. 


17 


Nov, 


29 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


7 


July 


29 


May 


26 


Nov. 


18 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


30 


Mar. 


9 


April 


11 


Dec. 


14 


Sept. 


30 


July 


23 



394 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Thackray, Isaac, Gloucester, and Hannah Gaskill 1783 

Thackery, Joseph, Gloucester, and Hannah Albersou, Gloucester 1731 

Tharp, Job, Woodbridge, and Sarah Sharp, "Woodbridge 1750 

Thatcher, Daniel, Aniwell, and Katharine Godown, Amwell 1771 

Thatcher, Samuel, and Elizabeth Kennedy 1771 

Thickstou, John, Piscataway, and Mary Martin, Piscataway 1743 

Thickston, Thomas, Middlesex, and Mary Van Bidden, Middlesex.. . .1741 

Thiskstuu, William, Middlesex, and Mary Thornell, Middlesex 1763 

Thomas, Abraham, Shrewsbury, and Martha Browne 1732 

Thomas, Absalom, Burlington, and Mary Springer, Burlington 1750 

Thomas, David, Burlington, and Margaret Lucas, Burlington 1746 

Thomas, David, Burlington, and Grace Taylor 1757 

Thomas, David, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Davis 1783 

Thomas, George, New York, and Elizabeth Smith, Raritan Landing. . 1748 

Thomas, Isaac, Salem, and Aune Smith . . . 1784 

Thomas, James, Salem, and Mary Standly 1730 

Thomas, James. Burlington, and Bridget Fitzgerald, Burlington 1731 

Thomas, Job, Woolwich, and Hannah Bennet, Woolwich 1774 

Thomas, John, Chesterfield, and Sarah Wood, Chesterfield 1746 

Thomas, John, and Mary Stanton 1756 

Thomas, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Sarah Ellis, Gloucester 1738 

Thomas, Martin, Burlington, and Ann Nut 1779 

Thomas, Moses, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Verree, Burlington 1742 

Thomas, Moses, Mannington, and Margaret Warner, Mannington ... 1766 

Thomas, Nathaniel, Monmouth, and Ann Leeds, Burlington 1738 

Thomas, Richard, Windsor, and Sarah Ackerly. 1778 

Thomas, Richard, Great Egg Harbour, and Elizabeth Wicks 1783 

Thomas, Seth, Burlington, and Elizabeth Borton, Burlington 1774 

Thomas, Timothy, Willingborough, Elizabeth Lucas, Willingborough.1744 
Thomas, Timothy, Burlington, and Bathsheba Gardiner, Burlington . . 1774 

Thomas, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Grimes 1783 

Thomas, William, Gloucester, and Eachel Denny 1781 

Thompson, Abel, Evesham, and Jemima Kemp 1778 

Thompson, Andrew, Hunterdon, and Christina Creeger 1780 

Thompson, Benjamin, Salem, and Jemima Hewes, Salem 1764 

Thompson, Benjamin, Salem, and Easter Mayhew, Salem , 1774 

Thompson, Benjamin, Amwell, and Sarah Hill, Amwell 1774 

Thompson, Benjamin, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Cleaver, Stow Cr'k.1778 

Thompson, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Brown, Bucks, Pa 1757 

Thompson, David, Elizabethtown, and Jane Boone, Elizabethtown. . . 1740 
Thompson, George, Middletown, and Deborah Gayhudd, Middletown. 1753 

Thompson, George, Middlesex, and Mary Williamson 1778 

Thompson, Henry, Burlington, and Mary Taylor, Burlington 1754 

Thompson, Jacob, Alloways Creek, Elizabeth Plomer, Alloways Creek 1775 

Thompson, James, Salem, aud Mary Draper 1784 

Thompson, John, Burlington, aud Elizabeth Staples, Burlington 1730 



Mar. 


11 


June 


1 


Jan. 


10 


April 


27 


Mar. 


18 


May 


11 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


4 


Sept. 


9 


April 


28 


Oct. 


27 


Aug. 


19 


Jan. 


8 


Feb. 


7 


Dec. 


1 


Dec. 


1 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


20 


June 


7 


Aug. 


3 


Nov. 


15 


April 


26 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


23 


Oct, 


25 


July 


2 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


— 


Aug. 


18 


Feb. 


20 


April 


24 


Sept. 


28 


July 


22 


Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


15 


Dec. 


4 


Aug. 


2 


Nov. 


29 


Aug. 


1 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


31 


April 


5 


Feb. 


18 


June 


11 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Thompson, John, Rhode Island, aud Mary Gift" ml, Perth Aniboy 1743 

Thompson, John, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Debois, Staten Island 1707 

Thompson, John, Burlington, and Jehoshebah Schooley 1759 

Thompson, John, Pilesgrove, and .Mary Sherry, Pilesgrove 1765 

Thompson, John, Backs, Pa., and Catharine Arkley 1778 

Thompson, Joseph, Freehold, aud Sary Covenhoven, Freehold 17G7 

Thompson, Joshua, Salem, aud Sarah Hill 1733 

Thompson, Robert, Newark, aud Mary Ward, Newark 17G5 

Thompson, Robert, and Mary Hooper 1779 

Thompson, Samuel, Salem, and Deborah Sedden, Salem 1765 

Thompson, Staples, Bristol, Pa., and Elizabeth Bodyne 1777 

Thompson, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Spragg 1759 

Thompson, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Berry 17G8 

Thompson, Thomas, Salem, and Rebecca Hedge, Salem 1770 

Thompson, Uriah, Mansfield, and Elinor Fagan, Mansfield 1771 

Thompson, William, Middletown, and Sarah Tyson, Middletown. 17G0 

Thompson, William, Salem, and Mary Newkirk 1772 

Thomson, Butler, Cumberland, and Hannah Foster 1779 

Thomson, Charles, Cape May, and Phebe Smith 1780 

Thomson, James, Middlesex, and Elizabeth McFarran 1751 

Thomson, John, Amboy, and Anna McKnight 1742 

Thomson, John, Middletown, and Mary Applegate 17-16-7 

Thomson, Mark, Sussex, and Ann Brackenridge 1768 

Thomson, Moses, Freehold, aud Sarah Carswell, Freehold 1765 

Thomson, Nathaniel, Salem, and Hannah Wiggins, Salem 1763 

Thomson, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Beers, Monmouth. . . . 1743 

Thomson, Thomas, Gloucester, and Martha Motfelt 1785 

Thomson, William, Somerset, and Margaret Leslie, Perth Amboy 1758 

Thorn, Daniel, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Sickles 1777 

Thorn, Jacob, Middlesex, and Johannah Fitzrandolph 1769 

Thorn, John, Jr., Nottingham, and Tace Skirm 1785 

Thorn, Joseph, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Licence, Gloucester 1757 

Thorn, Mahlon, Burlington, and Zerinah Page 1761 

Thorn, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Robins, Burlington 1764 

Thome, Benjamin, Burlington, and Sarah Bunting 1740 

Thome, Henry, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Tice 1775 

Thome, John, Gloucester, and Isabell Cheesman 1772 

Thorne, Samuel, Burlington, and Hannah Clay, Burlington 1730 

Thome, Thomas, New York, aud Letitia Hinchman, Gloucester 1727 

Thoruell, Israel, Middlesex, and Catherine Fitz Randolph, Piscataway.1753 

Thomell, Joseph, Middlesex, aud Mary Thickston, Middlesex 1764 

Thornton, James, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Burroughs, Bucks, Pa ... 1764 

Thornton, John. Bucks, Pa., aud Sarah Ashburne, Jr., Bucks, Pa 1756 

Thornton, Joseph, Pennsylvania, and Margaret Gale, Pennsylvania. . . 1729 

Thornton, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Jane Ferguison 1787 

Thornton, Thomas, Burlington, and Martha Smith, Burlington 1735 



395 

Nov. 26 

July 27 

Aug. 22 

Aug. 10 

April 24 

Feb. 19 

April 13 

Jan. 30 

Sept. 17 

Mar. 22 

April 12 

Dec. 29 

Oct. 22 

May 30 

Sept. 28 

Sept. 17 

Jan. 2 

Jan. 26 

June 15 

Aug. 27 

Dec. 30 

Mar. 2 

Nov. 1 

July 18 

Sept. 17 

May 24 

Feb. 15 

Nov. 2 

Aug. 5 

Dec. 30 

Mar. 29 

Feb. 19 

Feb. 23 

Jan. 16 
April 14 

Mar. 12 

Oct. 9 

Oct. 22 

July 29 

Jan. 1 

Dec. 12 

June 27 

Oct. 28 

Dec. 24 
June 7 
June 2 



396 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Thornton, Thomas, Middlesex, and Mary Haines, Elizabethtown 1761 

Thorp, Norris, Perth Amboy, and Isabella Herriott 1765 

Thorp, Benjamin, Middletown, and Mener Hoffrnire, Middletown 1761 

Thrasher, Adam, Philadelphia, and Mary Grudjon 1769 

Throckmorton, Hartness, Freehold, and Susannah Williams, Freehold. 1757 
Throckmorton, James, Shrewsbury, and Rosi^a Vumort,i Shrewsbury. 1767 

Throckmorton, James, Middlesex, and Mary Nephews 1780 

Throckmorton, Job, Monmouth, and Mary Morford, Monmouth 1743 

Throckmorton, John, Monmouth, and Sarah Holmes, Monmouth. 1739 

Throckmorton, John, Monmouth, and Abigail Talman, Monmouth. .. 1740 

Throckmorton, John, Monmouth, and Lydia West, Shrewsbury 1752 

Throckmorton, Joseph, Jr., Monmouth, Mary Forman, Monmouth. . .1747 
Throckmorton, Samuel, Amboy, and Catherine Franses, Monmouth. . . 1755 

Throckmorton, William, Morris, and Sarah Giller, Morris 1759 

Throp, William, Upper Freehold, and Betheney Applegate 1773 

Tice, George, Cumberland, and Pinea Smith 1788 

Tice, Gisbert, Freehold, and Rebeckah Holmes. 1756 

Tice, John, Freehold, and Mary Gould, Freehold 1758 

Tice, Peter, Freehold, and Christian Erickson, Freehold 1750 

Tice, William, Freehold, and Elizabeth Tomson, Shrewsbury 1757 

Tices, John. Cumberland, and Hannah Kenton 1786 

Till, John, Mount Holly, and Aune Bauks. , 1784 

Till, William, Philadelphia, and Damarus Douglass, Trenton 1746 

Tillyer, John, New Jersey, and Susannah Holmes, Middlesex 1745 

Tillyer, William, Somerset, and Martha Griggs, Somerset 1744 

Tilton, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Rogers 1781 

Tilton, Benjamin, Middletown, and Mary Hagens, Middletown 1767 

Tilton, Daniel, Freehold, and Mary Van Nort, Lower Freehold 1747 

Tilton, John, Monmouth, and Rebekah Applegate. Monmouth 1744 

Tilton, John, Middletown, and Elizabeth Lane, Middletown 1742 

Tilton, John, Middletown, and Frances Thomson, Middletown 1752 

Tilton, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Vanse, Croswicks 1758 

Tilton, John, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Gilford 1766 

Tilton, Joseph, Monmouth, and Katherine Mount, Monmouth 1739 

Tilton, Joseph, Freehold, and Mary Patterson, Freehold. ... 1749 

Tilton, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Potter, Shrewsbury 1767 

Tilton, Nathaniel, Middletown, and Elliuor Johnston, Middletown 1761 

Tilton, Peter, Monmouth, and Margaret Imlay, Monmouth 1745 

Tilton, Peter, Middletown, and HaDnah Edwards, Middletown 1765 

Tilton, Samuel, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Willet, Monmouth 1744 

Tilton, Samuel, Monmouth, and Mary Passel, Somerset 1749 

Tilton, Silas, Monmouth, and Phebe Mount, Monmouth 1739 

Tilton, Silvester, Monmouth, and Hannah Vahan, Monmouth 1739 

Tilton, Thomas, Middletown, and Mary Thomson, Middletown 1758 



Mar. 23 

April 9 

Sept. 30 

Mar. 27 

April 21 

Jan. 2 

April 17 

April • 4 

Dec. 24 

Oct. 6 

Oct. 3 

May 4 

Nov. 1 

Dec. 15 

Mar. 26 

Oct. 14 

Mar. 2 

Oct. 17 

Feb. 23 

Dec. 21 

July 31 

Sept. 16 

Oct. 24 
April 18 

J une 6 

Jan. 15 

Feb. 19 

Nov. 16 

Aug. 14 

Feb. 15 

Mar. 14 

Mar. 7 

July 23 
June 13 

Mar. 23 

July 28 

Jan. 10 

Jan. 29 
June 8 

Feb. 4 

Jan. 6 

Nov. 3 
April 3 
June 17 



i Or Vurnort. Possibly Van Noordt is meant. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 39/ 

Tilton, William, Freehold, and Arney White, Shrewsbury 1765 

Tinbrook, John, New Brunswick, Elizabeth Outhout, New Brunswick. 17-15 

Tindal, Isaac, Gloucester, and Anne Marland, Gloucester 1729 

Tindall, John, Trenton, and Catherine Anderson 1768 

Tiudall, John, Middlesex, and Hannah Knight 1769 

Tindall, Joseph, Salem, and Sarah Loyd, Salem 1771 

Tiudall, William, New Windsor, and Mary Cubberly, New Windsor . . 1770 

TindoL Joseph, Middlesex, and Susanah Sayer 1781 

Tinglen, Jeremiah, Elizabeth, and Esther Leddel, Elizabeth 1778 

Tipples, John, Monmouth, and Catherine Dome, Monmouth 1762 

Titler, George, Orange, N. Y., and Mary Cargil 1784 

Tittus, John, Shrewsbury, and Abigail Pintard, Shrewsbury 1754 

Titus, Francis, Bucks, Pa., an'd Mary Clark, Bucks, Pa 1734 

Titus, Francis, Jr., Bucks, Pa., and Jean Fagen, Bucks, Pa 1763 

Titus, Jacob, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Moon 1777 

Titus, John, Perth Amboy, and Lydia Brittain 1742 

Titus, Johnson, Hunterdon, and Anna Stout 1778 

Titus, Joseph, Hopewell, and Pelatiah Moon. . . 1764 

Titus, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Elisabeth Baldwin 1778 

Titue, Solomon, Hopewell, and Susanna Read. . 1779 

Titus, Stephen, Hopewell, and Mary Smith 1782 

Titus, Timothy, Pennsylvania, and Martha Wright, Pennsylvania .... 1764 

Titus, Timothy, Jr., Hunterdon, and Isabel Ther 1779 

Titus, Timothy, Hunterdon, and Patience Hoff. 1779 

Titus, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Mary Drake 1784 

Tobey, Isaac, Amwell, and Phebe Thomson, Amwell 1775 

Todd, Andrew, Somerset, and Sarah Yandle, Hunterdon 1771 

Toers, Garret, Bergen, and Margaret Van Winkle, Essex 1759 

Toers, Jacob, Bergen, and Cathinely Kip, Essex 1753 

Tole, Richard, New York, and Sarah Eatton, Shrewsbury 1761 

Tolkiuton, Joseph, Bristol, and Elizabeth Stackhouse 1781 

Tolyn, Michael, Gloucester, and Catharine Gyge 1774 

Tomkins, John, Chester, Pa., and Elizabeth Gother 1733 

Tomlins, Matthew, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Ervin, Gloucester 1772 

Tomlinson, George, Slow Creek, and Anne Ware 1778 

omlinson, Isaac, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Shivers, Gloucester 1766 

Tomlinson, William, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Montgomery, Bucks, Pa. .1769 

Tomson, Richard, Cape May, and Raamah Corsen, Cape May 1741 

Tompsou, William, Deptford, and Martha Reeves, Deptford 1768 

Tomson, Benajah, and Elizabeth Peters 1778 

Tomson, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Katharine Cleayton, Monmouth. . 1747 

Tomson, Johu, Middlesex, and Agnes Baker, Middlesex 1749 

Tomson, John, and Rebekah Huglan, Alexandria 1784 

Tomson, Richard, Cape May, and Marget Nickerson 17<>4 

Tomson, Thomas, Monmouth, and Annie Taylor, Monmouth 1711 

Tomson, Thomas, Freehold, and Jane Furman, Freehold 1770 



Aug. 


5 


July 


27 


Sept. 


10 


June 


1 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


28 


Dec. 


14 


July 


5 


July 


17 


June 


4 


Jan. 


12 


June 


19 


Aug. 


17 


July 


24 


June 


30 


Dec. 


30 


Nov. 


12 


Feb. 


13 


April 


6 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


5 


Feb. 


6 


Dec. 


15 


April 


17 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


23 


June 


12 


June 


23 


May 


15 


Jan. 


17 


April 


11 


Mar. 


20 


May 


6 


Aug. 


20 


Dec. 


30 


Dec. 


19 


Sept. 


12 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


5 


July 


17 


Mar. 


23 


Dec. 


31 


Dec. 


8 


Oct. 


22 



398 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tone, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Harvey, Monmouth 1742 

Tone, Thomas, Somerset, and Tenty Hance, Monmouth 1775 

Tonkin, Charles, and Esther Small 1734 

Tonkin, Edward, Burlington, and Mary Cole, Gloucester 1733 

Tonkin, Edward, Springfield, and Hepziah Ridgeway 1777 

Tonkin, Samuel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Inskeep, Burlington 1765 

Tonkins, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Sikes, Burlington 1778 

Tool, Peter, Evesham, and Mary Wagner, Burlington 1772 

Toole, John, Burlington, and Susanna Leland, Burlington 1740 

Toorner, Richard, Perth Amboy, and Catharine Tomson, Middlesex. . . 1751 

Topham, Mathew, Burlington, and Catherine McKeaman 1731 

Topping, Joshua, Burlington, and Elizabeth Brooks 1778 

Torn, John, Burlington, and Sarah Bennet 1778 

Tost, William, Bristol, Pa., and Sarah Sinclair, Bristol, Pa 1705 

Totten, Gilbert, Staten Island, and Mary Butler 1769 

Totten, Thomas, Richmond, N. Y., Catherine Hillard, Richm'd, N. Y.1760 

Totten, Zebulou, Staten Island, and Mary Doty 1770 

Town, Thomas, and Elizabeth Rece 1759 

'1 owers, John, Philadelphia, and Phoebe Leake 1779 

Townsand, Amos, Cape May, and Martha Hand, Cape May 1745 

Townsend, Charles, Pennsylvania, and Abigal Emrie, Pennsylvania. . .1730 
Townsend, Daniel, Gt. Egg Harbour, Lydia Sawins,l Gt. Egg Harb'r.1769 

Townsend, David, Cape May, and Hanah Osburn 1767 

Townsend, Elijah, Great Egg Harbour, and Suzanah Ingerson 1774 

Townsend, Elijah, Cape May, and Judith Townsend 1775 

Townsend, Henry Young, Cape May, and Priscilla Ludlum 1769 

Townsend, James, Cape May, and Abiah Hand, Cape May 1740 

Towser, Jeremiah, Cumberland, and Elizabeth' Kimme . . .17— 

Townsand, John, Cape May, and Tabitha Youug, Cape May 1740 

Townsend, John, Cape May, and Druzellah Townsend 1770 

Townsend, John, Jr., Cape May, and Sarah Swain, Cape May 1777 

Townsend, Joseph, Burlington, and Elizabeth Scull, Burlington 1735 

Townsend, Joshua, Cape May, and Elizabeth Shaw 1787 

Townsend, Jotham, Cape May, and Rachel Cresey 1768 

Townsend, Jotham, Cape May, and Elizabeth Corson, Cape May 1776 

Townsend, Judah, Lower Penns Neck, and Elizabeth Pedrick 1771 

Townsend, Reddock, Burlington, and Mary Covenoven, Burlington . .1736 

Townsend, Robert, Cape May, and Jane Shaw 1763 

Townsend, Robert, Cape May, and Rebecca Richardson 1767 

Townsend, Rudduck, Gloucester, and Elisabeth Ingursoll 1765 

Townsend, Silvanus, Cape May, and Prissillah Richardson 1778 

Townsend, Thomas, Cape May, and Rebecca Mattucks 1789 

Toy, Andrew, Pennsylvania, and Rachel Ellis, Pennshairkin 1775 

Toy, Daniel, Burlington, and Sarah Bennet, Burlington 1756 

i Or Sarvins. 



M;iy 


1 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


7 


May 


7 


Mar. 


18 


May 


10 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


13 


Sept. 


22 


Nov. 


8 


Mar. 


18 


Nov. 


11 


April 


19 


Oct. 


12 


Jan. 


23 


Nov. 


22 


May 


26 


Feb. 


16 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


10 


May 


18 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


26 


Oct. 


24 


April 


20 


May 


9 


Jan. 


7 


April 


20 


Oct. 


10 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


6 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


14 


May 


21 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


4 


June 


1 


July 


25 


Dec. 


30 


Aug. 


3 


Sept. 


29 


Dec. 


29 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 399 

Toy, Frederick, and Hannah Shinn 1734 Sept. 8 

Toy, Hezekiah, Gloucester, and Anne Tylee 1773 Nov. 30 

Toy, Jacob, Burlington, and Mary Merrill 1777 Oct. 17 

Toy, James, Chester, and Mary Duell 1788 Mar. 27 

Toy, John, Burlington, and Sarah Maxlield, Burlington 1780 Sept. 3 

Tradway, Henry, Burlington, and Anne Driver, Burlington KISS Dec. 8 

Trafford, Samuel, Monmouth, and Content Bills, Monmouth 1749 Dec. 29 

Traphagen, Jonathan, Bergen, and Catharine Doremus, Bergen 1770 Sept. 23 

Traphagen, William, Bergen, and Martintie Westervelt 1785 June 2 

Traves, Abraham, and Hannah Van Ostraut. 1779 June 3 

Travis, Robert, Freehold, and Phebe Lestraing, Freehold 17G1 Oct. 24 

Treadwell, Jabez, Monmouth, and Naomi Parker, Monmouth 1744 Nov. 5 

Treat, Samuel, Burlington, and Agnes Holliushead, Burlington. . . . 1774 Oct. 13 

Trenchard, Curtis, Salem, and Elizabeth Tuff, Salem 1771 Aug. 30 

Trenchard, Curtis, Salem, and Susannah Dickinson 1778 July 20 

Trenchard, John, Cumberland, and Theodosia Ogden, Fairfield 1770 June 25 

Trimble, William, Gloucester, and Hannah McCue 1775 Jan. 19 

Trimmer, David, Morris, and Margeret Pickle 1778 June 13 

Trimmer, Jacob, Koxbury, and Mary Trimmer . . 1778 Mar. 24 

Troth, William, Evesham, and Elizabeth Phillips 1 787 Feb. 6 

Trom, George, Shrewsbury, and Jane McCollys, Shrewsbury 1761 Oct. 5 

Trout, John, Chesterfield, and Anne Eockhill, Mansfield 1750 July 31 

Truax, John, Middlesex, and MargaretflVIounr, Monmouth 1743 Nov. 8 

Truax, Peter, Gloucester, and Patience Stall, Gloucester. 1730 Dec. 4 

Truax, Bulif, Freehold, and Mary Johnston, Freehold. . . 1761 Jan. 26 

Truax, William, Middletown, and Susannah Pew, Middletown 1753 Sept. 17 

Trueaxe, Elias, Monmouth, and Jemima Simons, Monmouth 1760 Jan. 26 

Trueaxe, Elias, Monmouth, and Bethena Pitman, Monmouth 1761 Jan. 26 

Truemau, David, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Giriee, Gloucester 1730 Oct. 19 

Truex, Samuel, Middletown, and Johanna Wilson 1747 Mar. 28 

Trumis, Benjamin, Burlington, aud Jane Kelly, Springfield 1764 Feb. 24 

Tucker, Bishop, Springfield, and Sarah Wilson 1778 Mar. 6 

Tucker, George, Trenton, and Catharine Nugeant 1764 Oct. 18 

Tucker, George, Galloway, and Briggett McCollum .... 1784 Nov. 14 

Tucker, Major, Burlington, and Sarah Quicksell, Burlington 1754 June 6 

Tuckett, Edward, Hunterdon, and Charity Peachee, Burlington 1732 June 19 

Tuckney, Henry, Burlington, and Ann Vaughn 1733 Oct. 16 

Tudor, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Bowlan 1769 Sept. 20 

Tuelie, John, and Judith Morrell 1692 Nov. 2 

Tuft, Brothwait, Salem, and Dorothy Pledger, Mannington 1762 Oct, 11 

Tuft, Brathwate, Lower Penns Neck, and Christiana Bichman 1771 April 4 

Tuft, William, Salem, and Elizabeth Beesely, Salem 1763 Jan. 2 

Tuleman, Cornelius, Bergen, and Mary Honyeman, Bergen 1760 April 7 

Tuly, Jonathan, Burlington, and Martha Brown, Burlington 1758 June 22 

Tuly, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Scott, Burlington. 1729 Sept. 13 

Tunis, Benjamin, Burlingtcn, and Dorothy Higgiubottom, Burlington. 1745 Aug 23 



400 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tunison, Cornelius, New Jersey, and Tannica Brower, Middlesex 1749 

Tunison, John, Bridgewater, and Elizabeth Campbell, Somerset 1772 

Tuuison, Philip, Middlesex, and Deborah Lugrange, Somerset 17-18 

Tures, Abraham, Bergen, and Bariche Bercote, Bergeu 1749 

Turner, John, Salem, and Hannah Hall.. 1733 

Turner. Richard, Perth Amboy, and Margaret Alford, Woodbridge.. . .1762 

Turner, Robert, Gloucester, and Abigail Burne, Gloucester 1738 

Turner, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Ann Roberts, Philadelphia 1736 

Turner, William. Philadelphia, and Mary King 1761 

Turner, Woodhull, Essex, and Elizabeth Tomson, Middlesex 1748 

Tussey, Joseph, Salem, and Jane Wood, Salem 1761 

Tustin, Thomas, Perth Amboy, and Ann Weeks 1761 

Tuthill, Samuel, Morris, and Sarah Kenney, Morris. 1751 

Tuttell, Caleb, Morris Town, and Mary Fairchild, Morristown 1779 

Tuttell, Daniel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Rogers, Burlington 1761 

Twining, David, Newton, and Elizabeth Lewis, Newton 1762 

Twiuing, Nathaniel, Perth Amboy, Mahitabel Richards, Perth Aruboy. 1756 

Twining, Thomas, Kingwood, and Elizabeth Crooks 1781 

Tyler, Job, Cumberland, and Bachel Sayre 1782 

Tyler, William. Salem, and Elizabeth Thomson, Salem 1737 

Tyson, George, Chester, and Mary Rue, Chester 1763 

Tyson, John, Am well, and Ann Ent, Amwell 1772 

Tyte, Thomas, Middletown, and Grace Stanley Middletown 1753 

FEMALES. T 

Taber, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and David Row, Gloucester 1738 

Tabert, Margaret, Monmouth, and Michael Hulit, Monmouth 1757 

Tabor, Hulda, Monmouth, and Peter White, Monmouth 1747-8 

Tabor, Peacable, Monmouth, and William Chadwick, Monmouth ...1761 

Tacher, Mary, Sussex, and Stephen Shiner, Sussex 1769 

Tafft, Sarah, Burlington, and Benjamin Mackarang, Burlington 1749 

Tailer, Elizabeth, and Matthew Gill, Jr., Gloucester 1785 

Tailor, Lydia, Gloucester, and Amariah Dolbon, Gloucester 1774 

Talbott, Catheriue, Burlington, and Edward Pierce, Burlington 1730 

Tallman, Elizabeth, and Uz Leecb, Burlington 1781 

Tallman, Hannah, Shrewsbury, and Daniel Taber, Shrewsbury 1763 

Tallman, Hannah, Burlington, and James Buxton, Burlington 1773 

Tallman, Hannah, Burlington, and Joseph Edwards, Burlington 1782 

Tallman, Lucy, Shrewsbury, and Amos Wite, Shrewsbury 1766 

Tallman, Martha, Monmouth, and Thomas Seabrook, Monmouth. . . . 1758 

Tallman, Martha, and John Lawrence, Burlington 1759 

Tallman, Mary, and John Kecklys, Mansfield 1781 

Tallman, Sarah, Monmouth, and Michael Cook, Monmouth 1757 

Talman, Abigail, Monmouth, and John Throckmorton, Monmouth 1740 

Talman, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Gamble, Burlington 1776 

Talman, Hannah, and Isaac ltogers, Monmouth 1757 



April 29 

Nov. 16 

Jan. 30 

Feb. 12 

Sept. 1 

Dec. 6 

Jan. 8 

Nov. 30 

June 29 

Dec. 3 

Dec. 1 

Oct. 5 

Sept. 9 

Nov. 30 

July 29 

May 1 

Mar. 2 

Sept. 27 

Oct. 21 

June — 

Dec. 2 

June 6 

Oct. 26 



Sept. 6 

July 19 

Jan. 22 

Jan. 7 

Jan. 30 

Oct, 27 

Aug. 15 

Feb. 22 

Jan. 19 

May 22 

Nov. 5 

May 20 

May 16 

April 3 

Oct. 11 

Nov. 14 

June 12 

Feb. 28 

Oct. 6 

June 15 

Sept. 29 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 4OI 

Talman, Kizia, Gloucester, and Samuel Harrison, Jr., Gloucester. ... 1761 

Tahnan, Lydia, Burlington, and Isaac Shreve, Burliugton 1781 

Tanner, Hester, Burlington, and John Miller, Burlington 176-4 

Tanner, Lydia, and Samuel Reeves, Burlington 1779 

Tallinn-, Susanna, and Christopher Sands, Evesham 1779 

Tansey, Margaret, and Israel El well, Salem 1773 

Tantum, Ann, Burlington, and Israel Hewlings, Burlington 1740 

Tantum, Martha, and Richard Schooley, Morris 1751 

Tantum, Sarah, Burlington, and Jonathan Lovett, Burlington 1741 

Tappen, Sarah, Woodbridge, aud Isaac Freeman, Woodbridge 1742 

Tarapin, Ann, Glqucester, and James Somers, Gloucester 1763 

Tatem, Patience, Gloucester, and Joseph Coffey, Burlington. 1768 

Tatem, Deborah, Deptford, and William Kimsey, Deptford 1748 

Tatum, Elizabeth, and Bartholomew Eggmen, Burlington 1759 

Tay, Elinor, and James Anderson, Burlington 1777 

Taylor, Ann, Burliugton, and Jonathan Quicksall, Burlington 1744 

Taylor, Ann, and Samuel Slater, Kiugwood 1767 

Taylor, Ann, Nottingham, and Isaac Rogers, New Windsor 1768 

Taylor, Ann, Amwell, and Ralph Shank, Amwell 1774 

Taylor, Ann, and John Haines, Burlington 1781 

Taylor, Anna, Burlington, and Benjamin Taylor, Burlington 1754 

Taylor, Anne, Burlington, and William Hirby, Burlington 1735 

Taylor, Anne, Springfield, and Jacob Shutz, 1 Springfield 1765 

Taylor, Annie, Monmouth, and Thomas Tomson, Monmouth 1741 

Taylor, Catherine, and William Gifford, Burliugton 1734 

Taylor, Catharine, Monmouth, aud John Ashton, Monmouth 1741 

Taylor, Catharine, Upper Freehold, and John VanKirk, Freehold . 1761 
Taylor, Catharine, Burlington, and Richard Borden, Jr., Burlington. . . 1772 
Taylor, Charity, AVoodbridge, and William Freeman, Woodbridge . . . 1750 

Taylor, Deborah, Monmouth, and Joseph Cooper, Monmouth 1741 

Taylor, Deborah, aud Thomas Cox, Monmouth 1767 

Taylor, Edith, and Joseph Lamb, Burlington 1782 

Taylor, Elizabeth, Chester, Pa., and John Morris, Chester, Pa 1742 

Taj lor, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Curtis, Monmouth 1766 

Taylor, Elizabeth, aud Benjamin Middleton, Gloucester 1775 

Taylor, Elizabeth, and William Hodson, Burlington 1777 

Taylor, Elliner, Freehold, and Thomas Vandycke, Freehold 1754 

Taylor, Grace, and David Thomas, Burliugton 1757 

Taylor, Hannah, Monmouth, and Jacob Gibbins, Monmouth 1737 

Taylor, Hannah, Monmouth, and William Garble, Monmouth 1764 

Taylor, Hannah, Springfield, and John Zelley, Springfield 1773 

Taylor, Helena, Middletown, and Gideon Crawford, Freehold 1754 

Taylor, Helena, Monmouth, and Daniel Covenhoven, Monmouth 1757 

Taylor, Jane, and William Smith, Perth Amboy 1747 

1 Or Shuts. 
25 



April 


10 


Mar. 


29 


Oct. 


'3 


May 


31 


Jan. 


4 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


10 


May 


25 


May 


7 


Nov. 


23 


July 


6 


Jan. 


20 


Dec. 


19 


Nov. 


26 


Oct. 


17 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


19 


July 


6 


Oct. 


8 


Oct. 


6 


June 


24 


April 


18 


Oct. 


21 


Dec. 


8 


May 


16 


June 


2 


May 


13 


Sept. 


21 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 




Nov. 


4 


May 


27 


Feb. 


18 


Mar. 


4 


April 


29 


Sept. 


2 


Sept. 


3 


Aug 


19 


May 


4 


April 


16 


Jan. 


7 


Dec. 


15 


Aug. 


15 


Mav 


5 



402 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Taylor, Jane, Burlington, and James Cabill, Burlington 1768 

Taylor, Jemima, Essex, and Caleb Baldwin, Essex 1747 8 

Taylor, Katharine, Monmouth, and John Ashton, Monmouth 1742 

Taylor, Kesiah, and Absalom Ewing, Burlington 1778 

Taylor, Lucretia, Burlington, and John Forsyth, Burlington 1768 

Taylor, Lydia, Borden town, and William French, Mansfield 1748 

Taylor, Lydiah, Cape May, and Cornelius Schellinger, Cape May 1756 

Taylor, Margaret, Bucks, Pa., and Robert Gregg, Bucks, Pa 1737 

Taylor, Margrat, Freehold, and Cornelius Schenck, Freehold 1765 

Taylor, Martha, Monmouth, and John Shepperd, Monmouth. 1742 

Taylor, Mary, Monmouth, and John Niles, Monmouth 1750 

Taylor, Mary, Burlington, and Henry Thompson, Burlington 1754 

Taylor, Mary, and John McCormick, Cape May 1759 

Taylor, Mary, Freehold, and John Vanderveer, Freehold 1760 

Taylor, Mary, and Simon Deheart 1764 

Taylor, Mary, Burlington, and Phillip Bowne, Burlington 1765 

Taylor, Mary, and William Ellis, Burlington 1779 

Taylor, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Cox, Monmouth 1750 

Taylor, Patience, and Joseph Sever, Evesham 1780 

Taylor, Phoebe, Monmouth, and John Henry, Middlesex 1768 

Taylor, Phebe, and Nicholas Elvertson, Burlington 1777 

Taylor, Rachel, Willingborough, and Benjamin Taylor, Mansfield. ... 1751 
Taylor, Rebekah, Monmouth, and David Clayton, Jr., Monmouth.... 

Taylor, Rebekah, Monmouth, and Jarrett Morford, Monmouth 1742 

Taylor, Rachel, Burlington, and John Vaite Bechtolde, Burlington . . . 1742 

Taylor, Rebecca, Monmouth, and John Forman, Monmouth 1750 

Taylor, Ruth, Cape May, and Elisha Haud, Cape May 1774 

Taylor, Sarah, Burliugton, and Joseph Rockhill, Burlington. ... 1728 

Taylor, Sarah, Monmouth, and Robert Hankirson, Monmouth 1734 

Taylor, Sarah, Burlington, and Joseph Horner, Burlington 1763 

Taylor, Sarah, Monmouth, and Thomas Morford, Monmouth 1765 

Taylor, Sarah, and John Voorhies, Jr., Bridgewater 1789 

Taylor, Susannah, Chesterfield, and Solomon Rockhill, Burlington . . . 1749 
Taylor, Susannah, Cumberland, and John Blizard, Jr., Cumberland. . .1776 
Taylor, Temperance, and Matthew Dixon Drummond, Cumberland. . . 1784 

Tearney, Ann, Burlington, and Peter Cavalier, Burlington 1739 

Teel, Abiah, and John Colder, Cumberland 1777 

Teffary, Grace, Shrewsbury, and Vincent White, Shrewsbury 1755 

Telf, Mary, and Aaron Day 1779 

Temple, Jane, Hunterdon, and Patrick Dohady, Hunterdon 1764 

Ten Brook, Hannah, and Jacob Williamson, Amwell 1785 

Ten Brook, Trinchey, Somerset, and Jacob Van Neste, Somerset 1746 

Tenbroyck, Catharine, Somerset, and Abraham Williamson, Amwell.. 1773 

Tencher, Hannah, and John Woolston, Burlington 1738 

Ten Eick, Anne, and Jacob Tenbrook, Somerset 1781 

Ten Eick, Nelly, and Jeromas Vanderbelt, Somerset 1781 



June 


29 


Jan. 


19 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


6 


Jan. 


5 


Sept. 


20 


Dec. 


14 


Nov. 


2 


July 


3 


Dec. 


13 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


31 


April 


20 


May 


17 


April 


9 


Mar. 


11 


Oct. 


15 


Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


27 


Mar. 


■J 3 


Dec. 


8 


April 


11 


Jan. 


3 


Oct, 


4 


Mar. 


21 


Jan. 


26 


May 


26 


Jan. 


8 


Jan. 


3 


Jan. 


21 


Jan. 


25 


Aug. 


8 


June 


4 


Jan. 


3 


Feb. 


11 


Dec. 


(i 


April 


14 


Jan. 


16 


Mar. 


26 


Mar. 


22 


April 


11 


May 


6 


May 


23 


April 


30 


Aug. 


16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



403 



Teneik, Jane, Somerset, and Thomas Vauhome, Hunterdon 1749 June 17 

Ton Eyck, Catherine, Somerset, and Gerrit Van Wagener, Somerset. . .1745 April 20 

Ten Eyck, Caty, and Rulef Van Pelt, Bridgewater 1782 Jan. 11 

Ten Eyck, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and Richard Hall, Somerset 1741 Aug. 12 

Ten Eyck, Mary, Somerset, and Jaques Vanderbeek, Somerset 1749 Oct. 17 

Tenick, Hannah, Somerset, and William Mackeny, Somerset 1749 Aug. 7 

Tennisson, Charity, Somerset, and John Sebriug, Middlesex. . . . 1748 Oct. 1 

Terhoon, Nelly, and Peter Cornell, Middlesex 1780 Nov. 29 

Terhuu, Marytje, and Christian Zabriskie, Jr 1771 Mar. 4 

Terhuue, Anna, and Garrit R. Garritson, Somerset. 1778 April 10 

Terhuue, Catriua, and Henry Dorames, Sussex 1771 Jan. 8 

Terhuue, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Hendrick Hoppe, Bergen 1770 Nov. 5 

Terhuue, Gertrude, and Thomas Banta, Bergen 1766 Sept. 5 

Terhune, Leah, and John Van Emburg, Bergen 17 — April 8 

Terhuue, Letitia, and James Huyseman, Bergen 1782 Dec. 12 

Terhune, Marritie, and Enoch Freeland, Bergen 1788 June 5 

Terhuue, Lydia, Bergen, and Casparus Kugh, Bergen 1760 Dec. 24 

Terhune, Polly, and Christian Zabriskie, New Barbadoes 1771 Sept. 18 

Terhuue, Weyntje, and Nicholas I. Zabriskie, Bergen 1788 Dec. 18 

Terks, Jane, and Jacob Smith, Somerset 1778 Dec. 19 

Terp, Catriua, and Andriec Haelderon 1771 Sept. 14 

Terrey, Sarah, Burlington, and William Bunting, Burlington 1743 Feb. 29 

Terry, Jane, Bucks, Pa., and Robert Smith, Bucks, Pa 1745 Jan. 20 

Terry, Rhoda, and Samuel Heaton, Cumberland 1783 May 12 

Tewksbury, Rachel, Burlington, and Jacob Mason, Burlington 1763 Nov. 9 

Thackera, Hannah, Gloucester, and Peter Champion, Gloucester ... 1740 Oct. 14 

Thackerell, Hannah, and Daniel Smith, Burliugton 1757 Dec. 3 

Thackery, Deborah, Pennsylvania, and Nathan Brad way, Salem. ... 1771 Dec. 24 

Thackery, Mary, and Benjamin Bates. Gloucester 1777 Sept. 6 

Thackery, Sarah, and Isaac Albertson, Gloucester 1782 May 7 

r l hala, Mary, and Frederick Muscat, Burlington 1768 Dec. 5 

Tharp, Elizabeth, and Edward Freeman, Middlesex 1746 Sept. 30 

lharp, Sarah, Piscataway, and Samuel Compton, Piseataway. 1753 July 31 

Thorpe, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Jonathan Cooper, Monmouth. . . 1767 Mar. 19 

Thatcher, Margaret, Hunterdon, and Daniel Mershon, Hunterdon . . 1763 Dec. 8 

Ther, Isable, and Timothy Titus, Sen., Hunterdon. 1779 Jan. 15 

Thickston, Mary, Middlesex, and Joseph Thornell, Middlesex 1764 Dec. 12 

Thimble, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Edgman, Burlington.. . .1754 Jan. 7 

Thomas, Ann, and John Pleadwell Priest, Gloucester 1773 June 21 

Thomas, Anne, Burlington, and David Carstlake, Burlington. ...... 1774 Jan. 29 

Thomas, Aune, Hunterdon, and George Rode, Hunterdon 1750 July 13 

Thomas, Elizabeth, Elizabeth, and Joseph Decamp, Elizabeth 1755 June 6 

'ihomas, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Joseph Meirs, Monmouth 1763 Dec. 3 

Thomas, Elizabeth, and Matthias Kerlin, Burlington 1772 Nov. 18 

Thomas, Given, Bucks, Pa., and Morris Morris, Bucks, Pa 1734 Aug. 6 

Thomas, Lydia, Burlington, and William Bigden, Pennsylvania. . .. 1755 Jan. 27 



404 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Thomas, Lydia, and John Joralaman, Somerset 1782 

Thomas, Margaret, and Samuel Rogers, Burlington 1783 

Thomas, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and Robert Carter, Bucks, Pa 1733 

Thomas, Mary, Essex, and Robert Milburn, Essex . . 1751 

Thomas, Mary, and Peter Vanskiach, Freehold 17G1 

Thomas, Mary, Jr., and James Starkey, Bucks, Pa 1762 

Thomas, Mary, and Daniel Donally, Burlington 1777 

Thomas, Prudence, and "William Hews, Burlington 1757 

Thomas, Sarah, Philadelphia, and John Ball, Chester, Pa 1747 

Thomas. Sarah, Pennsylvania, and Nathan Field, Pennsylvania 1770 

Thompson, Ann, and Nicholas Gibbon, Cumberland 1786 

Thompson, Charity, and Thomas Wright, Burlington 1756 

Thompson, Damey, and Thomas Ryneir, Mansfield 1783 

Thompson, Dillilab, and David Bennet, Cumberland 1780 

Thompson, Elenor, Perth Amboy, and Philip Carhart, Hunterdon 1757 

Thompson, Elisabeth, Somerset, and Nehemiah Vernon, Somerset. . . . 1749 
Thompson, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Burroughs Abit, Gloucester . . 1764 

Thompson, Elizabeth, and William Carpenter, Salem 1767 

Thompson, Elizabeth, and Daniel Manata, Bucks, Pa 1777 

Thompson, Elizabeth, and Coanrod Ten Eick, Somerset 1783 

Thompson, Grace, Alloways Creek, and Daniel Brown, Virginia 1750 

Thompson, Honor, and Barnard Hanlon 1777 

Thompson, Jane, Bridgeton, and Eli Eliner, Cumberland 1781 

Thompson, Margery, Perth Amboy, and Henry Norwood, New York 1759 

Thompson, Martha, Salem, and Edward Moore, Salem 1746 

Thompson, Mary, Perth Amboy, and James Carman, Perth Amboy. . . 1751 

Thompson, Mary, and George Bomen, Burlington 1760 

Thompson, Mary, and Jedidiah Allen, Salem 1761 

Thompson, Mary, Salem, and James Finlaw, Salem 1762 

Thompson, Mary, Somerset, and Daniel Castner, Jr., Somerset 1775 

Thompson, Nelly, Monmouth, and William Hanninson, Monmouth . . . 1762 

Thompson, Rebecca, and Henry Delatnsh, Burlington. . . 1761 

Thompson, Rebecca, and John Selpath, Mansfield 1763 

Thompson, Rebecca, and William Berry, Salem 1768 

Thompson, Rebecca, and Philip Carney, Hunterdon 1777 

Thompson, Sarah, Salem, and William Hancock, Salem 1765 

Thompson, Sarah, and John Smith, Salem 1778 

Thompson, Susannah, Burlington, and George May, Burlington 1742 

Thomson, Ann, and George Green, Burlington 1780 

Thomson, Agnes, and Richard Bates, Freehold 1745 

Thomson, Barbery, Monmouth, and John Brown, Monmouth 1743 

Thomson, Cornelia, Middlesex, and John Baldwin, Middlesex 1764. 

Thomson, Deborah, Cape May, and David Edwards, Cape May 1772 

Thomson, Elizabeth, Salem, and William Tyler, Salem 1737 

Thomson, Elizabeth, and John Anderson, Monmouth. 1773 

Thomson, Frances, Middletown. and John Tilton, Middletown 1752 Mar. 14 



June 


3 


Nov. 


21 


Aug. 


30 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


21 


Oct. 


7 


April 


4 


Oct. 


10 


April 


22 


July 


23 


April 


27 


Aug. 


26 


Jan. 


7 


April 


12 


July 


25 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


25 


July 


29 


Dec. 


15 


Feb. 


24 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


5 


Feb. 


13 


June 


8 


Nov. 


10 


May 


12 


June 


9 


Nov. 


25 


June 


7 


May 


8 


Aug. 


23 


Dec. 


15 


Aug. 


27 


May 


27 


Nov. 


16 


Oct. 


30 


Sept. 


2 


Jan. 


24 


Oct. 


15 


Nov. 


7 


Jan. 


23 


Nov. 


30 


Jan. 


20 


June 


— 


Mar. 


9 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 405 

Thomson, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and Isaac Doty, Long Island. . . . 1747 Oct. 2 

Thomson, Margaret, Perth Amboy, and William Stone, Perth Amboy. 1752 Aug. 19 

Thomson, Marsey, Cape May, and Isaac Hand, Cape May 1730 April 3 

Thomson, Martha, New Brunswick, William Williamson, New B'w'ck. 1741 April 20 

Thomson, Martha, Burlington, and Thomas Cutler, Burlington 1706 April 29 

Thomson, Mary, Morris, and Joseph Ogden, Morris 1751 Aug. 31 

Thomson, Mary, Middleton, and Thomas Tilton, Middletown 1758 June 17 

Thomson, Mary, and Abiel Cook, Jr., Monmouth 1705 June 17 

Thomson, Mary, and Benjamin Van Cleave, Lower Freehold 1770 Dec. 11 

Thomson, Mary, Philadelphia, and Patrick Flanagan, Hunterdon. ... 1773 July 30 

Thomson, Phebe, Amwell, and Isaac Tobey, Amwell 1775 Apiil 17 

Thomson, Rachel, Piscataway, and John Stelle, Piscataway 1730 June 16 

Thomson, Rachel, Middletown, and Ezekiel Smith, Freehold 1752 Mar. 7 

Thomson, Rebecca, Middlesex, and Peter Knap, Middlesex 1753 May 26 

Thomson, Sarah, Middletown, Hendrick Hendrickson, Middletown. .. 1751 April 3 

Thomson, Susannah, Perth Amboy, Benjamin Carman, Middletown. . 1763 Oct. 10 

Thorn, Abigail, and Isaac Shreve, Mansfield 1784 April 17 

Thorn, Elizabeth, and Walter Vanskyver, Burlington 1769 Oct. 2 

Thorn, Mary, and Cornelius Hendrickson, Monmouth 1767 Jan. 28 

Thorn, Miriam, and Richard Marsh, Monmouth 1765 Oct. 26 

Thorn, Rebeca, Upper Freehold, and Amos Wood, Upper Freehold. . . 1769 Mar. 5 

Thorn, Sarah, Middletown, and John Dennis, Middletown 1757 June 27 

Thorne, Abigail, Gloucester, and William Harrison, Gloucester 1759 Mar. 6 

Thorne, Abigal, Evesham, and Melchizedek Peacock, Evesham 1767 May 21 

Thorne, Deborah, Gloucester, and Isaac Albertson, Gloucester 1761 Jan. 29 

Thome, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Samuel Hugg, Gloucester 1761 April 15 

Thorne, Jane, Gloucester, and Nathan Alberson, Gloucester .1764 Jan. 17 

Thorne, Kessiah, and John Kay, Gloucester ... 1779 Nov. 2 

Thorne, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Hay, Burlington 1746 May 20 

Thome, Mary, Gloucester, and Robert Fr'd Price, Haddonfield. . . 1761 Mar. 7 

Thomell, Hannah, Morris, and Edward Demun, Sussex 1773 April 9 

Tornell, Mary, Middlesex, and William Thickston, Middlesex 1763 Jan. 4 

Thomell, Sarah, and Barent Reyneerson, Hillsborough 1779 Mar. 6 

Thornton, Martha, Middlesex, and John Crow, Middlesex 1765 Jan. 25 

Thorp, Mary, Middlesex, and Samuel Munday, Middlesex 1755 Mar. 26 

Thrackrey, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Strattan, Salem 1 779 Mar. 17 

Throgmorton, Jane, and Thomas Forman, Monmouth 1769 Oct. 31 

Throgmorton, Sarah, Freehold, and Jonathan Furman, Freehold. . .1745-6 Feb. 11 

Throckmorton, Mary, Freehold, and Reuben Foster, Freehold 1750 June 21 

Throckmorton, Anna, Monmouth, and Josiah Halstead, Monmouth. .1755 May 30 

Throckmorton, Catharine, Middletown, Richard Norris, Shrewsbury. .1765 Nov. 19 

Throckmorton, Elizabeth, and John Stevenson, New York 1754 June 14 

Throckmorton, Elizabeth, Monmouth, James Hankinson, Monmouth. 1757 May 25 

Throckmorton, Hannah, and Thomas Hankinson, Monmouth 1748 Dec. 17 

Throckmorton, Mary, Freehold, and Eden Norris, Shrewsbury 1767 Sept. 3 

Throckmorton, Patience, and Amice Grandine, Monmouth 1732 Sept. 23 



406 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Throckmorton, Patience, Shrewsbury, Daniel Woolley, Shrewsbury .. 1 758 
Throckmorton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Stephen Haviland, Monmouth. 1748 
Throckmorton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Daniel Grandin, Monmouth. . 1749 
Throckmorton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Edward Clayton, Monmouth. . 1765 
Throckmorton, Susannah, Monmouth, and Robert Francis, Monmouth. 1765 
Throp, Margaret, New Windsor, and Anthony Swum, New Brunswick. 1764 

Thnler, Elizabeth, and Matthias Mount, Burlington 1771 

Thurston, Sarah, Woodbridge, and John Arden, New York 1758 

Tice, Anna, Middletown, and William Snyder, Freehold 1757 

Tice, Anne, Freehold, and David Watson, Freehold 1752 

• Tice, Anne, and Robert Chew, Gloucester 1778 

Tice, Caterine, and Peter Ranue, Bergen 1780 

Tice, Elizabeth, and Henry Thorne, Gloucester 1775 

Tice, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Cane, Gloucester 1761 

Tice, Hannah, and John Gibson, Gloucester 1782 

Tice, Mary, Freehold, and Tice Derrickson, Freehold. . . 1765 

Tice, Mary, and Peter Hunsinger, Gloucester 1780 

Tiler, Berthena, and William Cornwell, Gloucester 1782 

Tillton, Hannah, Upper Freehold, and Joseph Killey, Upper Freehold. 1747 

Tillton, Patience, and John Bunting, Jr., Burlington 1768 

Tilton, Deborah, Monmouth, and Joseph Lawrence, Jr., Monmouth. .1766 

Tilton, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Humphrey Wall, Monmouth 1763 

Tilton, Hannah, Upper Freehold, and Joseph Killey, Upper Freehold. 1747 

Tilton, Hannah, and Joshu Williams, Hanover 1771 

Tilton, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Lawrence, Monmouth. 1756 

Tilton, Mary, Monmouth, and Garret Benuet, Monmouth 1760 

Tilton, Mary, and Ephraim Brick, Monmouth 1765 

Tilton, Mary, Somerset, and John Lafler, Somerset 1771 

Tilton, Meriam, Shrewsbury, and Edmund Williams, Shrewsbury. ... 1762 

Tilton, Phebe, Middletown, and Humphrey Wady, Shrewsbury 1760 

Tilton, Sarah, Monmouth, and Jonathan Combs, Perth Amboy 1743 

Tilton, Sarah, Freehold, and Samuel Willet, Readington 1752 

Tilton, Susannah, Monmouth, and Peter Fernerl, l Monmouth. .. 1742-3 

Tilton, Valeria, Middletown, and Silvanus Grover, Middletown 1757 

Tilton, Valerian, Monmouth, and William Hay, Monmouth 1764 

Tilts, Anna, and John Smith, Amwell 1778 

Tindall, Elizabeth, and Nathaniel Temple, Hunterdon 1769 

Tindall, Joanna, Burlington, and John Holder, Burlington 1736 

Tindall, Ruth, Gloucester, and Isaiah Ross, Gloucester 1733 

Tingley, Rachel, and Thomas Smith, Barnards. 1778 

Tiuubrooks, Anna, and Richard Stout, Middletown 1751 

Tioli, Elizabeth, Philadelphia, and Thomas Yorke, Philadelphia 1771 

Titus, Abigail, Shrewsbury, and Melatiah White, Shrewsbury 1760 

Titus, Anna, Hunterdon, and Samuel Ege, Hunterdon 1774 



Aug. 8 
April 30 
Sept. 20 
Dec. 4 
April 8 
Sept. 22 
Aug. 5 
Sept, 4 
Sept. 12 
Nov. 20 
Dec. 23 
July 13 
Mar. 12 
Sept. 24 
April 8 
Mar. 14 
July 25 
May 13 
Aug. 20 
Mar. 4 
Feb. 22 
Aug. 25 
Aug. 20 
Sept. 25 
Nov. 13 
Sept. 10 
Sept. 9 
April 4 
Aug. 11 
Feb. 28 
June 9 
Nov. 28 
Mar. 4 
Dec. 1 
Mar. 27 
Oct. 26 
Aug. 21 
Feb. 9 
June 22 
July 8 
Nov. 20 
July 1 
Jan. 2 
May 28 



i Or Fernall. 



Marriage licenses. 407 

Titus, Eupbamia, and George Faitoute, Mouraouth 1779 Nov. 4 

Titus, Hannah, ami Daniel Stilwell, Hunterdon 1780 Mar. 23 

Titus, Laura, and Daniel Hoff, Hunterdon 1769 Sept. 19 

Titus, ( Hive, and Daniel McCarty, Bucks 1733 Oct. 25 

Titus, Rebecca, and Simeon Phillips, Hunterdon . . 17G9 Feb. 8 

Titus, Sarah, Hunterdon, and William Mershon, Hunterdon . 1764 Feb. 27 

Titus, Sarah, and James Van Hart, Bucks, Pa 1787 June 5 

Todd, Elizabeth, and David Willey, Sussex 1768 June 18 

Toers, Lena, Essex, and Johannis Vanhouten, Essex 1746 Dec. 1 

Toilet, Mary, Shrewsbury, and John White, Monmouth 1739 June 25 

Tomlin, Drussilla, Gloucester, and Benjamin Bramin, Gloucester 1768 Feb. 27 

Tomlins, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and Job Coles, Gloucester 1771 Feb. 7 

Tomlinson, Elizabeth, and Thomas Hackney, Burlington 1788 April 16 

Tomlinsou, Mary, and William Fithian, Cumberland 1785 Nov. 1 7 

Tomlinson, Naomy, and George Conrow, Burlington 1788 June 3 1 

Tomlinson, Phebe, and Isaac Barker, Cumberland. . . 1778 May 19 

Tomlinson, Rebecca, Burlington, and Will Baites, Gloucester 1741 Aug. 6 

Tompson, Margaret, and Simeon Iszard, Cape May 1774 Jan. 26 

Tompson, Mary, Monmouth, and James Napier, Momnouth. 1741 Dec. 10 

Tompson, Pebekah, Monmouth, and David Clayton, Jr., Monmouth. . 1745 Dec. 24 

Tompson, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Henry Price, Philadelphia 1735 July 9 

Tompson, Sarah, Monmouth, and James Moorhead, Middlesex 1747 April 16 

Tompson, Susannah, Gloucester, and John Handbey, Gloucester 1735 Jan. 13 

Tomson, Catharine, Middlesex, and Richard Toorner, Perth Amboy. .1751 Nov. 8 

Tomson, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Woodhull Turner, Essex 1748 Dec. 3 

Tomson, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and William Tice, Monmouth 1757 Dec. 21 

Toukan, Elizabeth, Burlington, and William Bustill, Burlington 1687 Jan. 3 

Tonkin, Elizabeth, Burlington, and George Bowlby, Burlington 1737 Aug. 17 

Tonkin, Keziah, and Benjamin Van Leer, Gloucester 1774 April 21 

Tonkin, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Carpenter, Burlington 1774 April 12 

Tonkin, Susannah, and Robert Taylor, Springfield. 1762 Mar. 10 

Tool, Mary, Burlington, and Robert Page, Burlington 1761 May 5 

Topham, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Dukemanere, Gloucester. ... 1749 May 15 

Topping, Elizabeth, Burlington, and John Whittier, Burlington 1741 Mar. 7 

Topping, Jane, Burlington, and Joseph Woolston, Burlington 1737 Dec. 22 

Topscot, Lucy, and John Longstreet, Monmouth 1769 Jan. 28 

Torbert, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and Anthony Teate, New Jersey. . . . 1739 Mar. 22 

Tornere, Ann, Perth Amboy, and Richard Walker, Woodbridge 1746 June 3 

Totlerson, Elizabeth, Hunterdon, and James Clark, Hunterdon 1775 Oct. 14 

Touleman, Mary, and Daniel Vorhis 1762 July 31 

Tours, Nancy, and John Garritson 1783 April 24 

Towers, Mary, Philadelphia, and George Watson 1741 Feb. 20 

Towler, Lydia, and William Robinson, Deptford 1774 June 17 

Townley, Abigail, Elizabethtown, Martin Pendergast, Elizabethtown. . 1759 Nov. 10 

Townsend, Abiah, and Charles Foster, Cape May 1764 Oct. 16 

Townsend, Abigail, Gloucester, and Philip Scull, Gloucester 1737 Sept. 14 



408 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Townsend, Abigail, Gloucester, and Thomas Champion, Gloucester. . . 1763 

Townseud, Druzellah, and John Townsend, Cape May 1770 

Townsend, Elisabeth, and William Mitchell, Cape May 1774 

Townsend, Hannah, Cape May, and Jacocks Swain, Cape May 1774 

Townsend, Judith, and Elijah Townsend, Cape May 1775 

Townsend, Memriah, Gloucester, and Amariah Lak, Gloucester 17(30 

Townsend, Martha, and Jeremiah Hand, Cape May 1763 

Townsend, Mary, and Joseph Ingersol, Gloucester 1766 

Townsend, Mary, Cape May, and Elnathau Shepherd, Cumberland. . .1766 

Townsend, Mary, and Joseph Ireland, Gloucester 1767 

Townsend, Mary, and David Adams, Salem 1775 

Townsend, Phebe, Cape May, and James Godfrey, Cape May 1765 

Townsend, Rachel, and Giles Worth, Cape May 1770 

Townsend, Rebekak, and Gideon Badcock. Gloucester 1768 

Townsend, Rhoda, and Jeremiah Johnson, Cumberland 1789 

Townsend, Sarah, Philadelphia, and Jacob Carver, Philadelphia 1753 

Townsend, Sarah, Cape May, and John Taylor, Cape May 1760 

Townsend, Sarah, Cape May, and Jeremiah Hand, Cape May 1790 

Toy, Ann, Burlington, and Samuel Goldy, Burlington 1770 

Toy, Elizabeth, and Joseph Reeves, Northampton 1782 

Toy, Mary, Burlington, and Samuel Bullus, Burlington 1775 

Toyrscott, Lydia, and James Gaston, Monmouth 1773 

Tozer, Easter, and Joseph Mason, Cape May 1763 

Tracy, Ann, Salem, and Thomas Fitz Gerrald, Salem 1767 

Trambles, Rachel, Elizabethtown, and James Frazee, Middlesex 1770 

Transes, Catherine, Monmouth, and Samuel Throckmorton, Amboy. . . 1755 
Traphagen, Cornelia, Hunterdon, and Christophel Voghte, Hunterdon. 1749 

Traphagen, Cornelia, and Andrew Bray, Hunterdon 1780 

Traphagen, Rachel, and John Van Waggoner, Bergen 1786 

Traverrie, Mary, Monmouth, and Henry Dumont, Middlesex 1743 

Treadway, Keziah, and John Groff, Gloucester 1773 

Tredway, Emily, and Samuel Wood. Woolwich 1779 

Tredway, Lucy, Gloucester, and William Kimsey, Gloucester 1737 

Tremble, Ann, Middlesex, and Duncan McGarty, Middlesex 1749 

Trenchard, Jane, Salem, and William Hall, Philadelphia 1773 

Trenchard, Mary, Salem, and John Test, Philadelphia 1749 

Trendwell, Margaret, Burlington, and Barzilla Ivins, Burlington 1767 

Trenton, Ann, Burlington, and Ambrose Ewan 1739 

Trimbly, Hannah, and John Staats, Bound Brook 1776 

Trimley, Catharine, Elizabethtown, and John Noe, Woodbridge 1748 

Trimmer, Mary, Morris, and Caleb Sweze, Morris 1768 

Trimmer, Mary, and Jacob Trimmer, Roxbury 1778 

Trinlare, Margaret, Cumberland, and Ansell Long, Cumberland 1750 

Troth, Mary, and Peter Lippincott 1783 

Trotler, Elizabeth, and Hammond Beaumont 1768 

Trout, Anna, and Martin Johnson, Hunterdon 1779 



May 


5 


Oct. 


10 


Nov. 


21 


Feb. 


10 


April 


20 


June 


4 


July 


12 


Feb.' 


15 


Mar. 


8 


April 


21 


Oct. 


3 


Feb. 


26 


Mar. 


14 


Aug. 


23 


June 


2 


July 


14 


Nov. 


8 


Jan. 


21 


Sept. 


29 


Aug. 


8 


July 


29 


April 


20 


Jau. 


7 


Mar. 


4 


Sept. 


3 


Nov. 


1 


April 


14 


Dec. 


3 


July 


21 


Dec. 


20 


July 


17 


Dec. 


7 


May 


16 


May 


27 


Nov. 


1 


April 


11 


Oct. 


8 


April 


30 


April 


19 


Dec. 


27 


Dec. 


2 


Mar. 


24 


Dec. 


10 


Pec. 


10 


Nov. 


17 


Sept. 


18 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



409 



Troup, Elizabeth, Morris, and Benjamin Johnson, Essex 1767 

Trout, Margarret, Monmouth, and -)<>lm Oosman, Monmouth. 1756 

Trout, Mini, and Samuel Shreve, Mansfield 1771 

Trout, Sarah, and Samuel Hill, Hunterdon . . . . „ 1787 

Truax, Alice, Freehold, and Matthias Van Kirk, Freehold 1753 

Truax, Catharine, Monmouth, and Joseph Winter, Monmouth 1742 

Truax, Catherine, Middletown, and Andrew Dorsett, Middletown. . . . 1757 

Truax, Willimpe, Monmouth, and David Barry, Monmouth 1774 

Truex, Jemima, Middletown, and Peter Van Blarcom, Hackensack. . . . 17G1 

Trnex, Mary, Freehold, and Thomas Craig, Freehold 1748 

Tucker, Hannah, and Joseph Brown, Burlington 1772 

Tucker, Margaret, Shrewsbury, and John Wardell, Burlington 1761 

Tucker, Sarah, and Samuel Hutchius, Burlington 1758 

Tuckniss, Ann, Burlington, and Robert CateD, Burlington 1760 

Tuerse, Petertie, Bergen, and Garret Steyamets, Essex 1744 

Tuff, Elizabeth, Salem, and Curtis Trenchard, Salem 1771 

Tuff, Jean, Salem, and Thomas Moore, Salem 1730 

Tuite, Elizabeth, Trenton, and Peter Kemble 1749 

Tuley, Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Bowlby, Morris 1749 

Tullingtou, Ellen, Pennsylvania, and William Eaton, Pennsylvania . . .1728 

Tullis, Anna, Cumberland, and John Walling, Cumberland 1761 

Tuly, Ann, Burlington, and Godfrey Hancock, Burlington 1754 

Tunis, Sarah, Middletown, and John Smock, Middletown 1780 

Tunison, Catharine, Middletown, and John Swart, Middletown 1764 

Tunison, Ellinnar, Monmouth, and Cornelius McCleese, Monmouth. . . 1756 

Tunison, Neltie, Raritau, and Matthew Ten Eick, Raritan 1740 

Tunison, Sarah, and Zebulon Comptou, Somerset 1764 

Tunisson. Wooltie, and Garret Roseboom , 1742 

Turner, Ann, Burlington, and Jonathan Scott, Burlington 1780 

Turner, Anne, Evesham, and Christopher Vanzant, Evesham 1770 

Turner, Dinah, and John Lame, Burlington 1780 

Turner, Joanna, and Andrew Dilkes, Gloucester 1777 

Turner, Margaret, Gloucester, and Samuel Chew, Gloucester 1765 

Turner, Margaret, and Thomas McGee, Burlington 1780 

Turner, Mehitabel, Newark, and Nathaniel Wheeler, Newark 1761 

Turner, Priscilla, Burlington, and Henry Scott, Burlington 1749 

Turner, Rebecca, and John Coyne, Gloucester 1775 

Tusley, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Samuel Crow, Middlesex 1751 

Tuthill, Jinue, and Lewis Dunham, Morris 1777 

Tuttle, Abial, and Jeremiah Cramer, Monmouth 1738 

Tattle, Hannah, and Charles Hoff, Jr 1778 

Tylee, Anne, and Hezekiah Toy, Gloucester 1773 

Tyler, Hannah, and John Potts, Cumberland , 1782 

Tyler, Jerushia, Northampton, and Benjamin Springer, Northampton. 1747 

Tyler, Mary, and William Payday, Cumberland 1785 

Tyler, Ruth, Alloways Creek, and John Ware, Alloways Creek ..... .1778 



Dec. 


12 


June 


9 


Jan. 


26 


June 


6 


May 


14 


Sept. 


9 


July 


21 


Sept. 


17 


Oct. 


31 


July 


5 


April 


15 


Oct. 


26 


Oct. 


10 


Dec. 


9 


Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


30 


April 


15 


Oct. 


20 


June 


12 


Aug. 


4 


Mar. 


25 


June 


25 


April 


25 


June 


11 


April 


24 


Feb. 


1-2 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Nov. 


7 


May 


1 


April 


1 


Aug. 


26 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


■27 


Aug. 


7 


April 


18 


Aug. 


21 


May 


3 


Sept. 


19 


Sept. 


5 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


19 


Mar. 


9 


June 


8 


Dec. 


30 



410 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tyler, Sarah, Alloways Creek, and Samuel Stewart, Alloways Creek. . . 1765 Oct. 30 

Tyley, Elizabeth, and Jacob Clement, Gloucester 1741 Oct. 17 

Tyley, Naomi, Salem, and Jonathan Lippincott, Salem 1770 Dec. 6 

Tyly, Mary, and Thomas Clement, Gloucester 1737 May 30 

Tyre, Barbara, Gloucester, and David Dayton, Gloucester 1761 Sept. 9 

Tyson, Catherine, Middlesex, and William Wood, Somerset 1752 Oct. 23 

Tyson, Jane, Monmouth, and Joseph Davis, Monmouth 1739 Sept. 28 

Tyson, Mary, Morris, and Andrew Soolen, Morris 1761 Dec. 29 

Tyson, Sarah, Middletown, and William Thompson, Middletown 1760 Sept. 17 

Tytas, Hannah, and John Jolly, Hunterdon 1786 Oct. 28 



MALES. 



u 



Underwood, John, Pennsylvania, Huldah Donnelson, Pennsylvania. . . 1728 July 29 

Updike, Joshua, Hunterdon, and Aun Green, Hunterdon 1738 July 15 

Updike, Peter, Somerset, and Mary Van Camp 1779 Feb. 9 

Updike, William, Middlesex, and Anne Hutchinson 1761 Nov. 10 

Ute, Jacob, Middletown, and Mary Potts, Middletown 1749 Sept. 18 

Uvail, William, Bergen, and Elsse McCaiD, Bergen 1753 June 11 

FEMALES. U 

Ullrich, Catherine, and John George Bloomer, Salem 1771 May 21 

Underdunk, Rachel, and James Van Nuis, Middlesex 1780 Mar. 7 

Updike, Sarah, and Jeremiah Wood, New Jersey 1778 May 29 

Updike, Elizabeth, and Jaaob Mattison, Jr., Hunterdon 1779 Dec. 10 

Uralman— see Joraleman and Vralmon. 

Ustick, Deborah, and Michael Lowey 1750 June 16 

Utt, Mary, Middletown, and William Smith, Middletown 1751 Sept. 14 

MALES. Van 

Van Aaersdale, Philip, and Hannah Macknisb, Middlesex 1750 April 9 

Van Alen, Hendrick, Bergen, and Tamise Halenbeck, Bergen 1761 Jan. 20 

Van Alen, John, Bergen, and Elizabeth Post 1782 Jan. 10 

Van Alen, William, Bergen, and Garritje Vanhorn, Bergen 1773 Mar. 27 

Van Allau, William, Pompton, and Hannah Van Norde, Hackensack. . 1765 April 7 

Vanallen, Garret, Bergen, and Leah Vreeland 1779 Aug. 2 

Van Antwerp, James, Jr., Orange. N. Y. , and Ann Bogert 1783 Sept. 29 

Van Antwerp, John, Orange, N. Y., and Elizabeth Bogart 1780 Mar. 20 

Van Arsdale, Rulif, Somerset, and Leuah Dorland 1779 Oct. 18 

Vanarsdaleu, Aereys,! Somerset, and Sarah Garretson, Somerset 1747 Mar. 22 

Vanarsdalen Jorge, Somerset, and Letty Rider 1781 Feb. 8 

Vauarsdalen Joseph, Somerset, and Elizabeth Van Cleaf 1771 Jan. 13 

V : Blarcom, Henry, Aquackanonck, and Elizabeth Zabriskie 1784 July 12 

Van blarcom, Peter, Hackensack, and Jemima Truex, Middletown 1761 Oct. 31 

i Aaron, in the body of the bond, but signed Aereys, intended for Aerie, the Dutch for 
Aaron. 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 41 I 

Van Blishem, 1 Samuel, Bergen, and Suckey Quackinbos 1780 Jan. 1 

Nan Boakerk, Jan, Bergen, and Mereke Vanderlinde, Bergen 1719 July 7 

Van Boskerk, John, Hackensack, and Dorothy Van Norden 1760 June 30 

Van Brackel, Gisbert, and Rachel Dorset, Middletown 17-13 April 30 

Van Brackel, Stephen, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Sears, Monmouth. 1747-8 Jan. 9 

Van Brackel, Stephen, Monmouth, and Zeruiah Crawford, Freehold 1748-9 Mar. 22 

Van Brackle, Gisbert, Monmouth, and Margaret Wilson, Middletown. 1741 Jan. 30 

Van Brackle, James, Monmouth, and Mary Johnson, Monmouth.... 1754 July 6 

Van Brackle, John, Freehold, and Alice Holmes, Freehold 1749 Feb. 28 

Van Brunt, Hendrick, Shrewsbury, and Nelle Skauk, Middletown 1756 Dec. 21 

Van Brunt, Isaac, Long Island, and Annatie Voorhies, Somerset 1761 Mar. 20 

Van Brunt, Nicholas, Shrewsbury, Catharine Covenhoven, Middletown. 1767 Jan. 15 

Vanbrunt, Rutgart, Kings Co., N. Y., and Elenor Vanhorn, Harsemus. 1767 Nov. 30 

Van buereu, Somerset, and Jannetie Hendricksou, Somerset 1750 Oct. 15 

V: Buskirk, Abraham, Bergen, and Sophia Van Dam, Bergen 1760 Nov. 22 

Van Buskirk, Jacobus, Hackensack, and Vrowtje Banta, Hankensack. . 1765 Oct. 24 

Van Buskirk Jacobus, Bergen, and Sally Vreelant 1787 Dec. 12 

Van Buskirk, John, Bergen, and Wyntye Ackerman , 1789 Sept. 17 

Vaubushkirk, James, Bergen; Vrowtje Van Buskirk, Bergen 1774 June 29 

Van Campen, Abram, Sussex, and Bachel Vanaker, Sussex 1761 Oct. 29 

Van Campen, John, Northampton, and Rachel Johnson, Hunterdon. . . 1763 Aug. 29 

Van Cleaf, William, Middletown, and Deborah Smith, Middletown 1762 April 7 

Van Cleave, Benjamin, Lower Freehold, Mary Thomson 1770 Dec. 11 

Vancleave, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Hart 1780 Nov. 20 

Vancleeve, Benjamin, Jr., Monmouth, Lenah Covenhoven, Monmouth. 1741 Aug. 1 

Van Cleeve, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Sarah Covenhoven, Monmouth . 1763 July 1 1 

Van Cleeve, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Anne Lefferson, Monmouth. . 1765 June 17 

Van Cleeve, John, Freehold, and Elizabeth Mount, Middletown 1767 Mar. 3 

Van Corlaer, Arent, Middlesex, and Mary Lake, Middlesex 1743 Sept. 23 

Van Court, Cornelius, Moreland, Pa., and Mary Robertson, Aniwell. . .1775 Dec. 23 

V: Court, Elias, Jr., Middlesex, and Mary Kelly, Middlesex 1748 June 30 

Vancourt, Moses, Trenton, and Elizabeth Stillwell 1777 Dec. 4 

Van Court, Moses, Pennsylvania, and Louisa De Normaudie 1780 Feb. 1 

Vanculin, John, Salem, and Sarah Smith, Salem 1771 Sept. 1 1 

V: Dalsem,'- Henry, New Barbadoes, and Nasha Zabriskie 1781 April 28 

Van Dalsem, John, Tappan, and Helena Goetchius 1784 Sept. 21 

Van Dalsem, William, New York, and Charity Harring 1786 July 26 

Vandeford, John, Cumberland, and Catharine Shull 1778 Jan. 29 

Vandene, Albeit, Bergen, and Rachel Ackerman, Bergen 1753 Nov. 12 

Vanderbeck, Abraham, and Margaret Godwin 1779 Aug. 15 

Vanderbeck, Benjamin, Windsor, and Jannathy Dye 1771 Dec. 11 

Vanderbeek, Isaac, Hackensack, and Rachel Byerson, Saddle River. . . 1767 Nov. 23 

Vanderbeek, Jaques, Somerset, and Mary Ten Eyck, Somerset 1749 Oct. 17 



1 Qy: Van Blirkem. 

- "Henry Van Delsem " in the body of the bond. Signed "Henry V. Dalsem." 



412 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Yanderbeek, Rein, Windsor, and Mary Height 1773 

Vanderbek, Cornelius, Somerset, and Anne Bond, Somerset 1752 

Vanderbelt, Aron, Monmouth, and Charity Van Mater, Middletown. . . 1 762 
Yanderbelt, Hendrick, Middletown, Catherine Snyder, Middletown. .. 17G5 

Vanderbelt, Jeromus, Somerset, and Nelly Ten Eyck 1781 

Vanderbelt, John, Middletown, and Elizabeth Dorsett, Middletown. . .1761 

Vanderberck, Gershorn, and Jennet Herriot 1750 

V: D: B: (Vanderbilt?) Cornelius, Middlet'n, Margaret Johnson, Md'tn.1756 
Vanderbilt, Jacob, Staten Island, and Mary Spragg, Stat en Island ... 1746 
Vanderbilt, John, Staten Island, and Elizabeth Hendrickson, Monin'h. 1754 

V: D: Bilt, Pike, Middlesex, and Yannetie Alten, Somerset 174.9 

V: D: Bilt, William, Hunterdon, and Marya Yanduyn, Hunterdon. . . . 175G 

Vaudergrift, Garret, Philadelphia, and Agnes Harris, Bristol, Pa 1767 

Vandergrift, Jacob, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Matlack, Burlington.. .1746 

Vaudergrift, Leonard, Bucks, Pa., and Charity Haines, Burlington 1750 

Vanderhonef, John, Bergen, and Frances Degroat 1750 

V : D : Hoef, Michael, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Allen, Monmouth . . . 1760 

V: D: Hoef, Peter, Middletown, and Mary Dorsett, Middletown 1761 

Vanderhoef, Cornelius, Freehold, and Alice Vaukirk, Freehold 1751 

Vanderhoof, Garret, Saddle River, Susannah Drummond, Sad'le R'v'r.1779 

Vanderhule, Henry, Middletown, and Mary Walling, Middletown 1751 

Van De Liude, Benjamin, Bergen, and Elizabeth Schuyler, Bergen. . .174.8 
Van Der Linder, Roelif, Bergen, Mariche Reyper, Bergen. . . ........ 1750 

V: D: Speigel, John, New York, and Margret Van Veghte, Raritan. . . 1739 
Vanderveer, Cornelius, Freehold, and Mary Covenhoven, Freehold. . .1764 
Vanderveer, David, Freehold, and Catherine Covenhoven, Freehold. .1765 

Vanderveer, John, Freehold, and Mary Taylor, Freehold ... 1760 

Vanderveer, John, Middletown, and Mary Strieker, Somerset ........ 1762 

Vanderveer, Tunis, Freehold, and Jane Hance, Freehold 1759 

Vanderype, Mattis, Brunswick, and Jane White 1743 

Vandeventer, Christopher, Monmouth, and Mary Lane, Monmouth . . . 1755 
Vandervar, Domenicus, Monmouth, and Jane Williamson, Monmouth. 1757 
Vandeventer, Jacob, Somerset, and Helite Vanbrunt, Staten Island. . .1747 
Vandeventer. Peter, Monmouth, and Hannah New Port, Monmouth. . 1746 

Vandeventer, Peter, Monmouth, and Deborah Smith 1747 

Vandewanter, Jacob, Piscataway, and Altie Vauhise 1783 

Vaudien, Harman, Bergen, and Aaltje Zabriskie . 1787 

Vandien, l Martin, Morris, and Yanachey Vreelandt, Morris 1760 

Van Dien, Thomas, Bergen, and Polly Bogert, Bergen 1764 

Vandike, Charles, Burlington, and Elizabeth Phipps, Burlington 1752 

V : Dike, Frederick, Somerset, and Lydia Cole 1778 

Vandike, Jacob, Bucks, Pa., and Hendrica Benham 1768 

Van Dike, Mathias, Middlesex, and Elleauor Lane, Middlesex 1746 



Dec. 


30 


Oct. 


19 


June 


19 


July 


4 


Aug. 


16 


Dec. 


15 


Feb. 


4 


Dec. 


16 


Oct. 


27 


May 


20 


July 


26 


Aug. 


7 


Aug. 


14 


May 


10 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


26 


Dec. 


18 


Mar. 


11 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


23 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


23 


Dec. 


31 


Sept. 


17 


Sept. 


28 


May 


17 


Sept. 


18 


Mar. 


26 


Oct, 


21 


June 


3 


Oct. 


28 


Aug. 


7 


April 


19 


Jan. 


13 


April 


12 


Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


31 


Nov. 


24 


June 


27 


Dec. 


15 


Nov. 


10 


May 


14 



i The bond is signed thus; in the body of the instrument the name is entered 
Dine." 



Van 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 413 

Vandike, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Osburn, Burlington 1770 

Vandine, Charles, Middlesex, and Sophia Darndt, Middlesex 1751 

Vandine, Bice, Dennis, and Anne Seining 17G5 

Vandin, Corneles, Bergen, and Sarah Van Dien, Bergen 177-1 

Vandoren, Benjamin, Somerset, and Sophia Vandike 1780 

Vandoren, Jacob, Somerset, and Jenney Yoorhes 1769 

Vaudorn, Abram, Middlebush, and Anne Van Dicke, Middlebush . . 17G8 

Vandorn, Aaron, Freehold, and Gesha Shenck, Freehold 17G5 

Vandorn, Jacob, Freehold, and Rachal Longstreet, Shrewsbury 17G3 

Vandorn, John, Freehold, and Agnes Schauk, Freehold 1756 

Vanduyn, Abraham, Somerset, and Arianche Sutphin 1778 

Vanduyn, Denys, Somerset, and Lena Voorhies, Somerset 1754 

Van Duyn, Jacobus, Somerset, and Analtie Wykoff, Somerset . . . 1740 

Vanduyn, Boelef, Somerset, and Susannah Pettinger, Somerset 1752 

Vandycke, Thomas, Freehold, and Elliner Taylor, Freehold 1754 

Vandyk, Isaac, Shrewsbury, aud Meribe Slocum, Shrewsbury 1760 

Vandyk, Martin, Shrewsbury, and Mary Hofmire, Middletown 1759 

Vandyke, Arthur, Freehold, and Catherine Skauk, Freehold 1755 

Van Dyke, Jemes, Beading, and Jane Stoll, Reading : 1771 

Vandyke, Joseph, Freehold, and Deborah Lawrance, Burlington 1765 

Vaneman, Garret, Gloucester, and Ruth Brodice, Gloucester 1748 

Vaneman, Garret, Salem, and Barbary Hatton, Saiem 1773 

Van Einbert, William, Essex, and Elizabeth Jeralmon, Essex 1754 

Van Einburg, James, New Barbadoes, and Elysabet Couper 1769 

Van Einburg, John, Bergen, and Leah Terhune 17 — 

Van Embnrgh, John, Middlesex, and Margaret Moore 1779 

Vauess, Hendrick, Morris, and Yauachey Poulisse, Essex 1759 

Vaness, Simon, Pompton Plains, and Caty Van Houten 1779 

Vanfleet, William, aud Mary Alen 1748 

Vangelder, Abraham, Cape May, and Martha Hand, Cape May. .... 1757 

Vangelder, John, Cape May, and Hannah Scull 1757 

Vangeson, George, and Elisabet Smith 1772 

Vangiese, Reynier, Bergen, aud Hester Covenhoven, Bergen 1743 

Van Giese, Reynier — see Giese, Reynier V. 

Vangieson, Hendrick, Hackensack, and Agnes Huysman, Bergen 1768 

Vangieson, Isaac, Hackensack, and Maritie Hopper, Hackensack 1744 

Van Gieson, Isaac, Bergen, and Preyntje Cadmus, Bergen. .... .... 1766 

Vangieson, Isaack, Newark, aud Lea Spier 1746 

Y: Gieson, Johannes, Bergen, and Mathe Van Houten, Bergen 1762 

Vangilden, Jeremiah, Cape May, and Sarah Bisbop ... 1780 

Van Harlingen, Ernestus, Middlesex, aud Mary Oathout, Middlesex .1760 
Yanharon, Aaron Dirchon, Monmouth, Margaret Jermine, Monmouth. 1756 

Vau Hart, Jacob, and Elizabeth Wright 1782 

Van Hart, James, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Titus 1787 

Van Hovem, Christian, Hackensack, Altje Westervelt, Hackensack. 1764 
Vanhook, Henry, Cumberland, aud Mary Furnis 1784 



June 


18 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


26 


Au- 


6 


Dec. 


6 


April 


5 


May 


13 


May 


8 


Oct. 


21 


June 


30 


May 


11 


May 


1 


Nov. 


7 


April 


4 


Sept. 


3 


Aug. 


15 


Mar. 


14 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


2 


June 


18 


Dec. 


5 


Sept. 


24 


Feb. 


28 


April 


8 


April 


17 


Nov. 


19 


Nov. 


16 


Aug. 


24 


Aug. 


22 


July 


21 


Nov. 


28 


Mar. 


20 


May 


19 


Aug. 


2 


Dec. 


15 


Nov. 


1 


July 


24 


Aug. 


1 


July 


8 


May 


24 


Nov. 


16 


June 


5 


Dec. 


4 


May 


3 



414 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vauhorn, Abraham, Sussex, and Hannah Hoff, Sussex 1763 

Yanhorn, Abraham, Hunterdon, and Eve Pickle, Hunterdon 1770 

Vanhorn, Barnard, Northampton, and Lavina Bogart, Northampton. .1767 
Van Horn, Christian, Hackensack, and Mary Anderson, Hackensack. .1768 

Van Horn, Cornelius, Bergen, and Altie Ackerman 1790 

Van Horn, Daniel, Bergen, and Hannah Earl 1782 

Yanhorn, Gabriel, Middletown, and Susannah Ashton, Middletown. . . 1767 

Vanhorn, Henry, Bucks, Pa., and Elisabeth Yansant 1758 

Van Houten, Isaac, Bergen, and Mary Poesti 1770 

Van Horn, Peter, Middletown, Pa., and Sarah Mede, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Van Horn, William, Chester, and Sarah Kudderow, Chester 1757 

Vanhorn, William, Burlington, and Margaret Ellis 1780 

Vanhorne, Cornelius, Monmouth, and Hannah Seabrook, Monmouth. 1730 

Van Home, Cornelius, Hunterdon, and Gertie Wycoff, Somerset 1744 

Vanhorne, David, Bucks, Pa., and Gertrude Vansciver 1761 

Vanhorne, John, Bergen, and Ann Demott 1751 

Vanhorne, John, Bergen, and Jane Garribrant 1785 

Vanhorne, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Jane Teneik, Somerset 1749 

Van Houte, Johannes, Bergen, and Aeltje Sicgelse, Bergen 1761 

Van Houten, Cornelius, Essex, and Antje Henuion, Bergen 1773 

Van Houten, Garrabrant, Bergen, and Jane Garrison. . . 1791 

Van Houten, Helmich, Bergen, and Jannetie Van Riper, Bergen. . . . 1750 

Van Houten, Hellemig, Bergen, and Aegye Vrelaut, Bergen 1753 

Van Houten, Johannis, New Jersey, Frances Vreland, Acquackanock 174 L 

Vanhouten, Johannis, Essex, and Lena Toers, Essex 1746 

Vanhouten, Richard, and Rachel Van Idestine 1779 

Van Houten, Roelef, Bergen, and Antje Henuion, Bergen 1772 

Van Idestine, George, Essex, and Jane De Graw 1 794 

Van Kirk, Arthur, Monmouth, and Hannah Stout, Monmouth 1743 

Van Kirk, Arthur, Perth Amboy, and Mary Jamison, Perth Amboy ...1757 

Van Kirk, Benjamin, Hunterdon, and Sarah Armitage 1769 

Van Kirk, Henry, Hopewell, and Sarah Vankirk, Hopewell 1770 

Van Kirk, James, Freehold, and Jane House, Freehold 1767 

Van Kirk, John, Bucks, and Judith Williams 1749 

Van Kirk, John, Middlesex, and Anne Gordon, Middlesex 1750 

Vankirk, John, Freehold, and Catharine Taylor, Upper Freehold 1761 

Vankirk, Johu, Hopewell, and Ursula Parks, Hopewell 1770 

Vankirk, Joseph, Amwell, and Hannah Polhemus, Hopewell 1767 

Vankirk, Joseph, Readingtown, and Catharine Dykens, Tewksbury. . .1773 

Vankirk, Mathias, Freehold, and Alice Truax, Freehold 1753 

Van Kirk, Samuel, New Jersey, and Mary Lane 1779 

Van Kirk, Thomas, Freehold, and Catharine Cox, Upper Freehold. . .1761 

Van Kirk, William, Freehold, Elizabeth Craige, Freehold 1757 

Vankirke, Jacob, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Jenkins, Bucks, Pa 1735 



Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


21 


Dec. 


29 


Mar. 


5 


July 


24 


Mar. 


18 


Nov. 


17 


Aug. 


11 


May 


28 


Sept. 


2 


May 


21 


Aug. 


17 


Mar. 


15 


May 


12 


May 


20 


May 


2 


Mar. 


24 


June 


17 


Sept. 


21 


May 


11 


Jan. 


18 


Oct. 


19 


May 


4 


May 


19 


Dec. 


1 


April 


9 


Dec. 


18 


July 


4 


Aug. 


22 


May 


2 


Nov. 


23 


Feb. 


24 


Sept. 


19 


April 


3 


Sept. 


27 


May 


13 


July 


4 


Dec. 


12 


Mar. 


15 


May 


14 


Aug. 


26 


Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


23 


May 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. . 415 

Van Law, Preston, Bordentowu, and Jiulith Ann Marot, Bordentown. . 1746 

Van Leer, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Keziah Tonkin 1774 

Vanlew, Richard, Somerset, and Autey Sutphin 1779 

Vaulewen, Frederick, Jr., Somerset, and Autie Benuet, Middlesex. . . .1750 

Vaulier, William, Woolwich, and Mary Dericson 1787 

Vanliew, Denise, Somerset, and Dinah Duryee 1782 

Van Liew, Johu, Somerset, and Magdalen Wicoff, ... 1780 

Vanliew, Peter, Somerset, ami Sytie Wicoff 1783 

Vanmater, Chrj'ne, Monmouth, and Maria Sutphen, Freehold 1752 

Van Mater, Chrineyonce, Middletown, Nelley Van Mater, Middletown.1767 
Van Mater, Cornelius, Shrewsbury, and Sary Van Mater, Middletown. 1767 

Van Mater, Cyrenius, Middletown, and Mary Herd, Middlesex 1759 

Van Mater, Cyrenius, Monmouth, and Anne Vandorn .1761 

Van Mater, Cyrenius, Middletown, Coboacha Covenhoven, Freehold. .1766 
Vanmater, Daniel, Monmouth, and Mary Covenhoven, Middletown. . .1754 
Vanmater, Jacob, Middletown, and Nelly Heudrickson, Middletown. .1756 
Van Mater, Richard, Monmouth, and Moike Osborn, Monmouth. ... 1749 

Van Meter, Ephraim, Salem, and Sarah Cruin, Salem 1760 

Vanmeter, Henry, Salem, and Sarah Ellwell, Salem 1727 

Vaumeter, Jacob, Salem, and Elizabeth Coperthwaite, Burlington 1770 

Vanmeter, Joseph, Salem, and Hannah Beryman. 1760 

Van Middleswart, Abram, Somerset, and Mary Griggs 1744 

Van Middlesworth, Tunis, and Jannike Lagrange, Somerset 1748 

Van Middlesworth, Tunis, Somerset, and Magdaliue Brokaw 1781 

Van Middleswarth, John, Somerset, and Hannah Lane 1781 

Vannaulem, 1 James, and Charity Wickoff 1769 

Vauueman Garrett, Jr., Gloucester, and Ann Moreton, Greenwich . . . 1733 

Vannemau, Isaac, Woolwich, and Bajah Denny 1781 

Vauueman, Joseph, Salem, and Margaret Maxtield, Elsenborough 1763 

Vannemau, Joseph, Salem, and Phcebe Hodge, Salem 1769 

Vauueman, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Porch 1783 

Vaunest, John, Monmouth, and Mary Emans, Monmouth 1739 

Vaunest, William, Moumouth, and Phebe Hulse, Monmouth 1740 

Van Neste, Jan, Somerset, and Sarah Vroom, Somerset 174 6 

Van Neste, Henry, Somerset, and Januitje Van Ostraud, Somerset. . . 1741 

Van Neste, Jacob, Somerset, and Trinchey Tenbrook, Somerset 1746 

Van Neste, Jeronimus, Somerset, and Cataliue Welch, Somerset. .... 1743 
Vaunetta Gysbert, Somerset, and Folkertie Vanbuskirk, Readingtown. 1751 

Van Noorstrand, John, Somerset, aud Catharine Defrees 1768 

Van Nordeu, Tobias, New Brunswick, Jennet Campbell, New Br'nsw'k. 1 740 

Van Noarstraud, Jacob, Somerset, and Jane Vanste, Somerset 1740 

Van Norstrand, Jacob, Jr., Bridgewater, and Phebe McDonald 1783 

Van Norstrand, Jacobus, New Jersey, and Rachel Herdon, Bergen 1747 

Vannort, John, Shrewsbury, aud Kerchey Romine, Shrewsbury 1760 

1 •' James Vanallen " in body of bond, but signed " James Vannaulem." 



April 


15 


April 


21 


April 


27 


Oct. 


11 


.Mar. 


8 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


14 


June 


12 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


2 


Dec. 


19 


May 


26 


Mar. 


31 


Dec. 


27 


June 


19 


Nov. 


14 


April 


21 


Sept. 


4 


Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


26 


Nov. 


14 


June 


18 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


21 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


15 


Mar. 


3 


Oct. 


4 


April 


1 


Jan. 


21 


Sept. 


22 


Nov. 


10 


April 


18 


April 


11 


June 


13 


April 


3 


July 


16 


Sept. 


22 


Dec. 


23 


May 


5 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


22 



416 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Norte, Thomas, and Dorothy Havens. 1771 Dec. 10 

Vannorthwyke, John, Roxbury, and Frances Willet 1778 July 6 

Van Nortwick, Hendrick, Somerset, and Nancy Dunn 1781 Dec. 17 

Van Nortwick, John, Somerset, and Maria Cornell, Somerset 1747 Sept. 11 

Van Nortwick, John, Somerset, and Ann Hopper 1783 Aug. 2 

Van Nortwick, Martin, New Jersey, and Nelly Vaupelt, Somerset 1755 July 24 

Van Nortwick, Simon, Somerset, and Maria Cornell, Somerset 1751 April 12 

Vannoy, Francis, Hunterdon, and Mary Anderson 1781 Jan. 12 

Vannoy, John, Hunterdon, and Abigail Smith 1780 Feb. 19 

Van Nuis, James, Middlesex, and Rachel Underduuk 1780 Mar. 7 

Van Nuis, John, Middlesex, and Christian Van D. Ripe 1780 Nov. 27 

Van Nuys, Jacobus, Somerset, and Catharine Ditmus 1781 Jan. 16 

Van Nuyse, Cornelius, Somerset, and Mary Van Nuyse 1781 April 10 

Vanorde, Adam, Hackensack, and Margret Doele 1762 Mar. 1 

Vanover, Cornelius, Hardwick, and Abigail Mattox 1778 Jan. 20 

Vanpelt, Alexander, Somerset, and Jane Ganueau, Hunterdon 1751 May 6 

Vanpelt, Alexander, Middletowu, and Catherine Warne, Freehold ...1757 May 28 

Vanpelt, Anthony, New York, and Jennet Simonson, New York 1740 April 25 

Vanpelt, Anthony, Staten Island, and Susannah Slaght, Staten Island. 1758 Nov. 13 

Vanpelt, Benjamin, Staten Island, and Mary Collins, Perth Amboy . . . 1763 Aug. 24 

Vanpelt, Christopher, Monmouth, and Artilly Bennit 1751 Dec. 2 

Vanpelt, Honnes, Middletowu, and Anne Heyer, Middletowu ... ...1755 Jan. 13 

Vanpelt, John, Monmouth, and Mary Vaubrockell. 1762 Jan. 12 

Vanpelt, Rulef, Bridgewater, and Caty Ten Eyck 1782 Jan. 11 

Vanpelt, Peter, Middlesex, and Mary Van Voorhies, Middlesex 1751 April 20 

Vanpelt, Peter, Staten Island, and Phebe Ogden, Woodbridge 1756 Jan. 2 

Vanpelt, Peter, Monmouth, and Elleuor Vanderbelt, Monmouth 1760 April 21 

Vanpelt, Walter, Middletowu, aud Mary Soper, Middletowu 1746 Aug. 4 

Van Rensselaer, James, and Catharine Van Cortlandt 1782 Oct. 8 

Vanreype, Abrain, Essex, and Elizabeth Bradbury, Essex 1747 Nov. 28 

Van Ileype, Jacob, Essex, and Sophia Jacobusse, Essex 1761 Feb. 23 

Van Ripen, Jery, Bergen, and Antje Freeland 1787 Jan. 20 

Van Ripen, Thomas, Acquackanonck, Lena Van Wogenan, Acq'k'nck.1740 Aug. 6 

Van Riper, Adrian, Essex, and Sarah Killiham 1784 July 29 

Van Riper, Garrit, Saddle River, and Jane Cadmus 1790 Sept. 25 

Van Riper, Harp, Essex, and Margret Berry 1762 April 22 

Van Rypen, Cornelius, Bergen, and Elizabeth Vreelaud 1787 Jan. 20 

Vaurypen, Thomas, Essex, and Marget Cowman, Essex 1750 April 17 

Van Saan, Jacob, Hackensack, and Hester Goetsckius, Hackensack. ..1760 Dec. 9 

Van Saen, I lornelius, Bergen, and Elisabet Dumarest 1765 Jan. 9 

Vansant, John, Pennsylvania, and Robiua Cox, Pennsylvania 1728 Aug. 19 

Vansant, Joshua, Bucks, Pa., and Catherine Johnston, Bucks, Pa ...1728 Feb. 20 

Vansant, Peter, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Woollard 1778 April 8 

Vanschaick, David, Freehold, and Hannah Holmes, Shrewsbury 1757 May 23 

Vim Schaiack, John, Pepack, and Ann Clindenen, Pepack 1747 Aug. 11 

Van Schaick, John, Middlesex, and Margaret Rosebury, Middlesex 1764 Feb. 28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 417 

Vansehayne, William, Freehold, and Patience Schanck, Freehold 1754 

Vanschuyver, Joseph, Burlington, and Martha Belford 1776 

Vanschuyver, Joseph, Cumberland, and Murcy Goggin 1779 

Vansciver, Jacob, Burlington, and Elizabeth Cole, Burlington 175-1 

Vansciver, Jeremiah, Willingborough, and Mary Borden, Burlington .. 1781 

Vanserveer, Abraham, Burlington, and Hannah Lippincott 1782 

Van Sickel, Rinear, Monmouth, anil Mayike Longstreet, Monmouth. .1746 

Van Sickel, Stephen, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Streamback 1782 

Van Sickle, Abraham, Hunterdon, and AnneKols, Hunterdon 1744 

Van Sickle, < r&rret, Reading, and Anne Cannun, Reading 1772 

Vansickle, Gisbert, Middlesex, and Mary Ralf 1780 

Vanskiack, Peter, Freehold, and Mary Thomas 1761 

Vansiklen, Cornelius, Kings Co., N. Y., Fannetye Vanderveer, Mid'sex.1751 

Vanskyver, Walter, Burlington, and Elizabeth Thorn 1769 

Vantilburg, Henry, Kingston, and Jane Holman 1778 

Vantilburg, William, Somerset, and Keziah Laurason 1745 

Vantine, Aron, Perth Araboy, and Anne Davison, Middlesex . . 1716 

Vantine, Ephraim, Middlesex. Anne Hanuatie Van < >strand, Middlesex. 1750 

Vantine, Ephraim, Middlesex, and Anne Pumme 1782 

Vantine, Isaac, New Brunswick, and Anne Schureman 1779 

Vantuyl, Abram, Tewkesbury, and Isabel Berry 1781 

Van Tuyle, Isaac, Sussex, and Catherine Westfall, Sussex 1761 

Vanuxem, James, Philadelphia, and Rebecca Clark 1779 

Van Vliedt. ( i arret, Reading, and Lydia March 1777 

Van Vliet, Gerrit, Readingtown, and Catilinche Hagermon 1772 

Van Voghte, John, Essex, and Anne Post, Essex 1750 

Van Voorhees, Luke, Somerset, and Nedtie Strycker, Somerset 1717 

Van Voorhesse, John, Paramus, and Antie Boogart, Paramus 1765 

Van Voorhies, Minne, New Brunswick, Mary Ouke, New Brunswick. .1743 
Van Voorhies, Roelof, Middlesex, Eleanor Van Nuis, New Brunswick. 1748 
Van Vorhis, Albert, New Barbadoes, and Maritje Duremus, Bergen. . 1769 

Van Voorhis, Peter, Bergen, and Elizabeth Demarest 1785 

Vanwagen, John, Bergen, and Anne Van Dervaort 1786 

Van Wagenen, Gerrit, Somerset, and Catherine Ten Eyck, Somerset. .1715 
Van Wagenen, Johanes, Staten Island, and Morritje Demott, Bergen.. 1757 

Vanwageninge, Gerrit, Essex, and Sarah Van Wincle, Bergen 1753 

Van Waggoner, John, Bergen, and Rachel Traphagen 1786 

Van Wiekle, Evart, Somerset, and Cornelia Lupard us, Middlesex. ...1752 

Van Wikele, Nicasius, Somerset, and Trintie Boice, Middlesex 1749 

Van Winckle, Daniel, Bergen, and Altie Van Riper, Bergen 1760 

Van Winckel, Jacob, and Froutie Garretse, Bergen . . 1719 

Van Winkel, Jerey, Bergen, and Nancy Sip 1783 

Van Winkel, Johannes, Essex, and Jannetie Van Ripen 1745 

Van Winckel, Simeon, Saddle River, Catharine Romine, Saddle River. 1769 
Van Winckel, Tadus, Bergen, and Theodosia Van Boskerk, Bergen. . . 1760 
Van Wincle, Abraham, Stow Creek, and Phebe Garrison, Stow Creek 1774 
26 



Dec. 


26 


Oct. 


29 


June 


28 


May 


17 


Mar. 


26 


Nov. 


20 


April 


29 


April 


24 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


1 


Jan. 


19 


Oct. 


21 


Sept. 


11 


Oct. 


2 


July 


14 


Dec. 


20 


May 


17 


Feb. 


22 


Nov. 


26 


Aug. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


June 


13 


Mar. 


26 


May 


28 


May 


11 


Aug. 


7 


Oct. 


3- 


Oct. 


30 


Jan. 


11 


May 


27 


April 


25 


April 


28 


Sept. 


18 


April 


20 


Oct. 


5 


June 


8 


July 


21 


Dec. 


9 


May 


27 


Jan. 


28 


Dec. 


6 


Aug. 


31 


May 


30 


April 


25 


June 


16 


Mar. 


9 



41 8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vanwincle, Dial, Essex, and Anne Gerritson 1751 

Van Winkle, Francis, Essex, and Susannah Forester 1777 

Van Winkle, Francis, Essex, and Elizabeth Dowe 1785 

Van Winkle, Jacob, Bergen, and Annatje Bartholf, Bergen 176!) 

Vanzant, Christopher, Evesham, and Anne Turner, Evesham 1770 

Vauzile, Egbird, Paramus, and Sarah Hendricksou, Bergen 1754 

females. Van 

Vanaker, Rachel, Sussex, and Abram Van Cam pen, Sussex 1761 

Van Alen, Catherine, and Hassel Ryerson, Bergen 1787 

Vanalla, Anna, Perth Amboy, and Timothy Rose, Perth Amboy 1760 

Van Allen, Affie, Perth Amboy, and Annanias Rose, Perth Amboy. . . 1757 
Van Arsdale, Antie, Somerset, and Cornelius Sebring, New Jersey . . . 1748 

Van Belt, Elizabeth, and Walter Hires, Monmouth 1752 

Vanblercum, Ellenor, Bergen, and Jacob Ferdon, Bergen 1748 

Van Boskerk, Theodosia, Bergen, and Tadns Van Winkle, Bergen .... 1760 
Van Brackel, Anna, Middletowu, and Samuel Oyborn, Middletown. . . . 1765 

Vanbrackel, Anne, and Josiah West, Middletown 1774 

Vaubrackel, Naomi, Monmouth, and Samuel Crawford, Monmouth. . . . 1740 
Vanbrockel, Ann, Staten Island, and Benjamin Willson, Jr., Monm'th.1751 

Vanbrockell, Mary, and John Vanpelt, Monmouth ... 1762 

Van Brockles, Mary, Monnioutk, and Robert Sevinden, Monmouth. . . 1741 

Van Brunt, Crese, and Cornelius Hagerman, Monmouth 1766 

Vanbrunt, Helite, Staten Island, and Jacob Vandeventer, Somerset. . . 1747 

Van Bushkirk, Altje, Bergen, and Amy Banta, Bergen 1773 

Van Bushkirk, Elshe, and John Ackerman, Bergen 1783 

Van Bushkirk, Anne, Middlesex, and James Harris, Middlesex 1748 

Vanbushkirk, Folkertie, Readingtown, Gysbert Vannetta, Somerset. . .1751 

Vanbushkerk, Mary, Bergen, and David Demarest, Bergen 1748 

Van Bushkirk, Vrowtje, Bergen, and James Vanbushkirk, Bergen. . . . 1774 

Van Bussen, Caty, Bergen, and Gerrat Garrisse, Essex 1774 

Van Camp, Leah, Hunterdon, and Peter Haughawont, Hunterdon .... 1763 

Van Camp, Mary, and Peter Updike, Somerset 1779 

Van Canipen, Mary, and George Bush. Easton, Pa 1786 

Vancarrick, Christantia, and James Fitchett 1735 

Vance, Elizabeth, and Robert Montgomery, Jr., Monmouth 1757 

Van Cleaf, Elizabeth, aud Joseph Vanarsdalen, Somerset 1771 

Van Cleaf, Margaret, and James Scott, Monmouth 1774 

Vancleave, Catherine, and Stephen Kef, Hunterdon 1779 

Vancleave, Neeltje, New Brunswick, and Lewis Guest, New Brunsw'k. 1743 

Van Cleef, Mary, and Peter Hoagland, Middlesex 1780 

Van Cleve, Janey, Monmouth, and Daniel Hays, Monmouth 1763 

Van < 'lift, Jane. Maidenhead, and Waters Smith, Maidenhead 1770 

Van Courtlaudt, Catherine, and James Van Rensselaer 1782 

Van Dalsen, Sally, aud Richard Blauvelt, Bergen 1781 

Van Dam, Sophia, Bergen, and Abraham V; Buskirk, Bergen 1760 



June 


15 


Oct. 


2 


Feb. 


3 


June 


2 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


30 


Oct. 


29 


Nov. 


20 


Oct. 


23 


Mar. 


•Jl 


April 


25 


Feb. 


24 


April 


22 


June 


16 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


25 


Dec. 


3 


Dec. 


11 


Jan. 


12 


Nov. 


12 


May 


3 


Aug. 


7 


July 


17 


Aug. 


11 


June 


21 


April 


3 


Aug. 


1 


June 


29 


Mar. 


26 


Dec. 


31 


Feb. 


9 


April 


8 


Nov. 


5 


June 


14 


Jan. 


13 


May 


16 


June 


12 


June 


27 


Dec. 


16 


Jan. 


13 


Jau. 


15 


Oct. 


8 


April 


7 


Nov. 


22 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 419 

Vander Beck, Fammetje, Bergen, and Johannis Blauvelt, Bergen... 1773 July 20 

Vander Beck, Phebe, Bergen, ami John lien v, Bergen 1753 Mar. 13 

Van Der Beck, Anu, aud Janus Walker, New York 1786 Mar. 11 

Vanderbeek, Deborah, Somerset, and Peter Ten Eick, Somerset .1751 June 21 

Vanderbeek, Dorothy, Somerset, and Laurence Demdtt, Somerset 1749 April 25 

Vanderbeke, Ann, and Joel Taylor, Nottingham 1780 Oct. 11 

Vanderbelt. Elie, and Peter Jobnson s Monmouth 1772 Nov. 21 

Vauderbelt, Ellenor, Monmouth, aud Peter Vanpelt, Monmouth 1760 April 21 

Vanderbelt, Idy, Middletown, aud John Wall, Middletown 1764 Mar. 17 

Vanderbelt, Mary, Monmouth, aud Samuel Dennis, Monmouth 17G5 Mar. 13 

Vapdergrift, Joyce, Bensalem, aud John Severns, Bensalem 1747 July 28 

Vandergrift, Mary, aud Joseph Browning, Burlington 1782 Oct. 9 

Vandergrift, Sarah, aud George Cunningham, Burlington 1788 Feb. 20 

Vanderhoof, Elizabeth, and Heury Stevens, Bergen 1789 Oct. 10 

Vauderhoven, Elizabeth, Wood bridge, aud Patrick Riley, Piscataway.1753 Nov. 12 

Vanderlinda, Susanna, Bergen, and Samuel Verbeyck, Somerset 1749 Mar. 21 

Van Der Linde, Esther, and John G. Hopper, Bergen 1783 Mar. 29 

Van Der Linde. Merike, Bergen, aud Jau Van Boskerk, Bergen 1749 July 7 

Van Derlinden, Susannah, Bergen, and Luke Reyerson, Bergen 1745 June 4 

Vanderpoel, Catrine, and William Sandford, Bergen 1741 Jan. 18 

Vanderpool, Mary, Essex, and Robert Boyd, New York 1753 Feb. 19 

Van Dervoort, Anne, aud John Vanwagin, Bergen 1786 Sept. 18 

Vanderveer, Fannitje, Middlesex, Cornelius Vansiklen, Kings Co., N.Y.1751 Sept. 11 

Vanderveer, Jean, and Dominicus Stryker, Somerset 1778 Feb. 21 

Vanderveer, Mary, Monmouth, and Arthur Williamson, Monmouth. . .1746 Jan. 31 

Vandervere, Jane, and Isaac Voorhees, Somerset 1778 May 2 

Vanderwood, Elisabet, and Cornells Poulding, Orange Co., N. Y 1763 Aug. 14 

Vandevoort, Catharine, and Frederick Storm 1762 June 19 

Vandevoorte, Mary, Sussex, and John Henderson, Hunterdon 1770 Mar. 27 

Vandeveer, Catherine, Monmouth, and Arthur Hance, Monmouth . . 1755 Mar. 3 

Vandeveuter, Altie, Monmouth, and Cornelius Middagg, Somerset 1739 Feb. 22 

Vandeventer, Catherine, Middletown, and James Cooper, Middlet'n 1743-4 Mar. 21 

Vandeveuter, Rachel, Somerset, and Richard Cutler, Woodbridge 1757 Aug. 10 

Vandeventer, Mary, Monmouth, and James Herbert, Monmouth .... 1767 Oct. 15 

Vaudevere, Mary, Salem, aud Thomas Webber, Upper Penns Neck. . .1761 Dec. 20 

Van Dicke, Anne, Middlebush, and Abram Vandorn, Middlebush ..1768 May 13 

Van Dien, Elizabeth, and John A. Zabriskie, Bergen 1783 Dec. 5 

Van Dien, Sarah, Bergen, and Cornells Vandin, Bergen 1774 Aug. 6 

Vandike, Catherine, Staten Island, aud Lewis Gran din, Staten Island , 1749 Nov. 16 

Vandike, Jane, Somerset, and Abraham DuBoys, Somerset 1747 Oct. 22 

Yaudike, Jane, Salem, aud David Owen, Salem 1765 July 13 

Vandike, Margaret, and John Gulick, Middlesex 1780 Nov. 10 

Yaudike, Mary, Monmouth, and Hugh Rose, Monmouth 1746 Oct. 17 

Yaudike, Prudence, and Denys Hageman, Hunterdon 1773 April 22 

Van Dike, Sarah, Monmouth, aud David Allen, Monmouth 1748 July 19 

Yaudike, Sarah, Salem, and Benjamin Eaten, Salem 1765 July 13 



420 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vandike, Sophia, and Benjamin Vandoren, Somerset 1780 Dec. 6 

Vandine, Mary, and John Baptist Duinont, Somerset 1745 Nov. 6 

Vandevere, Margaret, Penns Neck, and William Smith, Penns Neck. . . 1763 Aug. 4 

Vandoren, Janitie, Somerset, and John Sutvin, Hunterdon 1764 April 9 

Vandoren, Nelly, and Mansfield Hunt. 1778 Dec. 3 

Vandorn, Anne, and Cyrenius Van Mater, Monmouth 1761 May 26 

Vandorn, Eleanor, and Henilrick Smock, Monmouth 1761 May 26 

Vandorn, Ellenuor, Freehold, and Abraham Probasco, Shrewsbury 1761 Nov. 9 

Vandorn, Mary, Monmouth, and Albert Covenhoven, Monmouth. . , .1745 May 22 

Vandorn, Mary, Monmouth, and John Covenhoven, Monmouth 1750 Nov. 5 

Vandorn, Mary, Freehold, and John Schenck, Freehold 1763 Nov. 12 

Vandorn, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Antonittus, Monmouth 1761 Nov. 23 

Vandoursen, Jane, Middlesex, and Peter Low, Middlesex 1751 Sept. 26 

Van Driessen, Hannah, and Lucas Wesse, 1 Essex 1752 Nov. 18 

Van D. Pipe, Christian, and John Van Nuis, Middlesex 1780 Nov. 27 

Vandike, Iraue, and George Mattison, Salem 1750 April 10 

Vanduyn, Catherine, Somerset, and Cornelius Low, Somerset 1746 Sept. 27 

Vanduyn, Mary, Somerset, and John Wyckof, Somerset 1749 Nov. 6 

Vanduyn, Marya, Hunterdon, and William V. D. Bilt, Hunterdon. . . . 1756 Aug. 7 

Vandyk, Catharine, Burlington, and John Ellison, Monmouth 1756 Mar. 1 

Vandyk, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Hoffmire, Monmouth ... 1762 Jan. 9 

Vandyk, Sarah, Somerset, and Andrew Emaus, Hunterdon 1752 Nov. 13 

Vandyke, Elizabeth, and Frederick V. Leaver, Somerset. . , 1780 June 16 

Vandyke, Lydia, Burlington, and Benjamin English, Burlington 1761 Oct. 5 

Vandyke, Margret, Shrewsbury, and Michael White, Shrewsbury. ...1758 April 19 

Vandyke, Mary, Shrewsbury, and John Pintard, Shrewsbury 1761 Feb. 3 

Van Dyke, Finche, Somerset, and Cornelius Falkison, Somerset 1764 Dec. 11 

Vane, Mary, Sussex, and George Main, Sussex. 1771 Jan. 4 

Vaneman, Elizabeth, Salem, and Joseph Graves, Salem 1750 May 8 

Vaneman, Ellin, Gloucester, and Thomas Bright, Gloucester 1753 June 16 

Vaneman, Rachel, Gloucester, and John Middleton, Gloucester 1763 Feb. 21 

Vaneman, Rebecca, Salem, and Charles Cox, Gloucester 1761 Jan. 6 

Vaneman, Sarah, Greenwich, and John Wright, Gloucester 1762 Feb. 24 

Van Emburgh, Affey, Middletown, and Lewis Forman, Middletown. . 1756 Sept. 28 

Van Emburgh, Catharine, Monmouth, and Thomas Hunn, Monmouth. 1763 May 20 

Van Emburgh, Leah, Hackensack, and John Williams, Hackensack. . . 1761 Mar. 11 

Van Emburgh, Mary, Middlesex, and Oussa Harrison, Middlesex 1748 Oct. 8 

Van Emburgh, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Hartshorne, Monm'th.1766 Aug. 2 

Van Emburgh, Sarah, and John Guest, Bergen 1740 Jan. 6 

Vanemon, Ruth, and Reuben Rimsey, Cumberland 1779 June 8 

Yanetta, Elizabeth, Readingtown, and John Brady, Readingtown 1749 Jan. 6 

Vanetta, Leentye, Somerset, and Thomas Cole, Somerset 1751 April 3 

Van Etten, Helena, Morris, and John Casparus Fryer, Morris 1742 June 18 

Vangeeson, Alchey, Essex, and Michael Vreelandt, Essex 1749-50 Mar, 14 

Wessels 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 42 I 

Van Gelder, Anne, Staten Island, and Samuel Pryer, Staten Island 1748-9 

Vangelder, ( 'atharine, and Judah Gridley, Morris 1779 

Vaugelder, Catharine, Pumpton, Patrick McFaddin, Cecil Co., Md 1779 

Vangise, Cornelya, and Job Smith, Bergen 17G3 

Vangrelt, Mary, Monmouth, and William Flen, Monmouth 1749 

Van ( I iiilder, Rebecka, and Luke Sooy, Burlington 1786 

Van Harlen, Johanna, Middlesex, and Garret Voorhees, Middlesex.. . .1747 

Vanharling, Anna, and Isaac Williamson 17S0 

Van Hanglin, Mary, and Simon Anderson, Somerset 1781 

Vauhess, Auna, and John Ford, Hunterdon 1782 

Vauhise, Altie, and Jacob Vandewauter, Piscataway. 1783 

Vanhook, Elizabeth, and Joseph Long, Cumberland 1785 

Vanhorn, Alice, and John Gale, Bristol, Pa 1782 

Vauhorn, Anney, Hunterdon, and Abram Bosenbark, Hunterdon 1763 

Van Horn, Antie, Bergen, and Isaac Bogert, Bergen 1761 

Vanhorn, Antje, and David Ackermau, Bergen 1768 

Vanhorn, Eleuor, Harsimus, and Rutgart Vanbrunt, Kings Co., N. Y. .1767 

Vanhorn, Garretje, Bergen, and William Van Allen, Bergen 1773 

Van Horn, Jane, Bergen, and Samuel Beekman, New York 1761 

Van Horn, Lena, and Cornelius Garrabrants, Bergen 1784 

Van Horn, Margaret, and David Duri, Bergen 1762 

Vanhorn, Nelle, Bergen, and Helmus Vreeland, Bergen 1752 

Van Horn, Rachel, and John Banta, Bergen 1781 

Vanhorne, Anna, Hunterdon, and Tobias Ten Eick, Hunterdon 1746 

Vauhorne, Catherine, Monmouth, and John Stevens, Monmouth 1745 

Vanhorne, Charity, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Moode, Bucks, Pa 1776 

Vanhorne, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Hendrick Lutlrins, Bergen 1753 

Vanhorne, Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Daniel Palmer, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Van Home, Hannah, and Edward Fay 1772 

Vanhorne, Jane, and Edmond Roberts, Bucks 1732 

Vanhorne, Mary, Burlington, and Lawrence Surley, Burlington 1738 

Vanhorne, Sarah, ami William Pippinger, Hunterdon 1767 

Vanhorne, Sarah, and Joseph Fenimore, Burlington 1777 

Vanhorne, Sophia, Hunterdon, and Baltes Pickle, Jr., Hunterdon ... .1716 

Van Houten, Antje, Bergen, and David Archibald, Bergen 1774 

Vau Houten, Caterine, and John Ridner, Bergen 1779 

Van Houten, Caty, and Simon Vaness, Pompton Plains 1779 

Vanhouten, Fytie, Bergen, and Hassel Petersie, Essex 1759 

Van Houten, Mattie, Bergen, and Johannis V. Geison. Bergen 1762 

Vau Houten, Picterlye, and Thomas Cuyper, Orange, N. Y 1781 

Van Houten, Sarah, and Jacob Prier, Bergen 1792 

Vanhuise, Katharine, and Garret Terhune, Hillsborough 1778 

Van Idestiue, Rachel, and Richard Vanhouten 1779 

Vauinburg, Elizabeth, and John Haring, Bergen 1763 

Yankee, Elizabeth, Somerset, and Jacob Vroom, Somerset 1744 

VanKerk, Auna, Monmouth, Abraham Hendrickson, Kings Co., N. Y. 1759 



Mar. 


3 


May 


17 


Dec. 


14 


May 


17 


Nov. 


13 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


25 


Sept. 


24 


Oct. 


11 


Jan. 


13 


April 


12 


Aug. 


27 


Nov. 


4 


Nov. 


4 


Feb. 


26 


Aug. 


18 


Nov. 


30 


Mar. 


27 


May 


22 


Oct. 


24 


Nov. 


16 


April 


1 


Mar. 


26 


April 


29 


Dec. 


16 


Jan. 


16 


May 


19 


Nov. 


15 


July 


20 


Aug. 


10 


June 


12 


Aug. 


22 


Sept. 


3 


Nov. 


10 


Aug. 


13 


Nov. 


20 


Not. 


16 


Dec. 


29 


July 


24 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


15 


Sept. 


3 


April 


9 


Nov. 


25 


Aug. 


7 


May 


23 



422 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Kerk, Mary, Monmouth, and Cornelius Honce, Monmouth 176(3 

Van Kirk, Alice, and Charles Rhodes, Lower Freehold 1750 

Van Kirk, Alice, Freehold, and Cornelius Vanderhoof, Freehold 1751 

Van Kirk, Mary, and John Haight, Middlesex 1773 

Van Kirk, Mary, and John McClean 1783 

Van Kirk, Sarah, Monmouth, and Joseph Morford, Monmouth 1761 

Van Kirk, Sarah, Hopewell, and Henry Van Kirk, Hopewell 1770 

Van Lear, Elizabeth, and James Clark, Salem 1784 

Van Low, Maritie, Somerset, and Joost Duryee, Long Island 1750 

Van Lowe, Helena, Somerset, and Rem Ditniass, Somerset 1739 

Van Lowe, Lena, Somerset, and Henry Sckenk, Somerset 1747 

Van Martry, Cathrine, and Henry Disbrow, Middlesex 1774 

Vanmater, Alte, Middletowu, and Albert Polhemus, Middletown 1762 

Vanmater, Anna, and James Stout, Amwell 1780 

Vanmater, Catherine, and Stephen Jones, Jr., Hunterdon 1783 

Van Mater, Charity, Middletown, and Aron Vanderbelt, Monmouth. . . 1762 
Vanmater, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William Bennit, Monmouth. . . . 1706 

Vanmater, Ida, Monmouth, and Benjamin Sutphin, Monmouth 1754 

Van Mater, Mary, Monmoiith, and John Polheinus, Monmouth 1758 

Vanmater, Mary, Monmouth, and Peter Leffers, Monmouth 1759 

Vanmater, Mary, and Garret Schenck, Amwell 1778 

Van Mater, Nelley, Middletown, Chrineyonce Van Mater, Middletown. 1767 
Van Mater, Sary, Middletown, and Cornelius Van Mater, Shrewsbury. 1767 

Van Meter, Elizabeth, Salem, and William Greentuan, Salem 1764 

Vanmeter, Elizabeth, and Thomas B. Greenman, Salem 1784 

Vanmeter, Ellenor, Monmouth, and Daniel Hendrickson, Middlesex. . 1758 

Vanmeter, Mary, and Nathan Shaw, Cumberland 1760 

Vanmetre, Rebecca, Salem, and Daniel Carter, Salem 1752 

Vanmetre, Sarah, Salem, and Abraham Nieukirk, Salem 1762 

Van Middleswart, Hannah, and Henry Stoll, New Jersey 1743 

Van Middleswart, Mary, and Peter Bogart, Somerset 1742 

Van Middleswarth,' Jane, and John Benuet, Jr. , Somerset 1783 

Van Middleswarth, Susannah, and Peter I. B. Dumont, Somerset. . . 1782 
Van Middlesworth, Petronelle, Somerset, Hendrick Veghte, Somerset 1748 

Van Nest, Catherine, Somerset, and Cornelius Bogert, Somerset 1752 

Van Nest, Iristia, and Folkard Sebring, Jr., Somerset 1768 

Vaunest, Jane, Somerset, and Christophel Brasee, Somerset 1748 

Van Nest, Susan, and Jeromus Rappelyea, Somerset 1781 

Van Neuman, Anne, and Matthias Lambson, Salem 1769 

Vanneman, Christiana, Salem, and Jonas Keen, Salem 17,63 

Vauueman, Mary, Salem, and John McCree, Salem 1764 

Vanneman, Mary, and Joseph H. Cheesman, Gloucester 1790 

\ anneman, Sarah, and William Brown, Salem 1758 

Vanneman, Sarah, and Joseph Guest, Gloucester 1773 

Vanu, Mary, Burlington, and William Stoirow, Burlington 1780 

Van Norde, Hannah, Hackensack, and William Van Allan, Pompton. .1765 



April 


9 


July 


28 


Nov. 


1 


Jan. 


23 


June 


4 


Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


24 


Oct. 


28 


June 


5 


Aug. 


6 


Aug. 


14 


Aug. 


12 


Mar. 


23 


April 


12 


Oct. 


2 


June 


19 


Nov. 


7 


June 


3 


Nov. 


14 


June 


11 


July 


28 


Jan. 


3 


Dec. 


2 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


3 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


15 


May 


20 


June 


23 


Nov. 


12 


April 


26 


Jan. 


25 


April 


13 


June 


11 


Jan. 


22 


Dec. 


16 


April 


8 


Mar. 


24 


Dec. 


22 


Feb. 


15 


Oct. 


2 


Mar. 


23 


Sept. 


26 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


2 


April 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 423 

v*anNorden, Dorothy, and John Van Boskirk, Hackensack 17G0 Jum 

Vannorder, Elizabeth, New Brunswick, Peter Cochran, New Brunsw'k. 1739 Mar. 19 

Van Noorstrand, Antie, Somerset, and Isaac Brocaw, Somerset 1746 May 31 

Vannort, Neley, Shrewsbury, and Thomas Romine, Shrewsbury 1761 Mar. 28 

Vannort, Mary, Lower Freehold, and Daniel Tillton, Freehold 1717 Nov. 16 

Vannortewick, Ann, Middletown, and Lewis Smith, Shrewsbury 1761 Aug. ~1'1 

Van Nortwick, Arianche, and John Brokaw, Somerset 1781 Dec. 2 

Van Nortwick, Margaret, and Sias Stilwell, Somerset 1783 Nov. 23 

Van Norstrand, Jane, Bergen, Hartman Enochse Vreelant, New Jersey. 1717 Aug. 8 

Van Nostrand, Sarah, Somerset, and John Nevill, Somerset 1775 Dec. 20 

Van Nostrandt, Eleanor, and Albert Voorhees, Hillsborough 1778 Aug. 25 

Vannoy, Catherine, and John Dockerty, Hopewell 1773 Nov. 24 

Yaimoy, Rebeccah, and John Anderson, Hunterdon 1779 Mar. 30 

Van Nuice, Mary, and William Terhune, Somerset 1781 Mar. 24 

Van Nuis, Eleanor, New Brunswick, Roelef Van VoOrhies, Middlesex 1748 May 27 

Van Nuis, Elizabeth, and John Ryder, Middlesex , 1780 Nov. 27 

Van Nuys, Elizabeth, New Brunswick, John Voorhees, New Brunsw'k 1719 Feb. 26 

Van Nuyse, Mary, and Cornelius Van Nuyse, Somerset 1781 April 10 

Van Ostrand, Hannatie, Middlesex, and Ephraim Vantine, Middlesex. 1750 Feb. 22 

Van Ostrand, Jannitje, Somerset, and Henry Van Neste, Somerset . . . 1741 April 18 

Van Ostrant, Hannah, and Abraham Traves 1779- June 3 

Van Pelt, Alke, Monmouth, and Peter Heyer, Monmouth, , . 1739 Nov. 30 

Van Pelt, Catharine, and William Layton, Monmouth 1764 Nov. 19 

Van Pelt, ( latherine, and William Davison, Middlesex 1780 April 29 

Van Pelt, Hannah, and Richard Sutphen, Somerset 1773 Oct. 3 

Vanpelt, Nelly, Somerset, and Martin Van Nortwick, New Jersey 1755 July 24 

Vanpeth, Nettie, and Jonathan Dunn, Somerset 1777 Dec. 10 

Vanranselear, Mary, and Leonard Gansevoort, Jr., Albany, N. Y 1777 Mar. 3 

Van Reamar", Elizabeth, and William Homan, Gloucester 1786 Sept. 19 

Vanreypen, Henderiche, and John J. Zabriskie, Bergen 1788 Dec. 7 

Van Ripe, Altie, Bergen, and Daniel Van Winckel, Bergen 1760 Jan. 28 

Vanripen, Anney, and William Day, Bergen 1764 Oct. 27 

Van Ripen, Jannetie, and Johannes Van Winkel, Essex 1745 May 30 

Van Riper, Jannetie, Bergen, and Helmich Vanhouten, Bergen 1750 Oct. 19 

Vanriper, Leoh, Essex, and Peter Jacobos, Essex 1753 Mar. 13 

Vanroom, Ruth, Burlington, and Nathaniel Robins, Burlington 1741 Oct. 7 

Vauroome, Sarah, and Mathias Swaine, Middlesex 1738 May 12 

Van Ripen, Anne, and John Westervelt, Bergen 1783 Jan. 19 

Van Saan, Salome, Bergen, andConert Lake, Bergen 1789 Aug. 15 

Vansail, Leah, Bergen, and Joseph Wood, Jr., Orange Co., N. Y 1743-4 Mar. 16 

Vansant, Anne, Pennsylvania, and William Hatcher, Pennsylvania. . . . 1727 Nov. 13 

Vansant, Beula, and David Cole, Hunterdon 1775 Oct. 24 

Vansant, Charity, and Samuel Morgan, Bucks Co., Pa 1762 May 20 

Vansant, Elisabeth, and Henry Vauhorn, Bucks, Pa 1758 Aug. 10 

Vansant, Rachel, and Lewis Rue, Bucks. 1736 Mar. 24 

Van Scaick, Mary, and Cornelius Bogert, Somerset 1742 Jan. 22 



424 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Scbaick, Isabella, and James Hibbits, Middlesex 17G7 Feb. 25 

Vansciver, Gertrude, and David Vanborne, Bucks, Pa 1761 May 20 

Vansciver, Gartery, and Jobn Kicbardson ' 1780 Nov. 27 

Van Sickle, Elizabetb, and William Clawson, Piscataway 1745 June 17 

Van Sickle, Jane, Hunterdon, and John Marlatt, Hunterdon 1752 Sept. 25 

Van Sickle, Margaret, Reading Town, William Brewer, Reading Town. 17-48 Sept. 30 

Van Sickle, Mary, Hunterdon, and Garret Scbenck, Hunterdon 1747 Dec. 5 

Van Sicklen, Mary, Middlesex, and Thomas Thickston, Middlesex ..1741 Jan. 18 

Vansisco, Sarah, Pequanock, and Peter Mead, Jr., Pumpton 1780 Oct. 23 

Van Sise, Elizabeth, and Giles Mead, Bergen 1783 Oct. 16 

Van Sise, Hellitye, and Abraham Banta, Bergen 1786 Sept. 8 

Van Skiack, Anne, Freehold, aud George Cassler, Middletowu 1760 Sept. 10 

Van Tillburgh, Sarah, and James Johnson, Essex 1746 Dec. 31 

Vantile, Catherine, Stateu Island, William Dougless, Hunterdon ....."1759 Dec. 21 

Vantile, Elisabeth, Somerset, and David Grant, Somerset 1762 Sept. 28 

Vantile, Jane, Bergen, and Jacob Sebring, Middlesex 1768 June 6 

Vantine, Anna, Middlesex, and Benjamin Cheesman, Middlesex 1751 Oct. 8 

Vantine, Catherina, Somerset, and Pieter Strycker, Somerset 1750 Oct. 1 

Van Veghte, Margret, Raritan, and John V: D: Spiegel, New York. . .1739 Dec. 31 

Van Vliet, Judick, aud Derick Aten, Hunterdon 1745 Dec. 24 

Van Vliet, Margant, Hunterdon, and Adrian Hagerman, Hunterdon. .1772 Feb. 28 

Van Voorbies, Lena, Bergen, aud David Demarest, Bergen 1760 Nov. 29 

Van Voorhees, Margaret, Bergen, and David Demarest, Bergen. ... 1771 June 25 

Van Voorhees, Nelly, Monmouth, and Peter Voorhees, Monmouth ..1768 Feb. 16 

Vanvoorheese, Elizabetb, and John Kip, Bergen 1764 Nov. 25 

Van Voorhies, Mary, Middlesex, and Peter Vanpelt, Middlesex . 1751 April 20 

Van Voorhies, Elizabetb, aud Uzal Meeker, Bergen 1 794 Jan. 17 

Vanvroome, Coustaut, and Daniel Hankins, Middlesex 1737 April 27 

Van Wagenan, Helena, and Areut Schuyler, Bergen 1741 Sept. 21 

Van Wagene, Annatje, Bergen, Guilliain Outwater, Bergeu 1773 June 26 

Van Wagener, Jenueke, Essex, aud Arent Schuyler, Burlington City. . . 1748 May 19 

Van Wagener, Jane, and Jacob Vreeland, Essex 1792 Jan. 4 

Van Wickle, Matie, Somerset, and George Audersou, Jr., Somerset. . . . 1748 Nov. 22 

Van Wicklen, Sieke, Archibald Gordon, Middlesex 1779 April 12 

Van Wicklow, Diuab, Somerset, aud Jobu Probasco, Somerset 1753 Aug. 18 

Van Wiuckle, Siechie, Newark, and Jobn De Voisue, Newark 1766 Dec. 20 

Vau Wiuckel, Wyntie, Bergen, and Gerbraut Gerbrantse, New Jersey 1739 Nov. 6 

Van Wincle, Helligant, Bergen, and Heudrick Garritse, Essex 1771 April 24 

A r au Wincle, Sarah, Bergeu, and Gerrit Vauwageuouge, E*sex 1753 June 8 

Van Winkle, Aunatie, Essex, aud Reyier V. Giese, Bergen 1760 Oct. 31 

Van Winkle, Aunatie, aud John Sliugerland, Bergen 1789 Nov. 20 

Van Winkle, Antie, Essex, and John Cowmau, Essex 1760 Feb. 13 

Van Winkle, ( 'atherine, Essex, aud Phillip Berry, Bergen 176 1 April 15 

Van Winkle, Frouche, aud Martin J. Ryerson, Bergen 1778 Aug. 8 

Van Winkle, Margaret, Essex, and Coruelius Vreeland, Essex 1747 Nov. 28 

Van Winkle, Margaret, Essex, and Garret Toers, Bergen 1759 Nov. 23 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 425 

Van Winkle, Margaret, Morris, and Hendrick Doremus, Morris .... L76D Sept. 25 

Yamviiikle. Mary, and William Ellicott, Essex 1751 April 1 

Van Winkle, Sytie, Somerset, and John Boyse, Now Jersey 17-19 May 27 

Van Wincle, Clausey, Bergen, and Jacob Haute, Bergen 1754 Sept. 26 

Van Wogenan, Lena, Acquackaaonk, Thomas Van Ripen, Acquack'nk 1740 Aug. t> 

Van Wykel, Alice, S imerset, and Joseph Mount, Somerset 1741 Sept. 28 

Vanzandt, Catharine, and Jesse Johnson, Bucks, Pa 1785 Mar. 25 

Van Zandt, S irah, and Amariah Phares, Middlesex 1780 June 19 

Van /ant, Margaret, New Brunswick, .lames Collin3, New Brunswick. 1748 Dec. 26 

MALES, V 

Vahan, James, Monmouth, and Rebeckah Gibbons, Monmouth 1739 Feb. 14 

Vail, Abraham, Perth Arnboy, and Sarah Paine 1772 Dec. 1 

Vail, Daniel, Somerset, and Mary McEwan, Somerset 1774 Sept. 21 

Vail, Henry, Morris, and Phebe Baker, Essex 1779 Nov. 15 

Vail, Isaac, Somerset, and Rachel Compton, Somerset 1762 Feb. 8 

Vail, John, Somerset, and Mary Laiug, Somerset 1751 Oct. 8 

Vail, John, Salem, and Rachel Stiles, Salem. . . 1768 Jan. 11 

Vail, Nathaniel, Elizabethtown, and Elizabeth Dennis, Elizabethtown. 1748 May 3 

Valentine, Peter, Orange Co., and Maria Blauvelt 1784 Sept. 8 

Vance, John, Hackensack, and Polly Price, Elizabethtown 17 — Oct. 3 

Varick, John, Bergen, and Jane Die, Bergen 1749 May 23 

Varnon, James, Springfield, and Anne Enoch, Springfield 1783 April 12 

Vasse, William, and Hannah Chambers 1741 Jan. 4 

Vaughn, David, Monmouth, and Hester Gybertson, Monmouth.. , , 1748 April 26 

Vaughn, James, Burlington, and Sarah Gibbins, Burlington 1765 June 27 

Vaughan, James, Upper Freehold, and Anne Robins 1768 Aug. 18 

Vaughan, John, Philadelphia, and Prudence Rugg, Salem 1761 Dec. 16 

Vaughan, John, Burlington, and Patience Vaughan, Freehold 1764 April 6 

Vaughan, Robert, Upper Freehold, Jemima Cornell, Upper Freehold 1763 Sept. 5 

Vaughan, William, Windsor, and Elizabeth Farvis, Windsor 1759 Feb. 5 

Vaughan, George, Gloucester, and Hannah Smith, Burlington 1735 June 30 

Vaughn, John, Monmouth, and Mary Cheesman, Monmouth 1764 Nov. 13 

Veeder, Garret, Saddle River, and Anne Kipp 1780 Feb. 15 

Veghte, Gerret, Somerset, and Charity Sutphen 17C4 Mar. 31 

Veghte, Hendrick, Somerset, Petronelle Vanmiddlesworth, Somerset. 1748 June 11 

Veghte, John, Somerset, and Mary Oppie 1778 July 15 

Veil, Thomas, Hackensack, and Hannah Berry, Hackensack 1760 Nov. 17 

Veldtman, Henry, Essex, and Rachel Wessells, Essex 17o4 Jan. 8 

Vennable, Arthur, Chester, and Rebecca Shin 1783 May 24 

Venable, Thomas, Burlington, and Sarah Wallis, Burlington 1729 Jan. 10 

Venable, Thomas, Burlington, and Hester Borrodail, Burlington 1756 Aug. 2 

Venables, Joseph, Evesham, and Susannah Jenkins 1778 Sept. 5 

Venaman, Jonas, Cumberland, and Christiana Souder 1785 Aug. 8 

Vennest, Henry, Somerset, and Hannah Donham, Somerset 1751 June 5 

Verbryct, Samuel Gersen, New Barbadoes, and Heyltye Remsen 1781 Aug. 2 



426 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Verbryck, Samuel, Somerset, arid Susanna Vanderlinda, Bergen 1749 Mar. 21 

Verner, Simeon, Somerset, and Elizabeth Christina Regan 1767 Dec. 24 

Vernon, James, Northampton, and Esther Colbreath, Northampton ... 1756 Nov. 13 

Vernon, Nehemiah, Somerset, and Elisabeth Thompson, Somerset. ... 1749 Nov. 2 

Vernon, Robert, Philadelphia, and Rachel Jones, Philadelphia 1738 April 14 

Verree, William, and Jane Raworth, Burlington 1745 Jan. 25 

Verrier, James, and Valbert Williams 1701 Sept. 9 

Vervalen, Daniel, Bergen, and Rachel Volk , 1788 Oct. 16 

Vickeus, Joseph, New Brunswick, and Sarah Walker, Piscataway 1753 Dec. 7 

Vickery, Richard, Salem, and Elizabeth Smith 1757 Aug. 18 

Vickery, Thomas, Salem, and Phebe Garrison 1780 Feb. 11 

Voghte, Christopher, Hunterdon, and Cornelia Traphagen, Hunterdon. 1749 April 14 

Volk, Henry, New Barbadoes, and Mary Oldwater, New Barbadoes ..1766 Nov. 7 

Von Goetschius, J. Henry, and Magdalena Christie 1773 Dec. 9 

Vongalden, Abraham, Middletown, Elizabeth Bartilmey, Middletown. 1759 Jan. 8 

Voorhees, Abraham, Somerset, and Eleanor Baird 1779 Aug. 14 

Voorhees, Albert, Hillsborough, and Eleanor Van Nostrandt 1778 Aug. 25 

Voorhees, Garret, Middlesex, and Johanna Van Harlen, Middlesex. ..1747 Nov. 25 

Voorhees, Gerrit, Somerset, and Sarah Stoohof 1783 Jan. 19 

Voorhees, Isaac, Freehold, and Helena Barcalow, Freehold 1754 May 27 

Voorhees, Isaac, Somerset, and Jane Vanderveere 1778 May 2 

Voorhees, James, Somerset, and Elizabeth Blew 1778 Dec. 17 

Voorhees, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Van Nuys, Middlesex 1749 Feb. 26 

Voorhees, John, Middlesex, and Christian Schuyler, Middlesex 1749 April 26 

Voorhees, John, Amwell, and Rebecca Williamson 1772 April 11 

Voorhees, John, Somerset, and Barbara Garrison 1778 Mar. 21 

Voorhees, Martin, Middlesex, and Mary V. Camp 1780 April 22 

Voorhees, Rnlef, Monmouth, and Rebecca Pees 1768 Jan. 9 

Voorhees, Peter, Monmouth, and Nelly Van Voorhees, Monmouth . . 1768 Feb. 16 

Voorhes, Luck, Middlesex, and Siche Boice, Middlesex 1746 June 9 

Voorhes, William, Freehold, and Catherine Hance, Freehold 1763 July 5 

Voorhese, Peter, Somerset, and Mary Ditmus 1779 Feb. 8 

Voorhies, Jacob, New Brunswick, and Sarah Cockafare 1772 Nov. 9 

Voorhies, John, Jr., Bridgewater, and Sarah Taylor 1789 Jan. 25 

Voorhies, Koert, Middlesex, and Mary Johnson, Middlesex 1764 Jan. 30 

Vorhis, Daniel, 1 and Meery Jouleman. 1762 Jnly 31 

Voorus, Andrew, Freehold, and Anna Sutfin 1751 May 13 

Vorhuyse, Roleph, Middlesex, and Margareta Cornel. Somerset 1745 Dec. 5 

Vought, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Grandin, Hunterdon 1772 Nov. 21 

Vredeuburg, Peter, New Brunswick, and Elizabeth Fitchet, Somerset 1746 Dec. 17 

\ lvdeuburgh, Isaac, New Brunswick, and Alletta Noe. . . 1784 April 7 

Vreeland, Cornelius, Essex, and Margaret Van Winkle, Essex 1747 Nov. 28 

Vreeland, Hehnus, Bergen, and Nelle Vanhorn, Bergen 1752 April 1 

Vreeland, Jacob, Bergen, and Jannetje Cadmus, Bergen 1770 June 16 

i ''Daniel Van Voorheese" In the body of the bond, but signed "Daniel Vorhis." 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 42/ 

Vreeland, Jacob, Essex, and Jane Van Wagener 1792 Jau. 14 

Vreeland, Peter, and Leah Duremes 17<>3 April 16 

Vreelandt, Enoch, Bergen, and Cornelius Kip, Bergen 1764 Nov. 18 

Vreelant, Enoehse Hartman, New Jersey, Jane Van Norstrand, Berg'n.1747 Aug. 8 

Vreelandt, Michael, Essex, and Alehey Vangeeson, Essex 1749-50 Mar. 14 

Vreelandt, Nicholas, Bergen, and Nancy Basset, Essex 1760 Nov. 2 

Vreelandt, Richard, Hackensack, and Hannah Banta 1783 Dec. 1 

Vrelad, Jacob. Hackensack, and Wyntje Durie, Bergen 1769 Dec. 15 

Vreland, John E. , Essex, and Yonacy Post, Essex 1754 Jan. 2 

Vrooin, Christian, Lebanon, and Gertrude Swum, Staten Island 1757 April 5 

Vroom, George, Middlesex, and Charity Duniout, Somerset 1741 Jan. '25 

Vroom, Jacob, Somerset, and Elizabeth Vaukee, Somerset 1744 Aug. 7 

Vroom, John, Somerset, and Jannetie Vanste, Somerset 1749 Oct. 23 

Vroom, John, Somerset, and Anne Bunn 1783 May 18 

Vroom, Teter, and Jannetje Dumont, Middlesex 1750 Aug. 20 

FEMALES. V 

Vactor, Polly, and Peter Dilleu, Somerset 1779 Nov. 13 

Vagere, Aales,' Northampton, and David Shadecker, Northampton .... 1747 Feb. 22 

Vahan, Hannah, Monmouth, and Silvester Tilton, Monmouth 1739 April 3 

Vahan, Rachel, Monmouth, and John Robinson, Monmouth 1756 Aug. 19 

Vahan, Rachel, and Nathaniel Cox, Monmouth 1761 Feb. 18 

Vail, Martha, Essex, and Abraham Merlatt, Somerset 1748 Feb. 25 

Vail, Rachel, Bernards, and Nathaniel Woodard, Bernards 1773 Nov. 21 

ValeaiV- Susannah, and Dr. John Bard 1741 Feb. 5 

Velentine, Mary, Richmond, N. Y., CharlesLisk, Richmond Co., N. Y.1742 July 24 

Valette, Judith, Middlesex, and Hugh McCann, Middlesex 1741 July 13 

Valt, Mary Crindren, Staten Island, and Asher Tappeu, Morris 1762 Dec. 29 

Vance, Elizabeth, and Robert Montgomery, Jr., Monmouth 1757 June 14 

Vaue, Mary, Sussex, and George Main, Sussex 1771 Jan. 4 

Vanse, Elizabeth, Croswicks, and John Tilton, Burlington 1758 Mar. 7 

Vanste, Jane, and Jacob Van Noarstrand, Somerset 1740 Dec. 23 

Vanste, Jannetie, Somerset, and John Vroom, Somerset 1749 Oct. 23 

Vaughan, Catherine, Burlington, and James Dillon, Burlington 1779 June 5 

Vaughan, Elizabeth, and Thomas Edwards, Monmouth 1770 June 19 

Vaughan, Martha, Monmouth, and William Morris, Monmouth 1768 Mar. 4 

Vaughan, Martha, and Joseph Brian, Salem 1774 Dec. 6 

Vaughan, Mary, Cumberland, and Daniel Maskell, Cumberland 1749 Jan. 15 

Vaughan, Mary, Burlington, and Gasper Peterman, Burlington 1761 Mar. 5 

Vaughan, Patience, Freehold, and John Vaughan, Burlington 1764 April 6 

Vaughn, Ann, Burlington, and Henry Tuckney, Burlington 1733 Oct. 16 

Vaughn, Betheuah, and Obadiah Applegate, Monmouth 1772 June 26 

Vaughn, Easter, Monmouth, and John Foster, Monmouth 1766 Dec. 8 

i Or Dales. In a small register of marriage licenses the name is given a- Anles Vagow. 
2 There are two entries of marri a ge licenses i<> these parties, one. dated Feb. 5. 1741, 
gives ao residences. Another, dated May 29, 1741, gives the residences as Philadelphia. 



428 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vaughn, Mary, Monmouth, and Joseph Everinghain, Monmouth 1750 

Vaughn, Mercy, Upper Freehold, and David Stout, Amwell 1768 

Vaughn, Rebecca, Freehold, and Henry Fisher, Cranberry 1756 

Vaughn, Rhody, and John Hays, Burlington 1782 

Varick, Jaue, aud Abraham Hardenbufgh, Ulster, N. Y 1781: 

Varick, Martyutje, Bergen, and Peter Zabriskie, Bergen 17i7 

Varick, Sarah, Bergen, and Jacob Zabriskie, Bergen 1743 

Vavason, Cornelia, and Stephen Gano, Orange, N. Y 1782 

Veader, Adriana, and Cornelius Henniou, Bergen 1781 

Veal, Hannah, and William Robinson, Cape May 1778 

Veal, Phebe, and Benjamin Parsons, Maurice River 1780 

Veal, Sarah, and Richard Hankinson, Somerset 1769 

Year, Faithy, and Thomas Denny, Gloucester 1782 

Veghte, Cornelia, Rocky Hill, and John Swaiue, Staten Island 1771 

Veil, Elizabeth, Haokensack, aud Christian Dederer, Hackensack. ...1760 

Venable, Mary, and William Holmes, Burlington 1768 

Venables, Anna, and Nathaniel Cosseboom, Burlington 1761 

Venables, Elizabeth, Cumberland, Obadiah Carruthers, Cumberland. 1768 

Veneball, Elizabeth, and John Holland, Burlington. 1790 

Vervule, Derrickie, Orange, N. Y. , and Christopher Campbell, Bergen. 1766 
Verveelen, Deborah, Orange, N. Y., and Resolvest Areyanson, Bergen. 1773 

Verveelen, Elizabeth, and Aurie Aureyanse, Bergen 1782 

Verree, Rebecca, Burlington, and Moses Thomas, Philadelphia 1712 

Vet, Leah Andrew, Staten Island, and Abraham Tappen, Woodbridge. 1758 

Vickars, Mary, and John Worthington, Hopewell 1779 

Vickers, Sarah, and Providence Ludlam, Cape May 1760 

Vickery, Ann, and James Wright, Penns Neck 1775 

Vickery, Rebecca, aud Isaac Bilderback, Salem 1772 

Vickery, Sarah, Salem, and Allen Congleton, Salem 1761 

Vickery, Sarah, Salem, and Charles Bilderback, Salem 1764 

Victory, Elizabeth, and John Kimpton, Burlington 1731 

Vining, Mary, Salem, and Nicholas. Ridgeley, Salem 1736 

Vinucomb, Rachel, Burlington, and Robert Haines, Burlington 1766 

Vinneman, Deborah, Gloucester, and Nathan Paul, Gloucester 17-10 

Volk, Rachel, and Daniel Vervalen, Bergen 1788 

Vollerson, Maria, Somerset, and Peter Schenk, Somerset 1747 

Vollow, Margaret, Bergen, and David Stout, Burlington 1743 

Voolass, Mary, aud James Robinson, Toms River 1768 

Voorhees, Ariauche, Monmouth, and Gysbert Zutphen, Monmouth. . .1749 

Voorhees, Elizabeth, and James Sutpheu, Somerset 1778 

Voorhees, Elizabeth, aud James Bennet, Middlesex 1779 

Voorhees, Maritie, and Abraham Dumon, Somerset 1782 

Voorhees, Mary, and James Bergen, Somerset. ... 1779 

Voorhees, Mary, Somerset, and Martain Stine, Monmouth 1780 

Voorhees, Nelly, Middlesex, and Peter Stryker, Middlesex 1784 

Voorhees, Sarah, and Adonijah Peacock, Evesham 1782 



Oct. 


29 


May 


6 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


19 


Jan. 


22 


Oct. 


21 


Nov. 


2 


Oct. 


21 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


6 


June 


16 


Nov. 


3 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


21 


Nov. 


17 


Feb. 


25 


Aug. 


24 


Mar. 


31 


Aug. 


23 


Aug. 


1 


Nov. 


1 


Mar. 


17 


Jan. 


9 


Mar. 


3 


Sept. 


6 


Nov. 


23 


Mar. 


26 


Feb. 


12 


Sept. 


4 


Feb. 


25 


Dec. 


23 


May 


17 


Aug. 


16 


Oct. 


16 


Aug. 


14 


Jan. 


1 


July 


26 


June 


15 


Sept. 


12 


June 


22 


June 


10 


May 


15 


Feb. 


24 


Mar. 


5 


Aug. 


15 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 429 

Voorhees, Styutie, and Lambert Durland, Somerset, 1747 May 5 

Voorhees, Sytee, Middlesex, and John Rue, Middlesex 1751 May 20 

Voorheese, Mary, and Barnt Stryker, Somerset 1779 Jan. 6 

Voorhies, Annatie, Somerset, and [saac Van Brunt, Long Island 1761 Mar. 20 

Vborhies, Anne, and Abraham Wilson, Hillsborough 1778 Dec. 25 

Voorhies, Catherine, and Aaron U agaman, Somerset 1779 Feb. 20 

Voorhies, Lena, Somerset, and Denys Vanduyn, Somerset 1754 May 1 

Voorhes, Jenny., and Jacob Vaudorn, Somerset 17G9 April 5 

Vorhes, Deborah, Somerset, and Ralph Phenix, Somerset 1779 Nov. 20 

VotOi Sarah, and Richard Crooks, Burlington 1783 Feb. 26 

Vralmon, Peterchey, Essex, and Ary King, Essex 1754 Jan. 12 

Vredenburgh, Catherine, Middlesex, and Matthew Light, Middlesex. 1779 Aug 12 

Vreeland, Elizabeth, and Cornelius Van Rypen, Bergen 1787 Jan. 20 

Yreeland, Frances, Acquackanock, Johannis Vanhouten, New Jersey. 1741 May 19 

Vreeland, Leah, and Garret Vauallen, Bergen 1779 Aug. 2 

Vreeland, Susannah, and Joseph Havens, Burlington 1757 Sept. 13 

Vreelandt, Beltie, Bergen, and Cornelius Sip, Bergen 1761 June '27 

Vreelandt, Yauachey, Morris, and Martin Vandien, Morris 1760 Mar. 31 

Yreland, Claucy, Essex, and Edward Earl, Bergen 1747 Oct. 20 

Vreland, Elizabeth, and John It. Ludlow, Essex 1787 Nov. 21 

Yreland, Hester, Essex, and John De Vausene, Essex 1745 April 29 

Vreland, Rachel, Bergen, and Albert Hoppe, Bergen 1765 Feb. 3 

Vrelant, Aegye, Bergen, and Hellemig Van Houten, Bergen 1753 May 4 

Vreelant, Sally, and Jacobus Van Buskirk, Bergen 1787 Dec. 12 

Vroom, Bradice, Somerset, and Peter Dumont, Somerset 1748 May 16 

Vroom, Marritie, Somerset, and Andres Teneick, Somerset 1746 Nov. 10 

Vroom, Sarah, Somerset, and Jan Van Neste, Somerset 1746 Nov. 10 

Vumort, 1 Rosina, Shrewsbury, and James Throckmorton, Shrewsbury. 1767 Jan. 2 

Vryefinger, Elisabet, Bergen, and Johannis Schuurt, Bergen 1762 April 10 



MALES. 



W 



Wadington, Jonathan, Mannington, and Sarah Bradway 1777 Nov. 13 

Wady, Humphrey, Shrewsbury, and Phebe Tilton, Middletown 1760 Feb. 28 

Waiuright, Joseph, Monmouth, and Susanna Walling, Hardyston. ... 1772 May 19 

Waiuright, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Rebeckah Hoisted, Shrewsbury. 1762 Jan. 26 

Waiuright, Vincent, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Williams, Freehold. . 1762 May 5 

Waithman, William, Cumberland, and Mary Moore, Cumberland 1763 May 22 

Waithman, William, Cumberland, and Sarah Bacon, Cumberland... 1775 Oct. 11 

Walcott, Benjamin, Shrewsbury, aud Cleffey Cook, Shrewsbury 1753 Feb. 27 

Waldron, Daniel, Perth Amboy, and Dorcas Conger, Piscataway 1750 Feb. 22 

Waldron, Joseph, Bergen, and Helena Ryerson 1789 Nov. 14 

Waldron, Resolve, Bergen, aud Betsey Gordon 1782 Jan. 27 

Walker, Abraham, Burlington, and Rebecca Chambers, Burlington. . .1736 July 15 

Walker, Benjamin, New York, and Mariah Robinson 1784 Aug. 30 

1 Or Vui'iiuri 



430 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Walker, Francis, Woodbridge. and Jane Brooks, Woodbridge 1744 April 30 

Walker, George, Monmouth, and Priscilla Forman, Monmouth 1747 Oct. 26 

Walker, George, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Heedleson, Bucks, Pa 1761 Dec. 2 

Walker, Isaac, Burlington, and Mary Horner, Burlington 1728 Dec. 4 

Walker, James, Piscataway, and Hannah Herriman 1745 Dec. 21 

Walker, James, Piscataway, and Anne Allison, Piscataway 1754 April 17 

Walker, James, New York, and Ann Van Der Beek 1786 Mar. 11 

Walker, John, Salem, and Mary Smith, Salem 1683-4 Feb. 19 

Walker, John, Burlington, aud Judith Land, Burlington 1746 Sept. 5 

Walker, Johu, Mannington, and Catharine Johnson, Manniugton. . . 1765 Oct. 17 

Walker, John, Alloways Creek, and Lylia Agnew, Salem 1768 Aug. 2 

Walker, John, Middlesex, and Rebecca Clark 1769 Sept. 6 

Walker, John, Salem, and Margaret Fogg, Salem 1772 Dec. 22 

Walker, Richard, Woodbridge, aud Ann Tornere, Perth Amboy. . ..1746 June 3 

Walker, Robert, Salem, and Isabel Parrott, Salem 1760 April 16 

Walker, Robert, Salem, and Susanna Walker, Salem 1768 Nov. 24 

Walker, Silas, Middlesex, aud Ruth Bloomfielcl, Middlesex 1762 Jan. 4 

Walker, Thomas, Middlesex, and Mary Allgur, Middlesex 1764 Dec. 18 

Walker, Thomas, Evesham, and Elizabeth Gaskin 1783 Aug. 8 

Walker, William, Woodbridge, and Anne Howell, Woodbridge 1741-2 Mar. 23 

Walker, William, Salem, and Hannah Fogg, Salem 1767 Feb. 23 

Walker, William, Gloucester, and Ann Austin, Burlington 1773 Sept. 20 

Wall, Garratt, Middlesex, and Catherine Carr, Monmouth 1740 Oct. 24 

Wall, George, Bucks, Pa., and Anne Elleket, Bucks, Pa 1744 Aug. 22 

Wall, Humphrey, Monmouth, and Elizabeth Tilton, Burlington 1763 Aug. 25 

Wall, Humphrey, Middletown, and Elizabeth Ogborn, Middletown. ..1765 Mar. 6 

Wall, John, Middletown, aud Rachel Bowue, Middletown 1751 April 30 

Wall, John, Middletown, and Anna Bowne, Middletown 1753 June 15 

Wall, John, Middletown, and Idy Vanderbilt, Middletown 1764 Mar. 17 

Wallace, Robert, Perth Amboy, and Jemima Borrowe, Perth Amboy . . 1749 May 6 

Walling, John, Cumberland, and Anna Tullis, Cumberland 1761 Mar. 25 

Waller, John, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Smith, Middlesex 1732 Bee. 16 

Waller, William, Woodbridge, Margaret Fitz Randolph, Woodbridge. . 1750 Sept. 1 

Walling, Gershom, Monmouth, and Mary Collins 1762 Nov. 15 

Walling, John, Middletown, and Elizabeth Roberts, Middletown 1757 Mar. 21 

Walling, John, Jr., Hunterdon, aud Easter Guile 1768 Feb. 3 

Walling, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Rachel Bacon, Greenwich 1774 Mar. 2 

Walling, Ladis, Cumberland, and Ruth Brewster, Greenwich 1775 Sept. 25 

Walling, Thomas, Burlington, and Hannah Wallace, Burlington 1740 Nov. 12 

Walling, Thomas, Middletown, and Rebecka Roberts, Middletown .... 1754 July 6 

Walling, Thomas, Middletown, and Elizabeth Watsou, Middletown ..1759 May 9 

Wallings, John, Evesham, and Drusilla Pricket 1779 Aug. 23 

Wallis, William, Gloucester, and Dorothy Connolly, Gloucester 1739 Mar, 17 

Wallis, Thomas, Evesham, and Hope Lippincott, Evesham 1750 July 12 

Wallis, Thomas, Burlington, and Hope Lippincott, Burlington 1750 July 12 

Wallor, Jacob, Sussex, and Christiana Creveling 1769 Nov. 27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 43 I 

Walne, James, Burlington, and Martha Adams, Burlington 1746 

Walsbey, William, Burlington, and Rachel Reynear, Burlington 1780 

Walsh, .lames, Burlington, and Margaret Norton, Burlington 1739 

Walters, Philip, Cumberland, and Mary Brown, Fairfield 1777 

Walton, Isaac, Philadelphia, and Sarah Holt, Bucks, Pa 1737 

Walton, John, Crosswicks, and Patience Gordon 1778 

Walton, Thomas, Chesterfield, and Anne Bower, Monmouth 1766 

Walton, William, Nottingham, and Micha Swem 1760 

Walton, William, Pequanock, and Catherine King, Eoxbury 1768 

Walty, Andreas, Salem, and Margaret Hoffham, Salem 1745-6 

Waney, John, Burlington, and Patience Moore, Burlington 1775 

Wanmaker, Henry, Bergen, and Mary Bertholf 1780 

Wanton, John, Jr., Rhode Island, and Lydia Eatton, Shrewsbury. . . .1750 

Ward, Aaron, Gloucester, and Phebe Holm, Gloucester 1732 

Ward, Benjamin, South Auiboy, and Lydia Cheesman, South Ainboy 1759 

Ward, David, Gloucester, and Susannah Ward, Gloucester 1749 

Ward, George, Gloucester, and Abigail Eowen, Gloucester 1746 

Ward, Jacob, New Hanover, and Hannah Bowker 1784 

Ward, James, Gloucester, and Mary Mackenny, Gloucester 1740 

Ward, Jonathan, Deptford, and Hester Jagard, Deptford 1765 

Ward, Joseph, Woodbury, and Deborah Ward, Woodbury 1764 

Ward, Josiah, Gloucester, and Keziah Albertson, Gloucester 1750 

Ward, Peter, Chester, and Hannah Hollinshead, Chester 1745 

Ward, Peter, Burlington, and Anne Barkenhof. ... , 1763 

Ward, Peter, Saddle River, and Nancy Mead 1781 . 

Ward, Samuel, Cumberland, and Deborah Brewster, Greenwich 17 

Ward, Stephen, Essex, and Katerine Crane, Essex 1779 

Ward, Uzal, Newark, and Martha Johnson, Newark 1746 

Ward, William, Gloucester, and Mary Anna Warden, Gloucester 1727 

Ward, William, Gloucester, and Temperance Johnson, Salem 1742 

Warde, George, Deptford, and Annie Middleton 1 772 

Wardel, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Deborah White, Shrewsbury 1758 

Warded, Ebenezer, Monmouth, and Hannah Curtis, Monmouth. . . . 1753 
WardeH, Ebenezer, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Parker, Shrewsbury. .1756 
Wardell, James, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Lipincott, Shrewsbury. . .1755 

Wardell, John, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Stelle, Monmouth 1748 

Wardell, John, Shrewsbury, and Sarah West, Shrewsbury 1755 

Wardell, John, Burlington, and Margaret Tucker, Shrewsbury 1761 

Wardell, Joseph, Monmouth, and Hannah Brinley, Monmouth 1749 

Wardell, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Catherine Lane, Shrewsbury 1750 

Wardell, Samuel, Hanover, and Hannah Pancost, Hanover 1763 

Wardell, Solomon, Shrewsbury, and Mary Andress 1767 

Wardell, William, Shrewsbury, and Mary Smith, Shrewsbury 1762 

Wardelle, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Ivins, Burlington 1777 

Ware, Benjamin, Salem, and Mary Allen 1773 

Ware, Elnathau, Greenwich, and Marcy Moore 1760 April 30 



Oct. 


13 


Oct. 


14 


June 


16 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


25 


Sept. 


5 


June 


14 


June 


2 


Oct. 


17 


Mar. 


10 


Sept. 


22 


Dec. 


12 


Aug. 


10 


July 


22 


June 


30 


April 


14 


July 


13 


Dec. 


3 


Mar. 


30 


June 


25 


Sept. 


24 


Mar. 


1 


Feb. 


28 


Dec. 


14 


May 


27 


Mar. 


22 


Nov. 


17 


July 


25 


Mar. 


14 


Sept. 


28 


April 


21 


Sept. 


27 


May 


22 


Jan. 


19 


Jan. 


9 


Jan. 


25 


Oct. 


26 


July 


8 


Feb. 


21 


May 


23 


July 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Jan. 


27 


Nov. 


9 



432 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ware, John, Salem, and Rath Tyler, Salem 1778 

Ware, John, Cumberland, and Margaret Newton, Cape May 1783 

Ware, Latin, Cumberland, and Ann Fithian, Cumberland 1 768 

Ware, Latin, Cumberland, and Elizabeth Barker 1782 

Ware, Richard, Salem, and Sarah Adams, Salem 1775 

Warford, Aaron, Kingwood, and Agnes Hogeland, Am well 1773 

Warford, Moses, Kingwood, and Anne Wolverton, Amwell 1771 

Warner, Jaconias, Northampton, and Sibella Eldridge, Northampton. . 1770 

Warne, John, Monmouth, and Zehiah Warne, Monmouth "...1766 

Warne, John, South Amboy, and Mary Brown 1773 

Warne, Joshua, South Amboy, and Meleney Disbrow, South Amboy. . 17G2 
Warne, Samuel, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Disbrow, Perth Amboy. . . 1755 

Warne, Stephen, Middlesex, and Mercy Peirce, Middlesex 1729 

Warne, Thomas, Middlesex, and Mary Prall, Staten Island 1759 

Warner, Isaac, Philadelphia, and Lydia Colton, Philadelphia 1757 

Warner, James, Burlington, and Sarah Favis, Burlington 1767 

Warner, John, Middlesex, and Sarah Ogbourn 1769 

Warner, Moses, Evesham, ami Elizabeth Gardner . ...... 1782 

Warner, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Mary Chapman, Burlington. .. . 1756 

Warner, Salaways, Evesham, and Susannah Conder, Evesham 1760 

Warner, Samuel, Middlesex, and Sarah Morrell 1765 

Warner, Samuel. Evesham, and Hepzibah Matlack, Evesham 1784 

Warren. Frettwell, Hanover, and Susannah Stockton 1760 

Warren, Jacob, Burlington, and Rebeckah Mount 1768 

Warrick, Abraham, Upper Freehold, Rebeckah Britton, Monmouth. . . 1750 

Warrick, Authony, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Crawford 1775 

Warrick, John, Gloucester, and Margaret Fry 1781 

Warwick, William, Gloucester, and Jemima Cheesinan 1780 

Wasley, Wasley, Bucks, Pa., and Phebe Bunting, Bucks, Pa 1719 

Water house, John, Perth Amboy, and Sophia Watson, Perth Amboy. . 1759 

Waterman, Henry, Burlington, and Mary Godfrey, Burlington 1727 

Waters, Anthony, Essex, and Margaret Codman 1767 

Waters, William, Salem, and Rebecca Bassett 1752 

Waters, William, Burlington, and Anne Munroe, Northampton 1757 

Watkins, Abijah, and Fhoebe Field, Burlington 1773 

Watkins, Eleazer, Springfield, and Elizabeth Scott, Springfield. . . .... 1773 

Watkins, Solomon, Burlington, and Mary Brayman, Burlington ... 1731 

Watkinson, John, Springfield, and Abijah Monear, Springfield 1715 

Watkinson, Burlington, and Margaret Leland, Burlington 1776 

Watkinson, Richard, Springfield, and Martha Ewing, Springfield 1771 

W'atre, Andrie, Freehold, and Margaret Derricksou, Midclletown 1763 April 18 

Watson, Benjamin, Evesham, and Martha Evans, Burlington 1767 

Watson, David, Freehold, and Anne Tice, Freehold 1752 

Watson, George, and Mary Towers, Philadelphia 1711 

Watson, Isaac, Greenwich, and Elizabeth Powell, Greenwich 1760 

Watson, James, New Hanover, and Hannah Estill, New Hanover 1771 



Dec. 


30 


May 


22 


Feb. 


15 


July 


30 


July 


25 


Nov. 


29 


Jan. 


12 


Mar. 


1 


Dec. 


26 


June 


9 


Oct. 


28 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


13 


Feb. 


19 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


18 


Feb. 


4 


Nov. 


13 


Dec. 


5 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


3 


Dec. 


8 


Feb. 


2 


Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


11 


Jan. 


25 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


12 


April 


12 


Feb. 


26 


April 


27 


Jan. 


31 


Oct. 


1 


May- 


5 


Mar. 


20 


Nov. 


4 


July 


24 


April 


18 


April 


18 


Feb. 


11 


Nov. 


21 


Feb. 


20 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


5 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 433 

Watson, John, Monmouth, and Jaunet Campbell, Monmouth . , 174-4 

Watson, John, Mansfield, and Mary Everingham, Mansfield 1766 

Watson, John, Jr., Nottingham, and Ruth Biles 1771 

Watson, Peter, Freehold, and Mary Ker, Freehold 1757 

Watson, Richard, Burlington, and Mary Howard 1756 

Watson, Thomas, Bristol, and Mary Hensley, Bristol 1764 

Watson, William, Cumberland, and Mary Mulf ord 1 754 

Watson, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Achley 1783 

Watt, James, Cape May, and Rachel Hand, Cape May 1770 

Watts, Charles, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Hibbs, Pennsylvania . . . 1735 
Watwood, George, Perth Amboy, Hannah Applegate, Perth Amboy. . . 1745 

Wayman, Henry, Chesterfield, and Sarah Burtis 1767 

Wayman, Henry, Mansfield, and Patience Chapman 1763 

Weaser, Frederick, Am well, and Mary Swallow, Amwell 1769 

Weatherbe, Benjamin, Salem, and Margaret Willis 1757 

Weatherby, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Edith Smith 1772 

Weatherby, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Ann Flanningham 1783 

Weatherby, Henry, Deptf ord, and Sarah Paul, Greenwich 1754 

Weatherby, Nathan, Gloucester, and Kezea West. 1782 

Weatherill, Thomas, Salem, and Sarah Hale, Salem 1748 

Weaver, Thomas, Gloucester, and Abigail Cheevers, Gloucester 1756 

Webb, Isaac, Middlesex, and Rachel Letts 1774 

Webb, Isaac, Springfield, and Mary Penrow, Springfield ] 783 

Webb, James, Burlington, and Mary Autram 1783 

Webb, John, Burlington, and Rebecca England, Burlington, 1740 

Webb, John, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Porter, Amwell .... 1765 

Webb, John, Gloucester, and Milicent Coates 1779 

Webb, Robert, Jr., Burlington, and Barthia Crammer,! Burlington. ..1751 
Webb, Robert, Jr., Shalton Island, and Barthia Crammer, - Burlington. 1751 

Webb, Samuel, Gloucester, and Rachel Wallen 1773 

Webb, Zebulon, Burlington, and Edith Lowder, Burlington 1740 

Webb, Zebulon, Hanover, and Ezabel Pearson 1762 

Webber, Thomas, Salem, and Mary Vandervere, Salem. . . 1761 

Webley, John, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Wardell, Shrewsbury 1756 

Webster, John, Middlesex, and Christian Drake, Piscataway. 1744 

Webster, Lawrence, Evesham, and Hannah Hugg, Northampton 1764 

Webster, Richard, Trenton, and Sarah Barrett 1778 

Weeks, David, Perth Amboy, and Agnes Sharp, Perth Amboy 1765 

Weeks, Joshua, Essex, and Margaret Ward, Essex 1761 

Weems, Thomas, Pennsylvania, and Ellenor Jacobs, Pennsylvania. . . . 1728 

Weever, Henry, Woolwich, and Elizabeth Gaidden, Woolwich 1772 

Weitzel, John, Philadelphia, and Tabitha Morris, Philadelphia 1771 

Weller, Amos, Hanover, and Rebekah Wright 1776 

Weller, Marick, Monmouth, and Mary Wright, Bordentown 1767 

1 So in the bond. -' Thus in the record. 

27 



Sept. 


29 


Aug. 


16 


April 


23 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


13 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


11 


Jan. 


16 


Oct. 


22 


June 


5 


Mar. 


25 


June 


20 


June 


20 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


6 


Dec. 


1 


May 


1 


May 


14 


Jan. 


19 


Dec. 


24 


Oct. 


15 


Feb. 


15 


Dec. 


16 


June 


5 


July 


13 


June 


11 


May 


9 


May 


9 


Dec. 


25 


May 


26 


July 


4 


Dec. 


20 


July 


27 


Oct. 


13 


Mar. 


2 2 


April 


18 


June 


29 


Feb. 


16 


Nov. 


6 


Mar. 


2 


Dec. 


25 


Dec. 


■2'2 


Jan. 


3 



434 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Welling, John, Hunterdon, and Zilpah Roberts 1781 

Welling, John, Trenton, and Mary Hart 1786 

Wells, Carvel, Freehold, and Elizabeth Bills, Freehold 17G7 

Wells, James, Philadelphia, and Rachel Lovele, Burlington 1750 

Wells, James, Goodluck, and Rachel Soarding, Goodluck 1763 

Wells, John, Trenton, and Prudence Dunbar, Trenton 1746 

Wells, Joseph, and Anne Murfiu 1774 

Wells, Peter, Gt. Egg Harbour, and Phebe May 1771 

Welsh, Darley, Chester, and Sarah Leed, Chester 1757 

Welsh. David, Roxbury, and Mary Sharpenstien 1778 

Welsh, John, Burlington, and Ruth Staekhouse, Pennsylvania 1776 

Welsh, John, Burlington, and Martha Quigley 1780 

Welsh, Patrick, Burlington, and Jane Flanigan, Burlington 1731 

Welsh, Peter, Nottingham, and Anna Bums 1 778 

Wentzell, Philip, Salem, ami Elizabeth Morrison, Salem 1765 

Werden, John, Monmouth, and Hannah Lain 1761 

Weseoat, Jael, Galleway, and Susannah Crammer 1784 

Wescot, Lenard, Great Egg Harbour, Sarah Bourton, Gt. Egg Harbour. 1761 
W( -tote, Arthur, Gt. Egg Harbour, Christian Smith, Gt. Egg Harbo'r.1759 

Wescote, Foster, Cohansey, and Abigail Fraser, Cumberland 1748 

Wescote, Zilea, Great Egg Harbour, and Catherine Deacon 1759 

Wesse, 1 Lucas, Essex, and Hannah Van Drieser"- . 1 7~>2 

Wessells, Lawrence, New York, and Mary Iselstine, Perth Amboy . . 1717 

Wessem, Yocam, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Dean, Somerset 1741 

West, Asher, Shrewsbury, and Anna Ellis, Shrewsbury 1756 

West, Bartholomew, Monmouth, and Susannah Shinn, Burlington 1727 

West, Beriah, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Parker 1761 

West, Charles, Deptford, and Sarah Hopper, Deptford 1772 

West, Daniel, Burlington, and Elizabeth Arned. 1736 

West, Daniel, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Moon. 

West, George, Shrewsbury, and Catharine Hollt, Shrewsbury 1759 

West, George, Burlington, and Mary Clark, Burlington 1768 

West, Jacob, Monmouth, and Ann Robinson, Monmouth 1771 

West, Jacob, Sussex, and Elizabeth Fitzgerald, Greenwich 1773 

West. James, Monmouth, and Ann Wing, Monmouth 1749 

West, John, Burlington, and Mary Ash, Burlington 1728 

West, John, Monmouth, and Mary West, Monmouth 1 7 Id 

West, John, Shrewsbury, and Amy Prise, Shrewsbury 1704 

West, John, Shrewsbury, and Lydia Winright, Shrewsbury 1755 

West, Jobn, Burlington, and Mary Reynolds 1759 

West, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Weatherby 1784 

West, John, Jr., Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Kay 1784 

West, John, Springfield, and Ueidah Cowgill 1784 

W -t, Jonathan, Gloucester, and Mary Pilchards 1786 

i Wessels. - Van Driessen. 



Feb. 


20 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


24 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


4 


Nov. 


5 


Oct. 


15 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


17 


May 


26 


Oct. 


5 


July 


5 


Mar. 


11 


June 


3 


Aug. 


3 


Jan. 


14 


Dec. 


8 


May 


20 


Dec. 


17 


May 


31 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


18 


Dec. 


26 


April 


22 


April 


6 


Oct. 


5 


Oct. 


2 


June 


Hi 


June 


5 


May 


15 


Feb. 


1 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


20 


Oct. 


19 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


28 


Dec. 


3 


July 


19 


Jan. 


19 


Apri 


17 


Nov. 


10 


Feb. 


28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 435 

West, Joseph, Monmouth, and Andrey Webley, Monmouth 1740 Dec. 13 

West, Josiah, Middletown, and Anne Vanbrackel 177-4 Aug. 25 

West, Matthew, Burlington, and Margaret Rossell. . 1784 Jan. 1 

West, Thomas, Pennsylvania, and Britta Johnson, Pennsylvania 1735 Mar. 27 

West, Uriah, Shrewsbury, and Mercy White, Shrewsbury 1762 Mar. 6 

West, William, Monmouth, and Divi Damey Wainright, Monmouth. .1760 Juue 16 

West, William, Nottingham, and Anne Stout 1778 Mar. 26 

Westcoat, Philip, Monmouth, and Mary Jacobs, Monmouth 1739 Sept. 24 

Westcote, David, Fairfield, and Susanna Elmer, Fairfield . . 1758 Jan. 6 

Westcote, Richard, Burlington, and Margaret Lee, Burlington .... ... 1761 Mar. 18 

Westerfelt, Benjamin, Bergen, and Sarah Berdett ... 1768 Oct. 27 

Westervelt, Caspares, Hackensack, and Rachel Zabrisco, Hackensack. .1763 May 13 

Westervelt, Casparus, Hackensack, Elizabeth Campbell, Hackensack. . 1774 April 1 

Westervelt, Cornells, Bergen, and Margret Post 1788 Jan. 7 

Westervelt, Jacob J., Bergen, and Jenny Banta 1768 Oct. 13 

Westervelt, James, Bergen, and Mary Slott 1788 June 21 

Westervelt, John, Bergen, and Anne Van Ryper 1783 Jan. 19 

Wetherby, Edmond, and Anue Gibbon, Salem 1769 Oct. 3 

Wetherbey, John, Salem, and Mary Colyer, Salem. . 1749 Mar. 19 

Wetherill, Isaac, Burlington, and Rebecca Deacon 1776 May 16 

Wetherill, Vincent, New Brunswick, and Abigail Lott 1773 April 17 

Wetherill, William, Bordentown, and Rebecca Haines, Bucks, Pa 1748 Nov. 2 

Wetherlee, Henry, Shrewsbury, and Leah Bennit, Shrewsbury 1760 Jan. 12 

Weydeman, John, Bergen, and Margaret Gruber 1767 Aug. 1 

A\ harton, James, Philadelphia, and Mary Hogg, Philadelphia 1754 Nov. 2 

Wharton, Reynold, Burlington, and Beulah Burr, Burlington 1782 May 27 

Wharton, William, Bucks, Pa., and Catharine Wesley, Bucks, Pa 1756 Dec. 13 

Wheatcraft, Edward, Burlington, and Elizabeth Weston, Monmouth. . 1732 July 18 

Wheatcraft, Samuel, Burlington, and Sarah Carter, Burlington 1736 May 7 

Wheatcraft, Samuel, Chesterfield, and Ann Hill, Chesterfield 1773 May 26 

Wheatley, William, Burlington, and Ann Warren 1760 Nov. 5 

Wheaton, Jonathan, Cumberland, and Hanuah Woodhouse. Hopewell. 1764 Aug. 23 

Wheatou, Joseph, Cape May, and Esther Willets 1768 Oct. 24 

Wheaton, Peter, Woodbridge, and Martha Manning, Piscataway 1754 April 3 

Wheaton, Robert, Cumberland, and Sarah Whittal, Salem 1765 Oct. 2 

Wheaton, Samuel, Deptford, and Kezia Ward 1780 Jan. 20 

Wheeler, Caleb, Jr., Newark, and Betsey Morris 1778 Feb. 23 

Wheeler, David, Morris, and Charity Mott, Morris 1739 40 Mar. 17 

Wheeler, Dobson, Deptfcrd, and Ann Richardson, Deptford 1737 April 30 

Wheeler, Hezekiah, Deptford, and Elizabeth Hamilton, Deptford ... 1761 April 21 

Wheeler, Jehiel, Fairfield, and Elizabeth Preston 1751 Dec. 9 

Wheeler, Nathaniel, Newark, and Mehitabel Turner, Newark 1761 Oct. 27 

Whetherby, Edmund, Salem, and Margaret Green 1784 June 12 

Whie, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Deborah Irons, Shrewsbury 1762 Sept. 4 

1 Or Dio. 



436 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Whilden, James, Cape May, and Jane Iszard, Cape May .... 1761 

Whildin, James, Cape May, and Susanba Hand 17G6 

Wbildin, James, Cape May, and Ehody Mulford 1774 

Whildin, Jonathan, Cape May, and Hannah Crowell, Cape May 1772 

Whildin, Matthew, Cape May, and Rhoda Stiles, Cape May 17G8 

Whildin, Matthew, Cape May, and Phoebe Hildreth, Cape May 1771 

Whildin, Seth, Maurice River, and Rebecca Goldin 1776 

Whilden, Wilmon, Cape May, and Elenor Hurst 1764 

Wliiltbanck, Abraham, Cape May, and Catharine Collick 1758 

Whisler, Thomas, Gloucester, and Mary Harris, Burlington 1770 

Whitacar, Ambrose, Fairfield, and Rachel Leak, Salem 1772 

Whitaker, Stephen, Bernards, and Ruth Conkling, Morristown 1779 

White, Alexander, Sussex, and Mary Clifford, Hunterdon 1769 

White, Andrew, Monmouth, and Hester Harbour, Monmouth 1743 

White, Andrew, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Pomroy 1779 

White, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Mary Morris 17»1 

White, Dauiel, New Bruuswick, and Rebecka Drake, New Brunswick. 1740 
White, Edward, Monmouth, and Rebekah Pelton, Monmouth . . . 1742 
White, Francis, Monmouth, and Elisabeth Lippincott, Monmouth . . 1749 

White, George, Burlington, and Mary Williams, Bucks, Pa 1732 

White, George, Monmouth, and Ann Lippincott, Monmouth 1747 

White, George, Bucks, Pa., and Mary Rickey, Bucks, Pa 1765 

White, George, Deerfield, and Martha Borden, Penns Neck 1772 

White, Hartshorne, Middletown, Phebe Forman, Middletown Point. . . 1759 

White, Henry, Middlesex, and Mary Gibbons, Middlesex 1762 

White, James, Salem, and Lydia Irelan, Deerfield 1773 

White, Joel, Shrewsbury, and Anne Wordel, Shrewsbury 1752 

White, John, Salem, and Mary Hall, Salem 1728 

White, John, and Lydia Shewring 1735 

White, John, Monmouth, and Mary Toilet, Shrewsbury 1739 

White, John, Perth Amboy, and Elizabeth Gumming, Perth Amboy. .1757 

White, John, Shrewsbury, and Mary Jackson, Shrewsbury 1761 

White, John, Am well, and Rachel Case, Amwell 1773 

White, John, Woolwich, and Rachel Gray, Woolwich 1781 

White, John, Windsor, and Mary Smith 1782 

White, John, Woolwich, and Sara Heins 17 — 

White, Joseph, and Anne Revell . . 1694 

White, Joseph, Bucks, Pa., and Lydia Bralesford, Bucks, Pa 1731 

White, Josiah, Shrewsbury, and Nancey Earley, Middletown 1762 

White, Matthan, Middlesex, and Elizabeth Merril 1781 

White, Melatiah, Shrewsbury, and Abigail Titus, Shrewsbury 1760 

White, Melatiah, Shrewsbury, and Lidy Wheatin, Shrewsbury. . , 1764 

White, Michael, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Vandyke, Shrewsbury ...1758 

White, Peter, Monmouth, aud Hulda Tabor, Monmouth 1747 

White, Philip, Burlington, and Hannah Southard 1777 

White, Robert, Jr., Monmouth, and Mary Price, Monmouth 1742 



July 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


16 


Dec. 


8 


April 


22 


Nov. 


4 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 


19 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


24 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


8 


April 


16 


April 


28 


Sept. 


18 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


5 


June 


27 


Nov. 


7 


July 


11 


June 


12 


Nov. 


3 


Oct. 


14 


Mar. 


4 


Nov. 


3 


June 


25 


Oct. 


3 


Jan. 


17 


Feb. 


11 


Sept. 


11 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


4 


April 


12 


Aug. 


13 


April 


10 


July 


6 


Jan. 


2 


May 


2 


April 


19 


Jan. 


22 


Aug. 


16 


Sept. 


25 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 437 

White, Robert, New Windsor, ami Hannah Clark 1768 Dee. 10 

White, Thomas, Shrewsbury, and Charity Green, Shrewsbury 1758 Dee. is 

White, Vincent, Shrewsbury, and ( trace Teffary, Shrewsbury 1755 April 14 

White, Vincent, Shrewsbury, and Rachel Green, Shrewsbury 1759 April 1 

White, William, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Lippett, Middletown 1766 Feb. 18 

Whitecar, Joseph, Cumberland, and Tabitha Davis ' 1780 Mar. 4 

Whitecar, Richard, Cumberland, and Elisabeth Husted 1756 Dec. 7 

Whitecar, Thomas, Fairfield, and Bartha Drown, Fairfield 1761 Nov. 12 

Whitecar, Thomas Fairfield, and Rachel Daniels 1780 Feb. 16 

Whitehead, Jobn, Burlington, and Mary Peachee 1733 July 27 

Whitehouse, Job, Springfield, and Olivia McCulley, Springfield 1773 Nov. 27 

Whitenack, Andries, Somerset, and Mary Hagerman 1778 Mar. 19 

Whitehead, James, Galloway, and Sarah Wood 1785 Feb. 8 

Whitlock, James, Monmouth, and Hannah Herbert 1769 Dec. 11 

Whitlock, John, and Lydia Bowne, Middletown 1758 Aug. 7 

Whitteo, Thomas, Burlington, and Lydia Williams, Burlington 1740 July 14 

Whittemore, Samuel, Essex, and Elizabeth Lose, Bergen 1753 Aug. 30 

Whittiss, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Topping, Burlington 1741 Mar. 7 

Whitton, William, Burlington, and Mary Hammett. 1738 Mar. 27 

Wichard, Phillip, Burlington, and Rachel Bishop, Burlington 1758 Mar. 29 

Wichart, Philip, Northampton, and Mary Critch 1781 Feb. 27 

Wick, Henry, Jr. , Morris, and Elizabeth Cooper, Morris 1760 Feb. 4 

Wickans, William, Gloucester, and Mary White 1782 July 23 

Wickoff, Martin, Jr., Hunterdon, and Gertye Newell, Hunterdon 1770 May 5 

Wickoff, Simon, Hunterdon, and Jamemiu ah Anderson, Somerset 1770 July 27 

Wicks, Zephaniah, Galloway, and Mary Myers 1781 Jan. 29 

AViggius, David, Salem, and Rebecca Griffin, Salem 1727 Nov. 23 

Wiggins, John, Trenton, and Abigail Crane 1784 Mar. 22 

Wikoff, Jacob, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Cowvenoven, Middletown 1754 Jan. 7 

Wikoff, James, Hunterdon, and Hannah Stout 1765 April 2 

Wikoff, < .hike, Monmouth, and Sarah Schenck 1769 Dec. 19 

Wikoff, Peter, Freehold, and Elsey Longstreet, Shrewsbury 1759 Oct. 29 

Wilcocks, Hugh, Burlington, and Sarah Alburtice, Burlington 1727 June 5 

Wilcox, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Elkinton, Burlington 1728 April 3 

Wild, John, Gloucester, and Hester Joley 1784 June 11 

Wiley, John, Burlington, and Lydia Lippincott, Burlington 1780 Aug. 29 

Wiley, Joseph, Gloucester, and Mary Middleton 1779 May 31 

Wilgus, William, Upper Freehold, and Hannah Foster 1769 Sept. 11 

Wilkason, John, Burlington, and Mary Saunders 1759 July 10 

Wilkius, Amos, Burlington, and Sarah Haines. >)k 1756 June 17 

Wilkins, John, Evesham, and Hannah Gwinnall, Evesham 1761 May 19 

Wilkius, John, Burlington, and Mary Stokes, Burlington 1776 Aug. 24 

Wilkins, Joseph, Evesham, and Sarah Norton 1784 Jan. 17 

Wilkins, Samuel, Evesham, and Mary Eldridge, Evesham 1783 Oct. 16 

Wilkins, Uriah, Burlington, and Elizabeth Eyre 1792 Oct. 18 

Wilkius, William, Gloucester, and Sarah Flanningham 1773 May 27 



438 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Wilkinson, Allen, Middlesex, and Anne Porter 1747-8 

Wilkinson, Johu, Hanover, and Levinah Wilson, Hanover 1748 

Wilkinson, John, Evesham, anil Amy Small, Evesham . . 1784 

Wilkinson, Nathaniel, Burlington, and Rachel Fenton 1735 

Wilkinson, William, Salem, and Mary Nickson, Salem 1689 

Wilkinson, Winson, Mansfield, and Sarah Rickets 1781 

Wilkison, Edward, Woodhridge, and Mary Flatt, Woodbridge 1763 

Wilkison, John, Monmouth, and Mary Starkey 1758 

Wilkeson, William, Monmouth, and Bridget Sherlock 1749-50 

Willard, Henry, Gloucester, and Ann Wetherill, Gloucester 1736 

Willet, Cornelius, New Jersey, and Nancy Whalon 1781 

Willet, John, Middletown, and Mary Wall, Middletown 1751 

Willet, Samuel, Readington, and S irah Tilton, Freehold 1752 

Willets, Hope, Burlington, and Mary Back, Cape May 1730 

Willets, Isaac, Cape May, and Mary Simkius 1771 

Willets, Jacob, Cape May, and Abigail Mackey 1777 

Willets, James, Cape May, and Rachel Young, Cape May 1776 

Willets, John, Cape May, and Rebekah Smith 1763 

Willets, Lewis, Burlington, and Sarah Morris, Burlington 1768 

Willets, Timothy, Shrewsbury, and Mary Burdsell, Stafford 1762 

Willett, Augustin, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Hicks, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Willett, Edward, Lebanon, and Elizabeth Bodiue, Lebanon 1752 

Willets, Amos, Monmouth, and Abigail Cook, Burlington 1743 

Willey, David, Sussex, and Elizabeth Todd 1768 

Willey, Josiah, Gt. Egg Harbor, and Hannah Adams, Egg Harbor . . . 1750 

Willgus, John, Monmouth, and Jane Curtis, Monmouth 1744-5 

Willhouse, George, Burlington, and Mary Hill, Burlington , 1685 

Williams, Asher, Chesterfield, and Mary Beck 1763 

Williams, Barlow, Cape May, and Mehitabel Carll, Cape May 1776 

Williams, Benjamin, Essex, and Elizabeth Stone, Woodbridge 1757 

Williams, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Anne Slocum, Monmouth 1759 

Williams, David, Bucks, Pa., and Jane Hare, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Williams, Edmund, Shrewsbury, and Meriam Tilton, Shrewsbury .... 1762 

Williams, Giles, Monmouth, and Catharine Parker, Monmouth 1761 

Williams, James, Burlington, and Ann Swift. . . 1777 

Williams, John, Burlington, and Rebecca Christopher. . . 1734 

Williams, John, Shrewsbury, and Hannah Scott, Shrewsbury 1751 

Williams, John, Shrewsbury, and Deborah White, Shrewsbury 1754 

Williams, John, Gloucester, and Martha Herritage, Deptford 1755 

Williams, John, Freehold, and Elizabeth Dorsett, Middletown 1761 

Williams, John, Hackensack, and Leah Van Emburgb, Hackensack. . . 1761 

Williams, Jonathan, Essex, and Susanna Maxfield 1768 

Williams, Josh, Hanover, and Hannah Tilton 1771 

Williams, Tatuin, Gloucester, and Hannah Flewellin, Gloucester. . . . .1761 

Williams, William, Upper Freehold, and Sarah Britton 1762 

Williams, William, Virginia, and Abigail Collins 1779 



Jan. 


27 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


30 


Dec. 


1 


June 


18 


Jan. 


30 


April 


30 


Nov. 


28 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


28 


June 


20 


Oct, 


7 


April 


27 


Dec. 


9 


June 


25 


Feb. 


17 


Sept. 


28 


Oct. 


2 


June 


19 


Aug. 


17 


June 


18 


July 


15 


Mar. 


16 


Nov. 


9 


Nov. 


10 


Dec. 


5 


Nov. 


10 


Nov. 


19 


Dec. 


6 


Aug. 


11 


Mar. 


16 


July 


22 


Oct. 


22 


July 


18 


Nov. 


12 


May 


25 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


11 


May 


14 


Sept. 


25 


Feb. 


11 


Jan. 


19 


July 


24 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 439 

Williams, William, Pennsylvania, ami Rebecca Garrison. 1782 

Williamson, Abraham, Amwell, and Catherine Tenbroyck, Somerset .1773 
Williamson, Arthur, Monmouth, and Mary Vanderveer, Monmouth. . .1746 

Williamson Cort, Now Jersey, and Anne Stryker, Somerset 1747 

Williamson, David, Middlesex, and Elenor Schuyler, Somerset 1752 

Williamson, David, Bethlehem, and Elizabeth Johnson, Bethlehem. . .1771 

Williamson, Elbert, Freehold, and Willemtje Schenck, Freehold 1752 

Williamson, Isaac, and Anna Vanharling . . 1780 

Williamson, Jacob,- Amwell, and Margaret Merlatt, Heading 1772 

Williamson, Jacob, Amwell, and Rachel Corwine, Amwell 1775 

Williamson, Jacob, Amwell, and Hannah Ten Brook 1785 

Williamson, John, Amwell, and Sarah Prall 1770 

Williamson, Mathew, Sussex, and Lydia Drake 1784 

Williamson, Nicholas, Somerset, and Arianche Duinont 1778 

Williamson, Peter, Bucks, Pa., and Leah Le Niser, Bucks, Pa 1731 

Williamson, Peter, Backs, Pa., and Sarah Suchum, Bucks, Pa 1764 

Williamson, Samuel, Middlesex, and Eleanor Gnlick 1782 

Williamson, William, Philadelphia, and Sarah Ray, Philadelphia 1731 

Williamson, William, Middlesex, Susanna Hickles, New Brunswick. . . 1739 
Williamson, William, New Brunswick, Martha Thompson, New B'w'k. 1741 
Williamson, William, Middlesex, and Christina Lougstreet, Monm'th. 1741 

Williamson, William, Middlesex, and Anne Suydam 1782 

Willis, Amos, New Hanover, and Jane Frazee, Bordentown 1747 

Willis, Amos, Nottingham, and Merribe Wells, Nottingham 17G7 

Willis, Daniel, Jr., and Mary Shinn 1695 

Willis, John, Burlington, and Elizabeth Wood. . 1743 

Willis, Thomas, Egg Harbor, and Rebecca Moody 1778 

Willis, William, Jr., Alloways Creek, Jane Walker, Alloways Creek. . .1767 

Willets, Amos, Springfield, and Charity Engle 1778 

Willets, James, Cape May, and Esther Hand, Cape May .... 1740 

Willkie, William, Upper Freehold, Elizabeth Jobs, Upper Freehold. ..1758 
Willmouth, Lazarus, Middlesex, and Catharine Warne, Middlesex ...1762 

Wills, Daniel, Jr., Burlington, and Margaret Newbold 1686 

Wills, David, Eveshain, and Martha Crispin, Evesham 1750 

Wills, George, Philadelphia, and Jane Kuowles, Philadelphia 1742 

Wills, George, New Jersey, and Elizabeth Rossell 177'.) 

Wills, George, Burlington, and Sarah Paschall 1787 

Wills, James, Philadelphia, and Rachel Lovell, Burlington 1750 

Wills, John, Willingborougb, and Bythinia Cox 1763 

Wills, John, Burlington, and Hope Gaskill 1778 

Wills, John, Burlington, and Catty Wynds 1790 

Wills, Moses, Burlington, and Margaret Wills, Burlington 1764 

Wills, Samuel, Morris, and Rebecca Bitson, Morris 1758 

Willson, Andrew, Jr., Middletown, and Hester Bonham, Middletowu 1751 

Willson, Andrew, Middlesex, and Susanna Pangborn, Middlesex 1759 

Willson, Andrew, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Anderson, Maidenhead ....1769 



Nov. 


3 


May 


6 


Jan. 


31 


Mar. 


22 


Aug. 


13 


Aug. 


28 


Dec. 


6 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


30 


Dec. 


11 


Mar. 


22 


April 


9 


Nov. 


4 


May 


5 


Jan. 


19 


May 


22 


Mar. 


12 


Mar. 


27 


Jan. 


22 


April 


20 


Aug. 


24 


Feb. 


18 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


2 


Mar. 


12 


June 


25 


Sept. 


22 


May 


11 


May 


9 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


14 


Dec. 


30 


Jan. 


21 


Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


3 


April 


3 


Oct. 


23 


Aug. 


19 


Mar. 


4 


July 


7 


Mar. 


31 


Mar. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


Mar. 


19 


Jan. 


31 



440 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Willson, Benjamin, Jr., Monmouth, Ann Vanbrockel, Staten Island. .1751 

Willson, Enoch, Great Egg Harbour, and Mary Dowers 1785 

Willson, Ezekiah, Burlington, and Christian Atkinson, Burlington 1727 

Willson, Hendrick, Somerset, and Nelly Dorn, Monmouth 1751 

Willson, Isaac, Middlesex, and Nelly Hay, Middlesex 1780 

Willson, James, Hunterdon, and Lucretia Freeman 

Willson, James, Jr., Perth Amboy, Margaret Perine, Perth Amboy. . . . 1743 

Willson, James, New Brunswick, and Mary Lee, New Brunswick 1750 

Willson, James, Perth Amboy, and Catherine Islestine, Perth Amboy. .1750 

Willson, James, Middletown, and Mary Boorn, Middletown 1757 

Willson, John, Burlington, and Catharine Eslo 1778 

Willson, Lambert, Middletown, and Anne Powling, Middletown 1757 

Willson, Matthew, Burlington, and Anne Guilliam, Burlington 1728 

Willson, Matthew, Burlington, and Hannah ScrDggy, Burlington 1771 

Willson, Michael, Burlington, and Sarah Blackbourn 1730 

Willson, Minerd, and Elce Rineson 1781 

Willson, Robert, Middletown, and Jane Mackdaniel, Middletown 1739 

Willson, Robert, Morristown, and Priscilla Hinds, Morris 1780 

Willson, Samuel, Piscataway, and Margaret Martin, Piscataway 1751 

Willson, Seavil, Gloucester, and Susannah Chew, Gloucester 1750 

Willson, Thomas, Amwell, and Mary Fisher, Amwell 17G8 

Willson, William, Burlington, and Mary Ashton, Monmouth 1730 

Wilmerton, Paul, Burlington, and Rebecca Fenimore 1778 

Wilmurt, Peter, Middlesex, and Martilla Jolly 1769 

Wilson, Abraham, Hillsborough, and Anne Voorhies - 1778 

Wilson, Alexander, Hunterdon, and Eliza Johnson 1788 

Wilson, David, Northampton, and Penelope Worley, Northampton .... 1748 

Wilson, Henry, Bristol, Pa., and Lydia Haw, Bristol, Pa 17G3 

Wilson, James, Freehold, and Elizabeth Remine, Freehold. . 1748 

Wilson, James, Freehold, and Catherine Stilwell, Shrewsbury 17G5 

Wilson, James, Bethlehem, and Ann Biggar, Bethlehem 1768 

Wilson, James, Amwell, and Sarah Smith, Hopewell 1774 

Wilson, James, Amwell, and Margaret Hunt 1779 

Wilson, James, Evesham, and Mary Joyce 1781 

Wilson, James, Galloway, and Susanah Cammel 1784 

Wilson, John, Somerset, and Elizabeth Belmer 1749 

Wilson, John, Hunterdon, and Mary Stewart 1785 

Wilson, Joseph, Cranberry, and Hannah Story, Perth Amboy 1746 

Wilson, Joseph, Somerset, and Elizabeth Rigge, Somerset 1757 

Wilson, Joseph, Middletown, and Bathiah Fauger, Middletown 1765 

Wilson, Peter, Freehold, and Sarah Smith, Middletown. 1749 

Wilson, Peter, New Barbadoes, and Catherine Duryee 1781 

Wilson, Robert, Philadelphia, and Martha Stewart 1775 

Wilson, Robert, Gloucester, and Eleanor Croston 1783 

Wilson, Thomas, and Anne Silver 1693 

Wilson, Thomas, Burlington, and Hanah Berry 1759 



Dec. 11 

Feb. 7 

Feb. 1 

Nov. 7 

Nov. 14 

Mar. 3 

Mar. 22 

April 18 

June 30 

Sept. 11 

June 30 

Sept. 12 

Aug. 24 

May 4 

Jan. 1 

July 31 

Aug. 31 

Oct. 25 

Dec. 1 

May 14 

Aug. 29 

April 30 

May 29 

Dec. 25 

June 7 

July 15 

Aug. 31 

Dec. 24 

June 1 

Nov. 7 

Jan. 24 

Jan. 25 

Jan. 4 

Dec. 1 

May 2 

Jan. 21 

Nov. 27 

Nov. 18 

Aug. 21 

July 24 

Feb. 3 

Dec. 30 

Sept. 30 

July 6 

May 4 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 44 1 

Wilsou, William, Somerset, ami Tyne Auten 1781 

Wilson, William, and Martha Allen 1782 

Wilsey, Cornelius, Upper Penns Neck, and Mary Slide 1784 

Wiltshire, John, Gloucester, and Elizabeth Williams, Gloucester 1738 

Winier, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Sarah Stevenson, Burlington 1780 

Wiuans, Jacob, Essex, and Betsey Williams, Essex 1763 

Winans, Josiah, Elizabeth Town, and Experience Winans, Essex.. .. 17-40 
Winants, John, Staten Island, and Elizabeth Bebout, Staten Island . . 1755 
Winant-, Peter, Richmond, N. Y , Christian Slacgth, Richmond, N. Y.1763 
Winants, Wiuaut, Staten Island, and Rhoda Lyddell, Staten Island. . . 1747 

Winder, Thomas, Hunterdon, and Rebecca Gregory, Hunterdon 1731 

Windsor, Anthony, Salem, and Elizabeth Adams, Jr., Salem 1683 

Wiuner, Amos, and Rebeca Cooper 1779 

Winner, Isaac, Bucks, Pa., and Hannah Searl, Backs, Pa 1776 

Winner, Jacob, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Helling, Bucks, Pa 1774 

Winner, John, Northampton, and Hannah Carr, Northampton 1776 

Winter, Gabriel, Middletown, and Deborah Stilwell, Middletown 1747 

Winter, James, Middletown, and Mary Shepherd, Middletown 1755 

Winter, Joseph, Monmouth, and Catharine Truax, Monmouth 1742 

Winter, Moses, Middletown, and Anne Kimming, Middletown 1749 

Winton, Nicholas, Salem, and Dorothy Davis, Salem 1699-70 

Witchell, Samuel, Burlington, and Aun Blouk 1779 

Wise, Philip, Morris, aud Lenah Haun 1769 

Wiser, Henry, Richmond, and Catharine Wynants 1768 

Wite, Amos, Shrewsbury, and Lucy Tallman, Shrewsbury 1766 

Wite, John, Deptford, and Grace Waitt, Deptford 1749 

Wite, Joseph, Shrewsbury, and Ruth Woolley, Shrewsbury 1761 

Witt, Francis, Burlington, and Abigail Stevenson, Burlington 1766 

Woertendyck, Frederick, and Margery Ryers, both Orange Co., N. Y. . 1763 
Woglem, Abraham, Staten Island, and Sarah Liddell, Staten Island. . . 1758 
Wolcott, Benjamin, Monmouth, and Rachel Wainright, Monmouth. ..1749 

Wolley, John, Freehold, and Mary Johnston, Freehold 1766 

Wolliug, Gershom, Middletown, and Mary Roberts, Middletown 1743 

Wolliug, James, Middletown, and Alice Stilwell, Middletown 1752 

Wood, Amos, Upper Freehold, and Rebeca Thorn, Upper Freehold . . . 1769 

Wood, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Mary Ashton, Philadelphia 1727 

Wood, Benjamiu, Monmouth, and Leah Robins, Monmouth 1741 

Wood, David, Deptford, and Lydia Branson 1773 

Wood, David, Salem, and Prudence Roberts, Cumberland 1777 

Wood, Francis, and Margaret English ] 781 

Wood, Henry, Gloucester, and Hannah Eldridge 1779 

Wood, Hezekiah, Burlington, and Mary Kenton, Burlington 1771 

Wood, James, Deptford, and Ann Catle 1765 

Wood, James, Jr., Philadelphia, and Rachel Cooper, Gloucester. ..... 1745 

Wood, Jechonias, Pilesgrove, and Christiana Gill 1772 

Wood, Jeremiah, Long Island, and Catharine Lloyd, Salem 1736 



Sept. 


3 


Mar. 


25 


July 


21 


Dec. 


14 


May 


3 


Jan. 


20 


Jan. 


7 


Sept. 


6 


May 


17 


June 


8 


April 


1 


Aug. 


23 


May 


1 


Nov. 


9 


Sept. 


29 


April 


1 


Mar. 


8 


Oct. 


21 


Sept. 


9 


Jan. 


17 


Jan. 


16 


July 


9 


July 


17 


July 


11 


April 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Dec. 


7 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


25 


Nov. 


27 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


24 


Dec. 


26 


Mar. 


5 


Mar. 


30 


Aug. 


31 


Jan. 


7 


July 


9 


Oct. 


16 


Dec. 


17 


Mar. 


14 


Jan. 


8 


Jan. 


14 


July 


4 


July 


2 



442 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Wood, Jeremiah, New Jersey, and Sarah Updike 1778 

Wood, John, Deptford, and Ann Reeves, Deptford 1765 

Wood, John, Upper AUoways Creek, and Martha Sayce, Stow Creek . . 1776 

Wood, John, Hopewell, and Elizabeth Johnston 1780 

Wood, John, Stow Creek, and Lucia Mulford 1785 

Wood, Joseph, Staten Island, and Elizabeth Serrin, Staten Island 1758 

Wood, Joseph, Freehold, and Phebe Honce, Freehold 1766 

Wood, Joseph, Upper Freehold, and Anne Hutchinson 1768 

Wood, Joseph, Georgia, and Mary Benezet. 1773 

Wood, Joseph, Philadelphia, and Eleonora Prosser 1777 

Wood, Joseph, Jr., Orange Co., N. Y., and Leah Vansail, Bergen. . .1743-4 

Wood, Moses, Salem, and Elizabeth Miller 1775 

Wood, Peter, Burks, Pa., and Mary Nutt, Pennsylvania 1730 

Wood, Samuel, Alloways Creek, and Sarah Dare, Deerfield 1767 

Wood, Samuel, Woolwich, and Emily Tredway 1779 

Wood, Thomas, Burlington, and Mary Howie, Burlington 1685 

Wood, Thomas, Chesterfield, and Sarah Hambelton 1761 

Wood, Timothy, Staten Island, and Elisabeth Winant, Staten Island. 1747-8 

Wood, Timothy, New York, and Agnes Fleming 1767 

Wood, William, Somerset, and Catherine Tyson, Middlesex 1752 

Woodard, Daniel, Somerset, and Sarah Moor 1784 

Woodard, Nathaniel, Bernards, and Rachel Vail, Bernards 1773 

Woodhouse, Samuel, Salem, and Aun Hudson, Salem 1694-5 

Woodmanse, David, Monmouth, and Penelope Warden, Monmouth. . . 1744 

Woodmansee, James, Monmouth, and Hanah Warden 1758 

Woodmansee, John, Upper Freehold, and Mary Bunting 1778 

Woodmansee, Thomas, Dover (Monmouth), and Sarah West, Dover. .1772 
Woodrow, Joseph, Northampton, and Jemima Leeds, Northampton. . . 1765 

Woodruff, Amos, Cumberland, and Mary Walling, Greenwich 1775 

Woodruff, Hezekiah, Morris, and Mary Blackley 1776 

Woodruff, Ichabod, Shrewsbury, and Mary Lippincott, Shrewsbury. . . 1739 

Woodruff, John, and Phebe Stratton 1757 

Woodruff, Thomas, Elizabeth Town, Anne Marsh, Elizabeth Town . . . 1753 

Woods, William, Sussex, and Sarah Lane 1785 

Woodward, Anthony, Jr., Monmouth, and Increase Dennis 1760 

Woodward, George, Burlington, and Margaret Mount, Monmouth 1780 

Woodward, Henry, Gloucester, and Ruth Ireland, Gloucester 1746 

Woodward, Joseph, Burlington, and Hannah Warner, Burlington 1727 

Woodward, Ralph, Burlington, and Mary Brock, Burlington 1758 

Woodward, Samuel, Burlington, and Rachael Cowgill, Burlington 1728 

Woodward, Thomas, Jr., Upper Freehold, and Susannah Forman 1762 

Woolley, Adam, Monmouth, and Ruth Hays, Monmouth 1742 

Woolley, Benjamin, Shrewsbury, and Phebe Coopper, Freehold 1758 

Woolley, Benjamin, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Ribbet, Shrewsbury. . 1759 
Woolley, Benjamin, Jr., Monmouth, Catherine Husbands, Monmouth. 1750 
Woolley, Daniel, Shrewsbury, Patience Throckmorton, Shrewsbury. . .1758 



May 


29 


Oct. 


28 


Mar. 


20 


Nov. 


18 


Jan. 


18 


Oct. 


26 


July 


24 


Nov. 


30 


July 


29 


Oct. 


24 


Mar. 


10 


June 


24 


Oct. 


1 


Oct. 


27 


Dec. 


7 


Nov. 


3 


May 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Dec. 


28 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


20 


Nov. 


21 


Jan. 


22 


Dec. 


21 


Oct. 


5 


April 


27 


Sept. 


17 


Oct. 


31 


Apri 


19 


May 


11 


Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


25 


Mar. 


22 


Oct. 


13 


Aug. 


21 





22 


May 


30 


May 


18 


Sept 


16 


Oct. 


13 


Oct. 


13 


May 


31 


Jan. 


13 


April 2 


Aug 


8 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 443 

Woolley, Daniel, Shrewsbury, and Surah Allen, Shrewsbury 1763 Feb. 23 

Woolley, Emanuel, Shrewsbury, and Isabell Carter, Shrewsbury 1752 May 28 

Woolley, James, Monmouth, and Catherine Woolley, Monmouth 1747 Jan. 14 

Woolley, James, Shrewsbury, and Sarah Kelley, Shrewsbury 1761 Dec. 8 

Woolley, John, Middletown, and Phebe Woolley, Shrewsbury . ... 1751 May 4 

Woolley, Silas, Shrewsbury, and Margaret Husbands, Shrewsbury... 1752 April 27 

Woolley, Silas, Shrewsbury, and Marah Bills, Shrewsbury 1754 Nov. 21 

Woolley, Stephen, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Large, Shrewsbury 1760 June 18 

Woolley, William, Middletown, and Elizabeth Evonts, Middletown. . .1754 July 25 

Woolley, William, Shrewsbury, and Susannah Helldreth, Middletown. 1755 Aug. 15 

Woolman, Abraham, Burlington, and Elizabeth Newton, Burlington. . 1765 Nov. 23 

Woolman, John, Pennsylvania, and Elizabeth Shadager, Burlington. . 1749 Nov. 14 

Woolman, Samuel, Mansfield, and Jane Ware, Pennsylvania 1771 Nov. 23 

Woolman, Uriah, Philadelphia, and Susannah Burr, Philadelphia 1769 Mar. 2 

Woolsey, Benjamin, Trenton, and Ann Carter, Trenton 1764 July 6 

Woolsori, Abraham, Cape May, and Judith Robeus, Cape May 1769 May 29 

Woolston, Cornwell, Burlington, and Hannah Arison, Burlington 1762 April Last 

Woolston, Jabez, Evesham, and Esther Bozell, Northampton 1767 Dec. 5 

Woolston, Jacob, Burlington, and Sarah Gosling, Burlington 1759 Feb. 27 

Woolston, John, Jr., Burlington, and Lettice Newbold 1683 Dec. 6 

Woolston, John, Burlington, and Hannah Tencher 1738 May 23 

Woolston, Joseph, Burlington, and Jane Topping, Burlington 1737 Dec. 22 

Woolston, Joseph, Northampton, and Mary Eayres 1781 June 25 

Woolston, Joshua, Northampton, and Hannah Birdsel, Northampton. .1767 May 18 

Woolston, Joshua, Burlington, and Tamar Ewing, Burlington 1770 Sept. 29 

Woolston, Melintus, Springfield, and Charity Eldridge, Springfield 1764 May 30 

Woolston, Michael, Northampton, and Anne Chemaly, Northampton. . 1774 Mar. 5 

Woolston, Newbold, Mansfield, and Mary Bowlby 1775 April 7 

Woolston, Samuel, Jr., Northampton, Celena Woolston, Northampton 1749 Dec. 25 

Woolston, William, Northampton, aud Hannah Eayre 1771 Feb. 11 

Woolverton, Charles, Amwell, aud Man Drake, Hopewell . 1763 Aug. 8 

Woolverton, John, Amwell, and Elizabeth Wilson, Amwell 1768 Nov. 8 

W< k ister, Michael, aud Elizabeth Sharp 1769 Jan. 3 

Worden, Samuel, Good Luck, and Rebecka Chamberlain, Good Luck 1755 Oct. 10 

Worledge, John, Salem, and Ann Lefever, Salem 1684 Nov. (i 

Worinton, John, Chester, and Mary Hesher, Chester 1772 April 11 

Worrall, Joseph, Bucks Co., Pa., and Anna Clark, Bucks Co., Pa 1765 June 4 

Worriel, William, Northampton, and Sarah Lee 1784 Oct. 22 

Worsten, John, Pennsylvania, and Ruth Wardel, Pennsylvania 1728 May 11 

Worth, Edward Patterson, Monmouth, and Sarah Harbour, Monmouth. 1742 April 17 

Worth, Giles. Cape May, and Rachel Townsend 1770 Mar. 14 

Worth, Henry, Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth Ellison, Shrewsbury 1750 Dec. 3 

Worth, Richard, Salem, and Lyddy Nilson, Salem 1772 Dec. 1 1 

Worth, William, Perth Amboy, and Sarah Wilson, Perth Amboy 1758 Dec. 6 

Worthington, Benjamin, Gloucester, and Eleanor Jones, Gloucester. .. 1731 Mar. 11 

Worthington, Ephraim, Salem, and Sarah Stitch 1757 May 18 



444 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Worthington, John, Hopewell, and Mary Vickers 1779 

Worthington, Robert, Philadelphia, and Mary Burtis, Burlington. . . .172? 

Worthly, John, Monmouth, and Lydia Bowne, Monmouth 1747 

Worthly, Obadiah, Shrewsbury, and Ann Bonhain, Shrewsbury 1766 

Wortman, David, Middlesex, and Lydia Gordon 1770 

Wosten, William, Salem, and Haunah Closen 1733 

Wothman, Constant, Cumberland, and Lediah Robins, Cumberland. . . 1754 

Wour, James, Burlington, and Sarah Kemble 1779 

Wouterse, Fraucis, Essex, and Hyntjei Bruyu, Essex 1741 

Wright, Aaron, Burlington, and Elizabeth Satterthwaite 1779 

Wright, Abraham, New Barbadoes, and Annetje Bogert. 17S8 

Wright, Andrew, Bucks, Pa., aud Rachel Carter, Bucks, Pa 1735 

Wright, Benjamin, Burlington, and Mary Page, Burlington 1732 

Wright, Benjamin, Burlington, and Ruth Harrison 1759 

Wright, Benjamin, New Hanover, Elizabeth Stackhouse, New Hanover. 1771 

Wright, Charles, Woodbridge, and Mary Baker, Woodbridge 1760 

Wright, David, Woodbridge, and Ruth Wright, Woodbridge 1745-6 

Wright, Ellis, Burlington, and Ann Shaw, Burlington 1776 

Wright, Ezekiel, Burlington, and Mercy Holbard, Burlington 1739 

Wright, Fretwell, Burlington, and Margaret Ellis, Burlington 1738 

Wright, George, Burlington, and Rebecca Hartshome, Middletown. . . 1729 

Wright, Isaiah, Northampton, and Rody Jonson 1784 

Wright, Israel, Bordentown, and Alee Stackhouse 1773 

Wright, James, and Mary Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa 1744 

Wright, James, Penns Neck, and Ann Vickery 1775 

Wright, John, Gloucester, and Ruth Mapes, Gloucester 1733 

Wright, John, Gloucester, and Sarah Vanemau, Greenwich 1762 

Wright, John, Burlington, and Persilla Garwood 1772 

Wright, Johu, Northampton, and Esther Austin 1772 

Wright, John, Trenton, and Rose Chambers 1778 

Wright, Jonathan, Burlington, aud Mary Inskeep, Burlington 1747 

Wright, Jonathan, Burlington, and Mary Ireton, Burlington 1754 

Wright, Josiah, Burlington, and Prudence Paulin, Burlington 1730 

Wright, Joseph, Monmouth, and Phebe Osbom, Trenton 1745-6 

Wright, Joshua, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Witchell, Bucks, Pa 1770 

Wright, Joshua, Richmond, N. Y., and Catharine Crowell 1784 

Wright, Josiah, Mansfield, and Anne Watson, Mansfield 1750 

Wright, Mathew, Burlington, and Penelope Jones, Burlington 1742 

Wright, Moses, Alloways Creek, and Grace Gilliugham 1768 

Wright, Nathan, Cumberland, and Ann Wright, Gloucester 1764 

Wright, Patterson, Bristol, Pa., and Anne Wright 1785 

Wright, Richard, Woodbridge, aud Rebecca Stone, Woodbridge 1762 

Wright, Samuel, Bristol, and Charity Cooper, Bristol 1781 

Wright, Samuel, Springfield, and Mary Shinn 1784 

i Or Styntje. 



Mar. 


3 


July 


31 


Oct. 


5 


Oct. 


25 


Jan. 


10 


Nov. 


12 


Jan. 


10 


Mar. 


26 


Dec. 


1 


April 


1 


Oct. 


18 


Aug. 


6 


May 


10 


Jan. 


17 


Nov. 


11 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


7 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


2 


Mar. 


17 


July 


23 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


30 


Dec. 


24 


Feb. 


24 


April 


4 


July 


23 


Aug. 


14 


June 


15 


Mar. 


18 


Feb. 


23 


Mar. 


17 


April 


26 


Oct. 


31 


June 


5 


Jan. 


17 


Oct, 


20 


Jan. 


31 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


12 


May 


30 


Dec. 


1 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Wright, Stacy, Burlington, and Sarah Baker 1708 

Wright, Thomas, Burlington, and Margaret Hopkison, Burlington ...1729 

Wright, Thomas, Bucks, Pa., and Elizabeth Smith 1739 

Wright, Thomas, Burlington, and Charity Thompson 1756 

Wright, William, Haekensack, and Altje Ackerman, Hackensack 17(51 

Wright, William, Burlington, and Sarah Lovett 17G9 

Wright, William, Perth Amboy, and Hannah Alston, Woodbridge. .. 1773 

Waits, John, Tewkesbury, and Sarah (Irandin, Boxbury 1773 

Wurtz, Jacob, Bucks Co., Pa., and Ann Cummin, Bucks, Pa 1762 

Wyatt, Bartholomew, Jr., Manniugton, and Mary White, Mannington.1762 
Wychof, Cornelius, Somerset, and Elizabeth Anderson, Somerset. . . 1740 

Wychof, Jacobus, Long Island, and Catalintie Gulick 1745 

Wyckof, John, Somerset, and Mary Vanduyn, Somerset 1719 

Wyckof, John, Hunterdon, and Elizabeth Johnston 1758 

Wycof, Peteris, Somerset, and Geertie Roineyn, Somerset 1713 

Wyckof, Samuel, Hunterdon, and Geertie Wycof, Hunterdon 1719 

Wyckoff, Gerrit, Monmouth, and Altie LefTers, Monmouth 1745 

Wyckoff, Simon, Hunterdon, and Molly Farlie, Hunterdon 1770 

Wycoff, John, Somerset, and Elizabeth Stotuff . 1784 

Wynants, Josiah, Elizabeth Town, Abigail Saluave, Elizabeth Town. .1760 

Wynants, William, Elizabeth Town, Jemima Lyng 1765 

Wyncoop, Henry, Pennsylvania, and Sarah Dubois 1782 

Wynkoop, Philip, Pennsylvania, Margaret Covenoven, Middletown. ..1735 

FEMALES. ^ 

Wade, Hannah, and Renier Gregory, Salem 1731 

Wagner, Mary, Burlington, and Peter Tool, Evesham 1772 

Wagoner,! Catharine, Aquackanonch, andCasparus Zabrowski, Bergen. 1747 

Wainans, Elizabeth, and Mathlagas Johnson, Middlesex 1740 

Wainright, Dis Damey, Monruouth, and William West, Monmouth. . . . 1760 

Wainwright, Lydia, Monmouth, and William Cramer, Monmouth 1737 

vVainright, Mary, Burlington, and David Gale, Burlington 1711 

Wainwright, Patience, Burlington, and Edward Tagg, Burlington . . . 1739 
Wainright, Rachel, Monmouth, and Benjamin Wolcott, Monmouth. . . 1749 

Wainright, Rebecca, Burlington, and Daniel Heavens 1759 

Wainwright, Anne, Little Egg Harbour, Moses Pettit, Lt. Egg Harb'r. 1744 

Wainwright, Rebecca, Gloucester, and Thomas Potter, Gloucester 1735 

Wair, Isabella, and Matthias Brachman, Burlington 1760 

Wait, Christian, and Samuel Shinu, Burlington 1769 

Waithmeau, Clemens, Cumberland, and Benoni Dare, Cumberland . .1760 

Waithman, Lovice, and John Mulford, Cumberland 1781 

Waitt, Grace, Deptford, and John Wite, Deptford 1749 

Walder, Mary, Salem, and Aron Bradway, Salem 1712 

Waldron, Catharine, and Sidney Berry. Hunterdon 1768 

i Van Wagoner 



445 



June 


8 


Sept. 


18 


Feb. 


23 


Aug. 


26 


Aug. 


17 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


20 


June 


8 


Mar. 


31 


April 


22 


June 


9 


Mar. 


25 


Nov. 


6 


Aug. 


17 


Feb. 


15 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


4 


April 


28 


Mar. 


7 


Feb. 


18 


Sept. 


10 


April 


20 


Mar. 


9 



Feb. 


10 


Feb. 


13 


April 


20 


Mar. 


23 


June 


16 


Oct, 


12 


July 


3 


Jan. 


3 


Oct. 


16 


Feb. 


1 


Dec. 


11 


May 


17 


May 


9 


Jan. 


4 


May 


9 


April 


3 


Oct. 


18 


Oct. 


10 


Oct. 


10 



446 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Waldron, Catharine, and David Godwin, Bergen 1791 

Waldron, Ketline, and Isaac Huff, Hunterdon 1783 

Waldron, Sarah, Bergen, and John Sickels, Bergen . 1769 

Wales, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Little, Monmouth 1752 

Walhill, Mary, Bristol, Pa., and Simon Sackit, Bristol, Pa 1741 

Waling, Ann, Salem, and Henry Jiles, Salem 1766 

Walker, Alice, Burlington, and Mordica Moor, Burlington 1731 

Walker, Amy, and John Cheston, Hunterdon . , 1769 

Walker, Ann, Philadelphia, and Edward Armourer, Philadelphia 1733 

Walker, Ann, and Robert Blair, Burlington 1780 

Walker, Anna, Monmouth, and William Carman, Monmouth 1767 

Walker, Anne, Salem, and Ephraim Lloyd, Salem 1746 

Walker, Benjamina, and Joseph Douglass, Burlington 1768 

Walker, Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Jonathan Fisher, Perth Amboy.1740 

Walker, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and David Barclay, Middlesex 1749 

Walker, Hannah, and Thomas Lippincott, Burlington 1778 

Walker, Jane, Alloways Creek, and William Willis, Jr., Alloways Creek. 1767 

Walker, Jerusha, Monmouth, and Charles Gordon, Monmouth 1747 

Walker, Lucy, Piscataway, and William Stone, Woodbridge 1758 

Walker, Margaret, and Eaton Harwood, Salem. 1768 

Walker, Martha, Burlington, and Peter Corey, Burlington 1784 

Walker, Mary, Burlington, and Cornelius Dorland, Hunterdon 1738 

Walker, Mary, Piscataway, and Samuel Nevill 1758 

Walker, Rachel, Monmouth, and John Campbell, Jr., Monmouth. ... 1746 

Walker, Sarah, Piscataway, and Joseph Vickers, New Brunswick 1753 

Walker, Susanna, Alloways Creek, and Robert Walker, Alloways Creek. 1768 

A\ all, Anna, Middletown, and John Stillwell, Middletown 1750 

Wall, Anna, Monmouth, and David Ketcham, Monmouth 1755 

Wall, Catherine, Monmouth, and Henry Green, Monmouth 1755 

Wall, Lydia, Monmouth, and James Magee, Monmouth 1752 

Wall, Margaret, and John Feurt, Jr., Middlesex 1780 

Wall, Mary, Middletown, and John Willet, Middletown 1751 

Wall, Rebecca, Monmouth, and Richard Jeffery, Monmouth 1761 

Wall, Susannah, Monmouth, and Richard Burdg, Monmouth 1743-4 

Wallace, Elizabeth, and Thomas Horden, Gloucester 1773 

Wallace, Hannah, Burlington, and Thomas Walling, Burlington 1740 

Wallace, Martha, and John Dickeson, Salem 1767 

Wallace, Sarah, and Andrew Lawrence, Burlington 1774 

Wallace, Sarah, and John Morrell, New Fork 1775 

Wallen, Rachael, and Samuel Webb, Gloucester 1773 

Wallin, Mary, and Thomas Kennedy, Bergen 1779 

Walling, Anne, Middletown, and Thomas Roberts, Middletown 1747 

Walling, Cynthus, and Isaac Smith, Cumberland 1772 

Walling, Martha, Middletown, and Pearce Cheasey, Middletown 1753 

Walling, Martha, Monmouth, and Jacob Mires, Monmouth 1759 

Walling, Mary, Middletown, and Joel Biddle, Bordentown 1748 



Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


4 


Dec. 


14 


Dec. 


23 


May 


8 


Mar. 


6 


Jan. 


17 


April 


13 


Jan. 


5 


Nov. 


4 


Sept. 


29 


May 


18 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


6 


Mar. 


3 


April 


6 


May 


11 


Oct, 


22 


April 


1 


Feb. 


17 


April 


29 


Sept. 


18 


Oct. 


21 


Jan. 


22 


Dec. 


7 


Nov. 


24 


April 


26 


Oct. 


18 


June 


30 


Sept. 


19 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


31 


Jan. 


17 


Mar. 


24 


June 


21 


Nov. 


12 


Sept. 


3 


Feb. 


3 


May 


4 


Dec. 


25 


Mar. 


15 


Mar. 


4 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


29 


April 


26 


Jan. 


4 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 447 

Walling, Mary, Middletown, ami Henry Vanderhule, Middletown 1751 

Walling, Mary, and Joseph Bailey, Monmouth 1771 

Walling, Mary, ( imnwich, and Ames Woodruff, Cumberland 1775 

Walling, Mary, Burlington, and John Gaskill, Burlington 1779 

Walling, Nancy, Monmouth, and Abraham Mires, Monmouth 17<J3 

Walling, Sarah, Cumberland, and Moses Rernenton, Cumberland 1768 

N\ ailing, Sarah, and John Roberts, Middletown 1774 

Walling, Susannah, Hardyston, and Joseph Wainright, Monmouth ...1772 

Wallis, Jane, Burlington, and Francis Jones, Burlington 1729 

Wallis, Mary, and Thomas Gill, Gloucester 1762 

Wallis, Rachel, Burlington, and Walker Atkinson, Burlington 1746 

Wallis, Sarah, Burlington, and Thomas Venable, Burlington 1729 

Walmsley, Ann, Bucks, Pa., and Connor Meaghan, Bucks, Pa 1733 

Walton, Anue, and Nathaniel Barbar, Hunterdon 1784 

Walton, Elizabeth, aud William Pence, Burlington 1778 

Walton, Martha, and John Stevenson, Burlington 1739 

Walton, Martha, Burlington, and Joseph Harrison, Burlington 1776 

Walsh, Mary, Bucks, and William Allen, Bucks, Pa 1740 

Walsh, Sarah, Burlington, and Fraucis DeCow, Burlington 1734 

Wans, Elinor, and Thomas Kidd, Bucks 1732 

Ward, Abigail, Gloucester, and William Dickasou, Salem 1749 

Ward, Ann, aud Thomas Morris, Burlington 1779 

Ward, Deborah, Woodbury, and Joseph Ward, Woodbury 1764 

Ward, Elizabeth, and John Morgan, Gloucester 1781 

Ward, Frances, Burlington, and Thomas Sharman, Burlington 1682 

Ward, Hannah, Gloucester, and John Stowe, Salem 1735 

Ward, Jane, Trenton, and John Yard, Trenton. . 1732 

Ward, Katharine, Fairfield, and George Adam Rasure, Cumberland. . .1760 

Ward, Kezia, and Samuel Wheaton, Deptford 1780 

Ward, Lydia, Shrewsbury, and Peter Parker, Shrewsbury. 1754 

Ward, Margaret, Essex, and Joshua Weekes, Essex 1761 

Ward, Martha, Burlington, and John Davies, Burlington 1765 

Ward, Mary, Newark, and Robert Thompson, Newark. . . . . 1765 

Ward, Mary, Deptford, and Abraham Reeves, Gloucester 1769 

Ward, Phebe, and Abraham Chattin, Gloucester . 1756 

Ward, Phebe, and William Davis 1779 

Ward, Rebecca, Salem, aud Edward Hancock, Salem 1774 

Ward, Rebecca, Burlington, and David Claypool, Burlington 1780 

Ward, Rosanna, Gloucester, and Levi Pearce, Gloucester ... 1733 

Ward, Sarah, Gloucester, and Abraham Inskeep, Gloucester 1740 

Ward, Sarah, Burlington, aud Thomas Cox, Burliugton 1750 

Ward, Sarah, and Benjamin Cowgill, Gloucester 1754 

Ward, Sarah, Cumberland, and Phillip Bacau, Cumberland 1768 

Ward, Susannah, Gloucester, and David Ward, Gloucester 1749 

Wardell, Ruth, Pennsylvania, and John Worsten, Pennsylvania 1728 

Warden, Catharine, Shrewsbury, and Zachari Sickles, Shrewsbury 1759 



Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


5 


April 


19 


Aug. 


19 


June 


21 


Feb. 


5 


July 


4 


May 


19 


Nov. 


27 


May 


18 


Sept. 


10 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


9 


April 


21 


Feb. 


7 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


26 


Feb. 


5 


Nov. 


21 


Mar. 


29 


Sept. 


24 


Aug. 


23 


Nov. 


1 


Mar, 


5 


Sept. 


9 


Mar. 


6 


Jan. 


20 


Dec. 


5 


Feb. 


15 


Sept. 


10 


Jan. 


30 


Feb. 


24 


Mar. 


31 


Feb. 


26 


Feb. 


28 


Nov. 


28 


May 


2 


Dec. 


10 


Mar. 


21 


May 


31 


Mar. 


1 


April 


I 14 


May 


11 


July 


28 



448 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Wardell, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Thomas Emley, Burlington 1753 

Wardell, Elizabeth, Shrewsbury, and John Webley, Shrewsbury 175G 

Wardell, Rebeckah, Shrewsbury, and John Slocum, Shrewsbury 1755 

Wardell, Sarah, and Joseph Cox, Monmouth 1770 

Warden, Penelope, Monmouth, and David Woodmajnse, Monmouth. .1744 

Warden, Mary Anna, Gloucester, and William Ward, Gloucester 1727 

Wardill, Sarah, Monmouth, and James Lippincott, Monmouth 1756 

Wardon, Hauah, and James Woodmansee, Monmouth 1758 

Ware, Ame, Burlington, and Isaac Hewlings, Burlington 1763 

Ware, Anne, and George Tomlinson, Stow Creek 1778 

Ware, Isabell, Somerset, and Samuel McMurray, Somerset 1753 

Ware, Jane, Pennsylvania, and Samuel Woolman, Mansfield 1771 

Ware, Mary, Cumberland, and Enoch Moore, Cumberland 1752 

Ware, Rachel, Gloucester, and Robert Briant, Gloucester 1758 

Ware, Rachel, and Joseph Riley, Cumberland 1773 

Ware, Rebeccah, and Jacob Paullin, Salem . . 1760 

Warford, Abigail, Sussex, and Mathew Lowry, Sussex 1762 

Warford, Sarah, Hunterdon, and John Ely, Middlesex 1762 

Warford, Sarah, and John Jewell, Jr., Hunterdon 1769 

Warne, Catherine, Freehold, and Alexander Vanpelt, Middletown 1757 

Warne, Catherine, South Amboy, and William Benuet, South Amboy 1760 

Warne, Catherine, Middlesex, and Lazarus Willmouth, Middlesex 1762 

Warne, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and Obadiah Herbert, Monmouth 1765 

Warne, Margaret, Middlesex, and Samuel Morrell, Middlesex 1756 

Warne, Margaret, Freehold, and James Crawford, Freehold 1756 

Warne, Mary, Monmouth, and Patrick Robertson, Monmouth 1749 

Warne, Mary, and Thomas Smith, Perth Amboy 1757 

Warne, Sarah, and James Lamberson, New Jersey 1745 

Warne, Sarah, Perth Amboy, and Nathan Beers, Middletown 1749 

Warne, Zehiah, Monmouth, and John Warne, Monmouth 1766 

Warner, Elizabeth, and Francis Page, Burlington 1758 

Warner, Elis-abeth, Perth Amboy, and John Scoby, Perth Amboy 1762 

Warner, Hannah, Burlington, and Joseph Woodward, Burlington. ... 1727 

Warner, Hannah, and John Ogborn, Burlington 1769 

Warner, Margaret, Manniugton, and Moses Thomas, Mannington ...1766 

Warner, Mary, and Isaac Hughes, Hunterdon 1764 

Warner, Mary, Burlington, and Stephen Simmons, Philadelphia 1775 

Warner, Mary, and Philip Fister, Hunterdon 1780 

Warner, Sarah, Lt. Egg Harbour, and Mose Robins, Lt. Egg Harbour 1774 

Warreck, Rebekah, Burlington, and Edward Page, Jr., Burlington 1764 

Warren, Ann, and William Wheatley, Burlington 1760 

"Warren, Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Folwell, Burlington 1766 

Warren, Mary, and John Cliver 1781 

Warren, Mary, and William Earl, New Hanover 1783 

Warren, Phebe, and James Gosling 1775 

Warren, Rebecca, Burlington, and Isaac English, Burlington 1764 



Nov. 


14 


July 


27 


Jan. 


19 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


21 


July 


25 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


5 


Oct. 


19 


May 


6 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


23 


April 


16 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


28 


Sept. 


22 


May 


24 


June 


18 


Nov. 


7 


May 


28 


July 


24 


Aug. 


14 


Mar. 


21 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


26 


July 


7 


Jan. 


31 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


26 


July 


26 


July 


20 


May 


30 


Mar. 


23 


Jan. 


13 


Mar. 


13 


Jan. 


2 


June 


2 


Aug. 


19 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


5 


June 


16 


Mar. 


8 


Sept. 


12 


April 


7 


Jan. 


13 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



449 



Warral, Ami, and Nicholas Monck, Sussex 1 771 

Warrick, Elizabeth, and Ephraim Albertson, Gloucester. 1775 

Warrick, Hannah, and Elijah Gheeseman, ( rloncester 1779 

Warrick, Mary, and Job Cook, Burlington 1772 

Warrick, Mary, Burlington, and Isaac Boultou, Burlington 1773 

Warrick, Rachel, and Jacob Cowl, Hunterdon 1780 

Warrick, Rebecca, and Jacob Lutes, Burlington 1777 

Warrick, Sarah, Burlington, and Bryan Higgins, Burlington 1737 

Warrington, Mary; and Titan Leeds, Burlington ... . 1782 

Wartnebe, Mary, Somerset, and Peter Bodiue, Somerset. . 1749 

Warwick; Frances, Monmouth, and Edward Hurley, Burlington 1729 

Warwick, Sarah, and Joseph Ranier, Burlington 1780 

Waslack, Pricilla, Pennsylvania, and David Buckalew, Pennsylvania. . 1771 

Waterhouse, Sophia, and John Terrill, Perth Amboy 1768 

Waters, Catherine, Burlington, and James Lawrence, Monmouth. ...1765 

Waters, Charity, and Henry Oglee, New Hanover 1782 

Watkin, Anne, and Fenwick Adams, Salem 1687 

Watkins, Sarah, Elizabeth Town, and Joseph Haiues, Elizabeth Town. 1751 

Watty, Sarah, and John James, New Jersey 17 — 

Watson, Agnes, Monmouth, and Peter Fresueau, New York 1750 

Watson, Ann, Salem, and William Champueys, Salem 1772 

Watson, Ann, and William Small, Sussex 1778 

Watson, Anne, Monmouth, and William Brown, Monmouth 1741 

Watson, Anne, Mansfield, and Josiah Wright, Mansfield 1750 

Watsou, Anne, Monmouth, and Samuel Ker, Monmouth 1757 

Watson, Elizabeth, Middlesex, and James Buckalew, Middlesex 1747 

Watson, Elizabeth, Middletown, and Thomas Walling, Middletown. . .1757 

Watson, Elizabeth, Middletown, and John Stilwell, Middletown 1764 

Watson, Esther, Burlington, and Owen Carty, Gloucester 1742 

Watson, Euphan, Monmouth, and Joseph Smith, Monmouth 1741 

Watson, Euphan, Monmouth, and Joseph Ker, Monmouth 1746-7 

Watson, Euphan, Monmouth, and Michael Johnston, Chester, Pa. . . 1750 

Watson, Hanuah, and James Shores, Burlington .... 1742 

Watson, Hope, Middletown, and John Burrows, Middletown 1749 

Watson, Margaret, Monmouth, and William Bryan, Monmouth 1750 

Watson, Margaret, Salem, and George Corlis, Salem 1762 

Watson, Margaret, Salem, and Aaron Daniel, Salem 1766 

Watson, Margaret, and Edmond Bowman 1781 

Watson, Mary, Greenwich, and Isaac Stathem, Cumberland 1760 

Watson, Mary, and William Topscott, Upper Freehold. . 1762 

Watson, Mary, Hunterdon, and Charles McKuighf, Hunterdon 1771 

Watson, Phelathea, and David James, Cumberland 1784 

Watson, Rebecca, Philadelphia, and Joseph Scaltergood, Burlington .1736 

Watson, Ruth, Cumberland, and Lewis Smith, Cumberland 1769 

Watson, Sarah, and Thomas Barnes, Jr., Burlington 1732 

Watsou, Sarah, and John Baslev, Bucks, Pa 1783 

28 



April 


16 


Dec. 


28 


April 


19 


May 


17 
g 


Aug. 
Jan. 


7 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


17 


Feb. 


26 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


3 


May 


24 


Aug. 


7 


Nov. 


1 


Oct. 


29 


July 


25 


Aug 


18 


April 


16 


July 


28 


Mar. 


12 


Jan. 


9 


Sept. 


19 


Dec. 


12 


June 


5 


May- 


31 


Dec. 


9 


May 


9 


Dec. 


4 


Aug. 


20 


Nov. 


11 


Mar. 


23 


May 


16 


June 


30 


Dec. 


2 


April 


2 


Dec. 


21 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


18 


Oct. 


11 


June 


25 


May 


2 


Dec. 


6 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


5 


June 


10 


April 


7 



450 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

"Watson, Sophia, Perth Amboy, and John Waterhouse, Perth Amboy. .1759 

Watson, Sophia, Middlesex, and Alexander Kidd, Middlesex 1767 

Watson, Tueoclosia, Burlington, and John Ettenger, Burlington 1775 

Wearon, Martha, and Robert Dummer 1699 

Weaten, Rachel, Saletn, and Isaac Hudson, Salem 1733 

Weatherby, Elizabeth, and John West, Gloucester 1784 

Weatherington, Rachel, and John Paul, Gloucester 1775 

Weaver, Ann, and John Morton, Burlington 1763 

Weaver, Catharine, Bucks, Pa., and John Brelsford, Bucks, Pa 1771 

Weaver, Catharine, Burlington, and Caspar Lutsey, Burlington.. . .. 1773 

Weaver, Dorothy, Burlington, and Thomas Crothau, Burlington 1765 

Weaver, Elizabeth,- Monmouth, and Abraham Emaus, Monmouth .... 1762 

Weaver, Mary, Burliugton, and Josiah Gaskel, Burlington 1754 

Weaver, Mehitable, and Evan Ewau, Burlington 1770 

Weaver, Susannah, and Daniel Antrim, Burlington. ... 1758 

Webb, Bethia, Burlington, and James Garwood, Burlington 1766 

Webb, Dovey, and Joseph Stevenson 1769 

Webb, Elizabeth, Burliugton, and Clement Shinu, Burlington 1740 

Webb, Elizabeth and Benjamin Cooke, Burlington 1759 

W r ebb, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Uriah Birdsal, Burlington 1767 

Webb, Jane, Perth Amboy, and Gerard Syers, Mariner 1741 

Webb, Jane, Woodbridge, and Edward Price, New York 1757 

Webb, Jerusha, Woodbridge, and Richard Soper, Woodbridge 1752 

Webb, Mary, Philadelphia, and Andrew Bankson, Philadelphia . . . 1731 

W T ebb, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Borrow, Perth Amboy 1743 

Webb, Mary, Woodbridge, and Francis Silvester, New York 1748 

Webb, Ruth, Burlington, and Isaac Antram, Burlington 1773 

Webley, Audrey, Monmouth, and John West, Monmouth 1740 

W ebley, Catherine, Shrewsbury, and Peter Slocum 1748-9 

Webley, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Jonathan Slocum, Shrewsbury 1759 

Webley, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and Daniel Taber, Shrewsbury 1765 

Webster, Ann, and Nicholas Bordiue, Somerset 1781 

Webster, Anne, and Jacob Fitz Randolph, Middlesex 1780 

Webster, Mary, Pennsylvania, and John Pindar, Pennsylvania 1732 

Webster, Mary, Sussex, and William Lunilj', Sussex 1769 

"Weed, Ruth, and David Anderson, Bergen 1786 

Weekes, Catharine, Perth Amboy, and Crawley Barrowe, Perth Amboy. 1754 

Weeks, Ann, and Thomas Tustiu, Perth Amboy 1761 

Weeks, Naomi, Pittsgrove, and David Sithin, Pittsgrove 1770 

Wedding, Rebeckah, and Ephraim Mulford, Cumberland 1778 

Weiley, Elizabeth, and John Hiuchman, Burliugton. . . 1789 

Welch, Cataline, Somerset, and Jeronimus Yan Neste, Somerset.. .. 1743 

Welch, Priscilla, Gloucester, ami Samuel Hidings 1773 

Weldon, Bershebe, Gloucester, and Isaac Adams, Gloucester 1730 

Weller, Hester, Perth Amboy, and John Cambell, Perth Amboy. .... 1731 
Weller, Sarah, Sussex, and Henry Creveling, Hunterdon 1770 



Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


27 


Nov. 


18 


Jan. 


22 


June 


11 


Jan. 


19 


Jan. 


23 


Aug. 


18 


April 


18 


June 


27 


Mar. 


7 


Feb. 


20 


Aug. 


19 


June 


5 


Jan. 


30 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


29 


Aug. 


30 


May 


31 


Oct. 


29 


June 


8 


June 


14 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


17 


Feb. 


20 


Sept. 


28 


Jan. 


26 


Dec. 


13 


Mar. 


24 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


1 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


4 


Jan. 


6 


April 


13 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


3 


Oct. 


5 


Dec. 


19 


Dec. 


7 


Dec. 


30 


June 


13 


April 


15 


Jan. 


23 


Mar. 


29 


July 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 45 1 

Welling, Abigail, Hunterdon, and William Naptin. Hunterdon 1773 

Wells, Anne, New Brunswick, and James Allesou, New Brunswick. . . .1739 

Wells, Bearsley, and Job Lippincott, Burlington 1780 

Wells, Beulah, and George Elkiuton, Burlington 1783 

Wells, Elizabeth, and John Lawrence, Jr., Essex 1777 

Wells, Margaret, Gloucester, and Aaron Albertson, Gloucester 17c"; 

Wells, Mary, and Daniel Buzby, Burlington 1784 

Wells, Merribe, Nottingham, and Amos Willis, Nottingham 1767 

Welsh, Dorothy, Pennsylvania, William Huddleston, Pennsylvania. .. 1727 

Welsh. Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Chambers, Burlington 1761 

Welsh, Sarah, and Thomas Eudicott, Burlington 1759 

Wescoat, Abigail, and Richard Shaw, Fairfield 1755 

Wesly, Catharine, Bucks, Pa., and William Wharton, Bucks, Pa 1756 

West, Abigail, Monmouth, and John Dennis, Monmouth 1763 

West, Abigail, Burliugtou, and Thomas Matlack, Burlington. 1766 

West, Anna, and James Smith, Shrewsbury ... 1768 

West, Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Andrew Stephens, Shrewsbury. ...1759 

West, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Timothy Halstetl, Monmouth 1746 

West, Eunice, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Robinson, Freehold 1766 

West, Eunies, Monmouth, and Alexander Montgomerie 1761 

West, Kezia, and. Nathan Weatherby, Gloucester. 1782 

West, Lavina, Monmouth, and Thomas Negus, Monmouth 1749 

West, Lydia, Shrewsbury, and John Throckmorton, Monmouth 1752 

West, Margaret, Monmouth, and Jesse Taber, Monmouth 1749 

West, Margaret, Monmouth, and Philip Edwards, Monmouth 1764 

West, Mary, Monmouth, and John West, Monmouth 1740 

West, Mary, and Jacob Stelle, Monmouth. . . 1757 

West, Mary, and William King, Burlington 1778 

West, Rachel, Burlington, and Benjamin Crispin, Burlington 1784 

West, Rebecca, Monmouth, and John Dennis, Monmouth ... 1766 

West, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Green, Burlington 1776 

West, Sarah, Monmouth, and Thomas Hewitt, Monmouth. . .... 1716 

West, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and John Wardell, Shrewsbury , . . . 1755 

West, Sarah, Dover, and Thomas Woodmansee, Monmouth 1772 

West, Zilpha, Monmouth, and Josiah Halstead, Monmouth 1740 

Westbrook, Ann, Sussex, and Charles B.ixter, Sussex 1755 

Westbrook, Catherine, Sussex, and Nicholas Emons, Sussex 1765 

Westcoat, Margaret, Gloucester, and Nathan Peniugton, Newark. . ..1783 

Westcote, Nancy, and Thomas Padgett, Salem 1778 

Westcote, Sarah, Fairfield, and Thomas Ogden, Fairfield. 1761 

Westcott, Mary, and Hampton Moore, Cumberland 1783 

Westervelt, Allche, Bergen, and Jacob Campbell, Bergen 1774 

Westervelt, Altje, Hackensack, Christian Van Hooern, Hackensack . .1764 
Westervelt, Deborah, Burliugtou, and Jacob Hayes, Burlington . ...1744 

Westervelt, Euphy, and Daniel Demarest, Bergen 1762 

Westervelt, Geesje, and Stephen Bogert, Bergen .... 1770 



Get. 


25 


Mar. 


11 


Feb. 


24 


July 


21 


An-. 


27 


April 


16 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


2 


Nov. 


14 


Oct. 


21 


June 


19 


Feb. 


15 


Dec. 


13 


June 


4 


Feb. 


17 


Sept. 


10 


Sept. 


26 


Nov. 


22 


Sept. 


3 


Nov. 


23 


May 


14 


July 


27 


Oct. 


3 


Dec. 


16 


April 


4 


Oct, 


6 


Mar. 


30 


June 


6 


Feb. 


16 


Feb. 


15 


Feb. 


5 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


17 


Jan. 


27 


May 


11 


Mar. 


8 


Jan. 


7 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


1 


April 


17 


April 


23 


Dec. 


4 


Nov. 


1 


Aug. 


22 


Nov. 


21 



452 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Westervelt, Geurtey, Bergen, and Albert Zabriskie, Bergen 1751 

Westervelt, Margaret, Bergen, una Joris Doremus, Bergen 1768 

Westervelt, Martintie, and William Traphageu, Bergen 1785 

Westervelt, Willimintia, and John Zabriskie, Bergen 1793 

Westfall, Catherine, Sussex, and Isaac Van Tnyle, Sussex 1761 

Weston, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Edward Wheatcraft, Burlington. .1732 

Wessels, Catharine, New York, and John Taylor, New York 1760 

w , ssells, Itachel, Essex, and Henry Veldtman, Essex 175-1 

Wessels, Mary, Perth Amboy, and Obadiah Avers, Middlesex 1750 

Wetherall, Katherine, and Joku Busted, New Brunswick 1744 

Wetherby, Sarah, Saltan, and Edward Austin, Philadelphia 171S 

Wetherel, Anne, and Oliver Brooks. New J ersey 1791 

Wetherell, Rachel, Middlesex, and Nehemiah Dye, Middlesex 1765 

Wetherington, Lydia, and William Haines 1782 

Wetherill, Anue, Burlington, and Peter Bishop, Burlington 1731 

Wetherill, Ann, Gloucester, and Henry Willard, Gloucester 1736 

Wetherill, Hannah, New Brunswick, (' trnelius Solloni, New Brunswick. 1740 

Wetherill, Mary, Middlesex, and Mat Johnson, Middlesex 1742 

Wetherill, Sarah, and Benjamin Inglish, Burlingtou 1741 

Wetherill, Sarah, .Middlesex, and John Reed, Freehold 1751 

Wever, Elizabeth, and Samuel Shourds, Little Egg Harbour 1759 

Weyerly, Elizabeth, and George Becstolzseimer, Hunterdon 1769 

Weyman, S irah, and Thomas Bond, Philadelphia 1742 

A\ halon, N incy, and Cornelius Willet, New Jersey 1781 

Wheatcraft, Hannah, Burlington, and Richard Harrison, Monmouth. . 1763 

Wheatcraft, Raoda, and George Stapleton, Evesham 1784 

Wheaton, Assenab, Cape May, and Jeremiah Goll'e, Cape May 1739 

Wheaton, Lidy, Shrewsbury, and Melatiah White. Shrewsbury 1764 

Wheaton, Elizabeth, and John Dunn, Salem 1733 

Wheaton, Elizabeth, and John Buck, Cape May 1766 

Wheaton, Hannah, and Andrew Donaldson, Philadelphia 1775 

Wheaton, Hepsebeth, Cumberland, Benjamin Mulford, Cumberland .. 1770 

Wheaton, Martha, and Thomas Godfrey 1786 

Wheeler, Elizabeth, Little Egg Harbour, Peter Allen, Lt. Egg Harbour. 1751 

Wheeler, Elizabeth, 1 ; ii rl iii-t..n, and Barzilla Scott, Burlington 1765 

Wheeler, Rebecca, and Luke Matox, Cumberland 1787 

Whetherton, Mary, and Morris Beesley, Salem 1755 

Whettall, Rhodi, and Jacob Chambless, S tlem 1750 

\\ hilden, Jane, and Jeremiah Edmons, ( lape May 1780 

Whildin, Anna, Cape May, and Jeremiah Ludlam, Cape May 1774 

Whildin, Rachel, and Abraham Schellinger, Cape May 1782 

Whilldin, Elenor, ( !ape May, and Ellis Hughes, Jr., Cape May 1768 

Whitaker, Mar-aret, and Stephen Kirby, Cumberland 1778 

Whitaker, Mary. Bucks, Pa., and John Simmons, Bucks, Co 1763 

Whitaker, Mary, and John Herkins, Burlington 1765 

Whitaker, Rebecca, Somerset, and William Conklin, Morris 1778 



Oct. 


8 


Oct. 


1 


June 


2 


May 


11 


June 


13 


July 


18 


Mar. 


15 


Jan. 


8 


Dee. 


5 


Nov. 


14 


May 


6 


April 


19 


Sept. 


18 


Max- 


24 


Sept. 


15 


Nov. 


29 


July 


19 


Dec. 


8 


May 


10 


Nov. 


25 


June 


11 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


31 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


1 


Nov. 


17 


May 


14 


May 


2 


Jan. 


18 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


11 


Dec. 


21 


Nov. 


13 


Aug. 


16 


Mar. 


25 


April 


27 


Feb. 


20 


Jan. 


15 


July 


17 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


14 


Sept 


. 21 


Dec. 


26 


May 


21 


May 


3 


Dec. 


7 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



453 



Whitaker, Susanna, and Valentine Swinm y. < lumberland 

Whit all, Sarah, Gloucester, ami George \.ves, < Uoucester .... 

Whitcraffc, Elizabeth, Burlington, Ameriah Famsworth, Burlington... 
White, Abigail, Shrewsbury, and Miln Parker, Shrewsbury.. 

Anirv, Shrewsbury, and William Tilton, Freehold 

Catherine, Middletown, and John Carman 1' 

Catharine, and Samuel Scott, Monmouth 

Christian, and Robert Hilborn 

Christian, and Richard Messeran, Richmond Co., N. Y 

Deborah, Shrewsbury, anil John Williams. Shrewsbury. 

Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Wardell, Shrewsbury , 

Dorothy, Monmouth, and Amos Chandler, Monmouth 

Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Thomas Dumfe, Burlington. 

Elizabeth, Bucks, Pa., and Thomas Stackhouse, Bucks, Pa . . 

Elizabeth, Perth Amboy, and Nicholas Johnson, Middletown. 

Elisabeth, and Thomas Letson, Monmouth . 

Elizabeth, Monmouth, and William McMurray, Monmouth . . 

Elisabeth, and Dauiel Starns, Shrewsbury. 

Elizabeth, and Benjamin Margerum, Bucks, Pa. . 

Frances, Bristol, Pa., and Abrm. Bralesford, Bristol. 

Frances, Monmouth, and James Dorsett, Monmouth 

Hannah, Burlington, and William Snowden, Burlington 

Hannah, Monmouth, aud William Layton, Monmouth 

Hauuah, Monmouth, and Robert Harvey, Monmouth 

Hannah, Monmouth, aud Thomas Leonard, Monmouth 

Hester, Hunterdon, and William Hill 

Jane, and Mattus Vauderype, Brunswick 

Jane, Bucks, Pa., and John Sison, Bucks, Pa 

Leah, Monmouth, and James Morris, Monmouth 

Lydia, aud John Daniels, Morris River 

Mary, Pennsylvania, and Thomas Oldham, Pennsylvania 

Mary, and John Brelford, Bucks, Pa 

Mary, Burlington, and Conrad Clener, Burlington 

Mary, Burlington, and Thomas Smith, Burlington 

Mary, Burlington, and Morgan Griffith, Burlington 

Mary, Bergen, and John Cochran, Essex ... 

Mary, Burlington, and Joseph Breyan, Burlington 

Mary, Manington, and Bartholomew Wyatt, Jr., Maniugton. . 

Mary, Gloucester, and William Finley, Gloucester 

Mary, Monmouth, aud John Fennimore, Monmouth 

Mary, and William Wickans, Gloucester 

Mercy, Shrewsbury, and Uriah West, Shrewsbury 

Penolipe, Burlington, aud John Stillwell, Burlington 

Phebe, Burlington, aud John Richardson, Mansfield 

Rachel, Salem, and Cornelius Carubel, Salem 

Rachel, and John Corlis, Monmouth 



1783 
1730 

1776 
L766 
L765 

is 9 
1778 
1761 
1768 
1734 
1758 
1739 
1739 
1740 
1752 
1752 
1753 
17G0 
1769 
1739 
1766 
1728 
1735 
1764 
1767 
1762 

174:3 

1764 
1753 
1759 
1727 
1734 
1735 
1738 
1740 
1740 
1746 
1762 
1762 
1765 
1782 
1762 
1772 
1772 
1764 
1779 



Feb 17 

.Mar. 15 

June 4 

April 24 

Aug, 5 

Feb. 25 

April 28 

Aug. 17 

May II 

Nov. 12 

April 21 

April 30 

May 28 

Oct. 30 

May 9 

Dec. 1 

Aug. 18 

June 3 

Feb. 1 

April 19 

Feb. 21 

July 15 

May 24 

Jan. 2 

April 30 

June 12 

Oct. 2 1 

Nov. 13 

July 18 

Aug. 22 

Sept. 11 

April 13 

Mar. 21 

Aug. 7 

Aug. 7 

Oct, 20 

Aug. 14 

April '22 

April 28 

Oct. 31 

July 23 

Mar. 6 

Nov. 19 

Dec. 8 

May 5 

May 31 



454 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

White, Rebecca, Bucks, Pa., and Joseph Brelsford, Bucks, Pa . . 1742 

White, Rebekah, and Richard Margerum, Jr., Bucks Co., Pa 1768 

White, Sarah, Burlington, and Isaac Marrot, Burlington 1743 

White, Sarah, and Constantine Carll, Cape May 1762 

White, Sarah, and Abner Calkius, Sussex 1786 

White, Susannah, Philadelphia, and James Kell, Philadelphia 1735 

Whiteall, Sarah, Gloucester, and Joseph Herritage, Burlington ... 1730 
Whitecar, Abigail, Cumberland, and James Benson, Cumberland. ... 1774 

Whitecar, Abigail, Cumberland, and Seth Leve, Cumberland 1778 

Whitehall, Mary, and James Coffing, Gloucester 1732 

Whitenack, Margaret, and Johaues Ditmars, Somerset 1778 

Whitenack, Eleanor, and Bartholomew Huut, Cumberland. . . 1782 

Whitess, Sarah, Good Luck, and Ephraim Potter, Good Luck 1763 

Whitlock, Jenny, and Richard Merrel, Middlesex 1784 

Whittal, Sarah, Salem, and Robert Wheatou, Cumberland 1765 

Whitten, Grace, and Nathaniel Cripps 1694 

Whitticar, Lozania, and John Back, Cumberland 1761 

Whittou, Hannah, and Thomas Croshaw, Burlington 1783 

Wickers, Rebecca, and Elias Brewer, Burlington . . 1786 

Wickoff, Charity, and James Vanneubem 1769 

Wickoff, Frances, and Adrian Hegerman, Somerset 1778 

Wickoff, Mary, and John Brewer, Hunterdon 1783 

W r icks, Elizabeth, and Richard Thomas, Gt. Egg Harbour 1783 

Wicks, Hannah, Salem, and Benjamin Abbit, Salem 1770 

W T icoff, Magdalen, and John Van Liew, Somerset 1780 

Wicoff, Nautche, Somerset, and Christian Lupardus, Hunterdon 1783 

Wicoff, Sytie, and Peter Van Liew, Somerset. . . 1783 

Wiggins, Hannah, Salem, and Johna Bradway, Salem 1739 

Wiggins, Hannah, Salem, and Nathaniel Thomson, Pilesgrove. ... . . 1763 

Wiggins, Rebecca, and Roger Sherrou, Salem 1732 

Wikoff, Elizabeth, and Joseph Perine, Middlesex 1771 

Wilcott, Meribah, Monmouth, and Noah Tabor, Monmouth 1748 

W r ild, Elizabeth, Burlington, and James Nightingale, Burlington . ...1747 

Wild, Mary, ami William Smith, Bordentown 1761 

Wild, Sarah, and George Ellin, Gloucester 1735 

Wiles, Elizabeth, Burlington, aud Joseph Spragges, Burlington 1736 

Wiles, Mary, Burlington, and Abraham Millard, Burlington 1764. Aug, 

Wiles, Sarah, Burlington, and Joshua Pitman, Burlington 1741 

Wiley, Priscila, and Edward Harbet, Gloucester ... 1770 

Wilgus, Sarah, aud William Hutchinson, Middlesex 1784 

Wilie, Mary, aud Caleb Matlack, Cumberland 1777 

Wilits, Rachel, aud Darinenas Corson, Cape May 1778 

Wilkius, Alice, Monmouth, and Silas Reve, Monmouth 1746 

Wilkins, Elizabeth, aud Matthias Matson, Gloucester. . . 1754 

Wilkius, Hannah, Gloucester, and Charles Ferguson, Gloucester 1761 

Wilkins, Hannah, and Benjamin Burroughs, Gloucester 1783 



Sept. 


21 


Mar. 


23 


Aug 


12 


Dec. 


15 


April 


27 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


17 


May 


13 


May 


8 


July 


2 


Sept. 


14 


Jan. 


5 


Mar. 


2 


Feb. 


2 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


9 


June 


27 


Mar. 


18 


Sept. 


25 


Oct. 


21 


May 


29 


April 


5 


July 


2 


Jan. 


4 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


15 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


8 


Sept. 


17 


April 


5 


June 


6 


April 


12 


April 


17 


Jan. 


22 


Feb. 


12 


Dec. 


11 


Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


3 


Mar. 


17 


Mar. 


9 


Dec. 


18 


Oct. 


26 


April 


28 


Sept. 


12 


April 


28 


Oct. 


28 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 45 5 

Wilkins, Hester, Evesham, and Jacob Stokes, Waterford 1774 Feb. 1 

Wilkins.'Sarah, Somerset, and John Davison, New Brunswick 1740 Mar. 25 

Wilkinson, Anne, Burliugton, and Edward Brown, Burlington 1750 May 30 

Wilkinson, Mary, Burlingtou, and William Fennimore, Burlington . . 1757 Aug. 22 

Wilkinson, Zibyah, Bucks, Pa., and Peter Ink, Bucks, Pa 1769 Nov. 28 

Wilkison, Anne, Newark, and John Kingsland 1752 Feb. 13 

Wilkison, Mary, Monmouth, and Andrew Layten, Monmouth 1761 Dec. 19 

Wilkison, Sarah, Middlesex, and Isaac Tappen, Middlesex 1745-6 Mar. 14 

Wilkison, Sarah, Woodbridge, and Josiah Cramer, Little Egg Harbour. 1751 Aug. 10 

Willard, Abigail, Gloucester, and Samuel Spicer, Gloucester 1743 Aug. 3 

Willbirt, Polly, and Joshua Stutson, Philadelphia 1778 Nov. 21 

Willdeu, Hannah, Cape May, and Jonathan Fester, Cape May 1759 July 28 

Wilkieu, Mary, Cape May, and Ellis Hughes, Cape May 1761 Oct. 2 

Willess, Abigail, Monmouth, and Nathan Burdsall, Monmouth 1752 Dec. 13 

Willet, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Samuel Tiltou, Monmouth 1744 Feb. 4 

Willet, Frances, and John Vannorthuyke, Roxbury 1778 July 6 

Willets, Esther, and Joseph Wheaton, Cape May 1768 Oct. 24 

Willet, Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and John Mitchell, Bucks, Pa 1776 July 27 

Williams, Alice, Middlesex, and Alexander Scobey, Middlesex 1745 Oct. 1 

Williams, Amy, Monmouth, and Daniel Malson, Monmouth 1737 Jan. 12 

Williams, Amible, Essex, and Zophar Squier, Essex. 1752 Mar. 30 

Williams, Ann, Essex, and Carlisle Brown, Middlesex 1762 Feb. 16 

Williams, Anna, Philadelphia, and Thomas Edwards, Philadelphia. .. 1731 Sept. 21 

Williams, Anne, Greenwich, and Robert Muuuion, Greenwich 1748 Dec. 27 

Williams, Betsey, Essex, and Jacob Wiuans, Essex 1763 Jan. 20 

Williams, Charity, Freehold, and Peter Stout, Middletown 1767 Nov. 16 

Williams, Dorcas, Stafford, and David Rulen, Stafford 1763 Sept. 6 

Williamse, Eleanor, Monmouth, and Peter Forman, Monmouth. . . 1742 Dec. 7 

Williams, Elizabeth, Gloucester, and John Wiltshire, Gloucester 1738 Dec. 14 

Williams, Elizabeth, Freehold, and Vincent Wainright, Shrewsbury. . 1762 May 5 

Williams, Elizabeth, Orange, N. Y., and Joseph Degroot, Bergen. 1764 Aug. 22 

Williams, Hannah, Monmouth, and Timothy Corlies, Monmouth 1762 July 14 

Williams, Hanuah, and Jonathan Robeson, Philadelphia 1773 Oct. 6 

Williams, Jane, Pennsylvania, and Edward Lewis, Pennsylvania 1730 July 4 

Williams, Joan, Cape May, and Samuel Leonard, Cape May 1733 June 27 

Williams, Joannah, Gloucester, and Peter String, Gloucester 1762 Sept. 15 

Williams, Judith, and John Van Kirk, Bucks 1749 April 3 

Williams, Lydia, Burlington, and Thomas Whitten, Burlington . 1740 July 14 

Williams, Lydia, and John Gandy, Cape May 1774 Aug. 30 

Williams, Marah, Monmouth, and Samuel Hayes, Monmouth 1754 Jan. 12 

Williams, Margaret, and Joshua Milles, Burlington 1739 Nov. 1 

Williams, Margaret, Perth Arnboy, Ebenezer Cooper, Perth Amboy. . . 1751 June 22 

Williams, Mary, Bucks, Pa., and George White, Bucks, Pa 1732 Dec. 25 

Williams, Mary, and William Page, Burlington 1742 Mar. 17 

Williams, Mary, Monmouth, and Richard Hulst, Monmouth 1751 May 27 

Williams, Mary, and Benjamin Passmore, Great Egg Harbour 1757 April 29 



456 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Williams, Mary, Monmouth, and Jobu George Ital, Monmouth 1701 Jan. 12 

Williams, Mary, Philadelphia, and Joseph Coultou, Philadelphia. ... 1771 Oct. 15 

Williams, Naomi, Gloucester, and Thomas Muuyan, Gloucester 1761 Mar. 28 

Williams, Ruth, Burlington, and Thomas Meredith, Burlington 1755 June 29 

Williams, Sarah, Monmouth, and Samuel Layton, Monmouth 1755 Dec. 25 

Williams, Susannah, Freehold, an 1 Hartuess Throckmorton, Freehold. 1757 April 21 

Williams, Tamzen, and Daniel Bates, Gloucester . . 178-4 April 20 

Williams, Thankfull, Gloucester, and Nathaniel Morris, Gloucester ..1747 June 23 

Williams, Thankful, and William Crandel, Cape May 1777 Dec. 22 

Williams, Valbert, and James Verrier 1701 Sept. 9 

Williamson, Aun, Hunterdon, and Henry Krewson, Backs, Pa 1774 Oct. 31 

Williamson, Anne, Freehold, and Cornelius Coveuhoven, Freehold. . . .1750 May 28 

Williamson, Eleanor, and James Schureman, Middlesex 1778 Jan. 23 

Williamson, Elenah, Monmouth, Cornelius Coveuhoven, Monmouth. . 1756 June 5 

Williamson, Elizabeth, and Aaron Anderson, Burlington 1786 July 24 

Williamson, Helena, Middlesex, and James Lyne, Middlesex 1744 A Tig. 6 

Williamson, Jamima, New Jersey, and George Duckworth, New Jersey. 1739 June 26 

Williamson, Jane, Monmouth, and Domenicus Vanderveer, Monmouth. 1757 Oct. 28 

Williamson, Martha, Middlesex, and Thomas Goold, Middlesex 1744 Dec. 5 

Williamson, Mary, and Heudrick Gulick, Hunterdon 1754 Sept. 26 

Williamson, Mary, Amwell, and Cornelius Quick, Amwell 1770 Oct. 13 

Williamson, Mary, Burlington, and Pearson Fenimore, Burlington. . . . 1775 Oct. 24 

Williamson, Mary, and George Thompson, Middlesex 1778 Dec. 11 

Williamson, Patience, and John Ten Broeck, Middlesex 1745 Jan. 28 

Williamson, Phcebe, and Andrew Anderson , 1775 Aug. 28 

Williamson, Rebecca, and Jobu Voorhees, Amwell 1772 April 11 

Williamson, Sarah, and Barns Smock, Middletown 1766 May 27 

Williamson, Sarah, and William Cotaucb, Sussex 1773 Dec. 8 

Williamson, Styntie, aud Peter Monfoort 1748 Aug. 9 

Willis, Anne, Essex, and Joseph Halsy, Jr., Essex 1768 June 15 

Willis, Effy, Shrewsbury, and John Rente, Shrewsbury 1767 Aug. 28 

Willis, i Elizabeth, Northampton, aud William Raiuee, Northampton. 1747 Jan. 7 

Willis, Fythe, Essex, and Isaac Brown, Essex 1754 June 5 

Willis, Haunah, and Thomas Smith, Salem 1771 Nov. 12 

Willis, Lydia, Alloways Creek, and Samuel Sims, Salem ... 1747 Dec. 10 

Willis, Margaret, and Benjamin Weatherbe, Salem 1757 Mar. 3 

Willis, Mary, aud William Bickley, Burlington 1734 July 18 

Willis, Mary, Middlesex, and Joseph March, Middlesex 1773 Oct. 8 

Willis, Mary, Burlington, and Henry Leap, Burlington.. 1777 Mar. 1 

Willis, Mary, and Nathan Bartlett, Monmouth 1778 Dec. 2 

Willis, Phebe, Monmouth, aud Peter Parker, Monmouth 1743 July 1 

Willits, Lydia, Monmouth, and Anthony Smith, Burlington. 1746 May 16 

Willitts, Mary, Monmouth, and Samuel Bunting, Burlington 1739 May 11 

Willkeuson, Experience, Freehold, Jacob Quackenbush, Shrewsbury. .1663 Nov. 16 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 

Wills, Keziah, Northampton, and Henry Taylor, Northampton 1764 

Wills, Lettis, Burlington, and Levi Lippincott, Burliugtou 1773 

Wills, Margaret, Burliugtou. and Moses Wills, Burlington 1764 

Wills, Mary, Burliugtou, and Elijah Burdsal, Burlington 1765 

Wills, Mary, and William Morris, Burliugtou 1768 

Wills, Sarah, and William Ford, Burlington 1783 

Willson, Edith, and Nathan Starkey, New Hanover 1749 

Willson, Eleanor, Newton, and John Ferguson, Burliugtou 1768 

Willson, Elizabeth, Burliugtou, and James Gregory, Burliugtou 1776 

Willson, Margaret, Middlesex, aud George Hance, Middlesex 1760 

Willson, Margaret, aud Joshua Corshan 1764 

Willson, Mary, Burlington, aud John Scholey, Burlington 1727 

Willson, Mary, Monmouth, and Peter Patterson, Monmouth 1742 

Wilson, Anu, Burlington, and Obadiah Eldridge, Jr., Burliugtou. ...1740 

Wilson, Aun, Burlington, aud James Bryan, Burlington 1741 

Wilsou, Ann, Perth Amboy, and Matthias Iselstine, Jr., Perth Amboy. 1759 

Wilson, Catherine, Hunterdon, aud Andrew Mershon, Hunterdon 1774 

Wilsou, Catharine, aud Hope Opdyke, Hunterdon 1787 

Wdsou, Deborah, Monmouth, aud William Kenney, Monmouth 1761 

Wilson, Elizabeth, Essex, and John Jenkins, Essex 1761 

Wilson, Elizabeth, Amwell, and John Woolverton, Amwell 1768 

Wilson, Elizabeth, and Samuel Bayles, Middlesex 1779 

Wilsou, Hannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Mount, Monmouth 1754 

Wilson, Hannah, Monmouth, and Dennis Driskel, Monmouth 1762 

Wilson, Hannah, and William Harris, Burlington 1783 

Wilson, Ida, New Brunswick, and John Johnson, Middletowu 1749 

Wilson, Jamima, Monmouth, aud James Kelsey, Monmouth 1759 

Wilson, Jane, Somerset, and Simon Loof borrow, Somerset 1751 

Wilson, Jane, Somerset, and Hugh McLuen, Somerset 1753 

Wilsou, Johanna, aud Samuel Truex, Middletowu 1747 

Wilsou, Levinah, Hanover, aud John Wilkinson, Hanover 1748 

Wilson, Lydia, Burlington, and Joseph Morris, Burlington 1767 

Wilson, Margaret, Middletowu, aud Gisbert Vaubrakle, Monmouth. . . 1741 
Wilson, Margaret, Middletowu, aud David Robertson, Middletowu. v . . 1749 

Wilson, Margaret, and Thomas Land, Gloucester 1772 

Wilson, Martha, Middletowu, and Samuel Ayres, Middletown 1760 

Wilsou, Mary, Middletown, and Samuel Carman, Middletown 1748 

Wilsou, Mary, Perth Amboy, and John Roe, Perth Amboy 1757 

Wilson, Mary, Hunterdon, and Peter Henshell, Hunterdon ......... 1 774 

Wilson, Mary, Burlington, aud Mahlou Gibbs, Burlington 1776 

Wilson, Mary, and John Hust, Gloucester 1782 

Wilson, Rachel, Burlington, and Charles Netterville, Burlington 1736 

Wilson, Rachel, Middlesex, and Francis Bodine, Middlesex 1755 

Wils n, Rachel, Middlesex, and Thomas Height, Middlesex 1767 

Wilsou, Sally, aud Edmund Kingsland, Bergen 1763 

Wilsou, Sarah, Burliugtou, and Jonathan Brayman, Burlington 1742 



457 



Mar. 31 

April 12 

Mar. 

June 

May 

April 

Oct. 

Dec. 

Sept. 

July 

Dec. 

Sept. 

Sept. 

April 21 

Oct. 14 

Sept, 25 

Oct. 

Dec. 

Oct. 

Aug. 

Nov. 

Nov. 

Sept. 

Sept. 

April 

July 

Feb. 

April 

July 

Mar. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

April 

Sept, 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Aug. 

April 

Sept. 

April 

May 

Jan. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

Nov. 



458 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Wilson, Sarah, Perth Amboy, aud William Worth, Perth Ainboy 1758 

Wilson, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Joseph King, Hunterdon 1775 

Wilson, Sarah, and Philip Bowne, Burlington 1778 

Wilson, Sarah, and Bishop Tucker, Springfield 1778 

Wiuaus, Anne, Somerset, and Henry Harrison, New Jersey 1742 

Winaus, Experience, Essex, and Josiah Wiuans, Elizabeth Town 1740 

Winaut, Elisabeth, Staten Islaud, and Timothy Wood, Staten Island. 1747-8 

Wing, Aun, Monmouth, and James West, Monmouth. . 1749 

Wing, Azenbeth, Monmouth, and Joseph Chambers, Monmouth. 1757 

Whine, Nancy, and Gerrebrant Gerrebrants 17(39 

Wiunick, Elizabeth, and Francis Bullus, Burlington 1791 

Winright, Lydia, Shrewsbury, and John West, Shrewsbury. . . 1755 

Winter, Catherine, Monmouth, and James Bray, Monmouth. . . 1756 

Winter, Hannah, Monmouth, and Thomas Herbert, Monmouth 1751 

Winter, Sarah, Philadelphia, Pa., Archibald Montgomery, Phila., Pa 1737 

Winters, Miry, Mourn Kith, and William Chumard, Burlington 1776 

Wiseheart, Jemima, Philadelphia, Pa., Richard Edwards, Phila, Pa.. 1736 

Wisel, Catharine, Freehold, and Peter Benam, Freehold 1761 

Wissiug, Margaret, Burlington, and Lewis Giles, Burlington 1771 

Witcraft, Ann, and James Hardy, Trenton 1780 

Woglum, Eliah, aud John Pryer, Staten Island 1771 

Wolcott, Mary, Monmouth, aud Hugh Jackson, Monmouth . . 1745 

Wollcott, Susanna, New Jersey, and Nicholas Chambers, New Jersey .. 1743 

Wolton, Elizabeth, Salem, and John Paiue, Salem 1682 

Wolverton, Anne, Amwell, and Moses Warlord, Kingwood ... 1771 

Wombok, Elizabeth, and James Hixson, Hunterdon 1779 

Wonitnan, Mary, and John Rain, Gloucester 1735 

Wood, Abigail, Gloucester, aud Robert Hunt, Burlington 1733 

Wood, Alice, Gloucester, and James Brown, Gloucester 1754 

Wood, Atalanah, Burlington, and George Douglas, Burlington 1741 

Wood, Catharine, Gloucester, and David Addains, Gloucester 1745 

Wood, Deborah, Chesterfield and John Beck, Chesterfield 1747 

Wood, Deborah, Deptford, and Jonathan Sell, Gloucester. t 1750 

Wood, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Ebenezer Gaskill, Burlington 1731 

Wood, Elizabeth, aud Nehemiah Leeds '. 1735 

Wood, Elizabeth, and John Willis, Burlington. 1743 

Wood, Elizabeth, and Aaron Chew, Gloucester. . 1775 

Wood, Esther, and Thomas Low, Gloucester 1780 

Wood, H inuah, Gloucester, and Joseph Heulings, Burlington 1741 

Wood, Jane, Pilesgrove, and Joseph Tussey, Pilesgrove 1761 

Wood, Jemima, and Thomas Brundridge, Monmouth . . . 1737 

Wood, Jemima, Burlington, and Robert Moses, Burlington 1741 

Wood, Letitia, Gloucester, and John Jefferis, Gloucester 1736 

Wood, Mary, Gloucester, and Joseph Cole, Gloucester 1731 

Wood, Mary, Gloucester, aud Abel Lee, Gloucester 1733 

Wood, Mary, Burlington, and Joshua Anderson, Trenton 1745 



Dec. 6 

Nov. 16 

Jan. 10 

Mar. 6 

May 17 

Jan. 7 

Jan. 19 

Dec. 20 

July 18 

Oct. 18 

Jan. 8 

Dec. 3 

Feb. 23 

Oct. 21 

Nov. 14 

Jan. 12 

Nov. 6 

Feb. 24 

Aug. 28 

Feb. 24 
April 27 

Nov. 7 

July 19 

Jan. 19 

Jan. 12 

Dec. 7 

Sept. 8 

Dec. 1 9 
April 23 

Sept. 28 

June 20 

Feb. 22 

Aug. 7 

J une 2 1 
Sept. 24 

June 25 

Feb. 1 4 

Dec. 29 

May 12 

Dec. 1 

Dec. 22 

Sept. 15 

Feb. 24 

Dec 2 

Mar. 7 

Nov. 27 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 



450 



Wood, Mary, Richmond, N V , and Paton Parmar, Richmond, N. 5f. L763 

Wood, Mary, Salem, ami Henry Miller, Salem 17G5 

Wood, Mary, Waterford, and Barzillai Hugg, Gloucester 1771 

Wood, Margaret, Philadelphia, Pa., William Lawrence, Phila., Pa. . . .1755 

Wood, Millesaut, and Head Sheppard, Cumberland 177H 

Wood, Phebe, and Silas Beagle, Stateu Island 1743 

Wood, Rachel, and William Smith, Mannington 1759 

Wood, Rachael, and Armas Dare, Salem . . 1775 

Wood, Rebecca, Burlington, and John Butteriield, Burlington 1740 

Wood, Ruth, Gloucester, and Abraham Chattiu, Jr., Gloucester 1760 

Wood, Sarah, Chesterfield, and John Thomas, Chesterfield 1746 

Wood, Sarah, Chester, Pa., and John Pearson. Chester, Pa 1716 

Wood, Sarah, Mausfield, and Joseph Raniear, Mansfield 1751 

Wood, Sarah, and Benjamin Drake, Hunterdon 1769 

Wood, Sarah, Burlington, John Curtis, Capt. Bowman's Co., 2 Jersey. 1781 

Wood, Sarah, and James Whithead, Galloway 1785 

Woodard, Hannah, and Aaron Steward, Burlington .... 1 780 

Wo )dath, Sarah, Gloucester, and Edward Irviu, Gloucester 1727 

Woodhouse, Hannah, Hopewell, and Jonathan Wheaton, Hopewell. . .1764 

Woodhouse, Mary, Salem, and William Remmington, Salem 1693 

Woodland, Rhoda, and Edward Ketchem, Cumberland 1773 

Woodmansee, Anna, Monmouth, and Ebenezer Collins, Monmouth. . .1748 

Woodmausee, Lydia, Monmouth, and Joseph Graves, Monmouth 1741 

Woodmausey, Haunah, Monmouth, and David Killey, Monmouth ...1730 

Woodoth, Ruth, and Jacob Matlack, Evesham 1733 

Woodrouff, Elizabeth, and John Parent, Upper Freehold 1761 

Woodruff, Elizabeth, Moumouth, and John Morris, Monmouth 1765 

Woodruff, Ester, Cumberland, and Preston Bishop, Cumberland . . . 1761 

Woodruff, Haunah, and John Ingram, Cape May ... 1780 

Woodruff, Mary, Shrewsbury, and Jeremiah Stillwell, Upper Freehold. 1750 

Woodruff, Polly, and Hugh McKee, Cumberland 1789 

Woodruff, Sarah, Cumberland, and Daniel Maskell, Cumberland 1775 

Woodruff, Sarah, and William Robinson, Cumberland 1789 

Woodward, Constant, and Oliver Potter, Monmouth 1786 

Woodward, Joaunah, Hunterdon, and Josias Lambert, Monmouth ...1766 

Woodward, Mary, and Joseph Talman, Burlington 1736 

Woodward, Mary, and Evie Smith, Gloucester 1746 

Woodward, Rebecca, and Peter Covenover, Gloucester 1773 

Woodward, Rhoda, and Richard Britau, Burlington 1767 

Woodward, Sarah, Burlington, and Robert Taylor, Burlington 1728 

Wooglom, Antie, Staten Island, and Daniel Garrison, Stateu Island. . . 1743 

Woollard, Elizabeth, and Peter Vansant, Pennsylvania 1778 

Woolley, Abigail, Monmouth, and Stoffel Lougstreet, Monmouth 1743 

Woolley, Adrea, Monmouth, and George Mount, Monmouth. . . 1748-9 

Woolley, Ann, Monmouth, and Amaziah Slocum, Monmouth 1739 

Woolley, Catherine, Monmouth, and James Woolley, Monmouth 1 747 



May It) 
April 9 
Dec. 23 
May 17 
Nov. 12 
Nov. 26 
July 20 
July 25 
July 29 
July 22 
June 7 
Nov. 13 
May 8 
April 7 
Feb. 5 
Feb. 8 
Feb. 20 
Nov. 23 
Aug. 23 
April 13 
April 3 
Dec. 27 
April 13 
Feb. 25 
Nov. 15 
May 14 
June 23 
May 19 
Dec. 26 
Oct. 23 
May 18 
Aug. 5 
July 9 
Jan. 7 
July 23 
May 18 
Nov. 3 
June 16 
July 23 
May 14 
June 14 
April 8 
Dec. 16 
Mar. 4 
Nov. 3 
Jan. 14 



460 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Woolley, Content, Shrewsbury, and Parnel Clayton, Burlington 1731 

Woolley, Deborah, Shrewsbury, and Benjamin Rogers, Shrewsbury. . .1753 

Woolley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Timothy Akin, .Monmouth 1718 

Woolley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and John Cook, Monmouth. 1749 

Woolley, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and David Lippiucott, Monmouth. 1757 
Woolley, Freelove, Monmouth, and Isaac Herbert, Monmouth. . . . 1742-3 
Woolley, Lydia, Monmouth, and Jacob Lippiucott, Jr., Monmouth . . 1753 
Woolley, Margaret, Monmouth, and Webley Edwards, Monmouth... 1742 
Woolley, Margaret, Monmouth, and Sylvester Brinley, Monmouth. . . . 1752 

Woolley, Margaret, Monmouth, and George Brown, Monmouth 1755 

Woolley, Mary, Monmouth, and Benjamin Davis, Monmouth 1749 

Woolley, Patience, Shrewsbury, and David Burdg, Middletown 1746 

Woolley, Phebe, Shrewsbury, and John Woolley, Middletown . ... 1751 

Woolley, Ruth, Shrewsbury, and Joseph Wite, Shrewsbury 1761 

Woolley, Sarah, Monmouth, and John Collard, Monmouth 1743 

Woolman, Sarah, Burlington, and Robert Elton, Burlington 1737 

Woolmar, Keziah, and Isaac Haines, Burlington 1788 

Woolsou, Polley, Cape May. and Eli Daniels, Cumberland 1776 

Woolston, Anne, Burlington, and George Briggs, Burlington 1734 

Woolston, Ann, Burlington, and Amos Shreve, Burlington 1737 

Woolston, Celena, Northampton, Samuel Woolston, Jr., Northampton 1749 Dec. 25 
Woolston, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Courod Painter, Burlington. ...1754 

Woolston, Elizabeth, and John Firt, Jr., Burlington 1756 

Woolston, Epicarius, Gloucester, and Simon Sparks, Gloucester 1761 

Woolston, Hannah, and Joseph Belcher, Burlington 1754 

Woolston, Hannah, Gloucester, and Samuel Flaningam, Gloucester . . 1768 

Woolston, Lattice, Gloucester, and Isaac Hinchman, Gloucester 1753 

Woolston, Lettice, Burlington, and Abel Briggs, Burlington. ... 1773 

Woolston, Margaret, Burlington, and Ebenezer Doty, Burlington 

Woolston, Mary, Burlington; and Levi Budd, Burlington 1774 

Woolston, Ruth, Burlington, and Isaac Budd, Burlington 1775 

Woolston, Sarah, and Isaac Stephens, Deptford. 1772 

Woolverton, Eliza, Hunterdon, and Joseph Lambert, Hunterdon 1774 

Woolverton, Mary, Susses, and Samuel Crowell, Sussex 176:2 

Woolverton, Mary, Kingwood, and George Smith, Kingwood 1770 

Woolverton, Mary, and Daniel Bray, Hunterdon 1772 

Woolverton, Rosauuah, and Henry Matthis, Hunterdon 1782 

Wi 11 )ly, Hannah, and Thomas B nden, Monmouth 1780 

Wooly, Margaret, and John Horn, Gloucester 1761 

Wordel, Anne, Shrewsbury, and Joel White, Shrewsbury 1752 

Worden, Hosanuah, Monmouth, and John Johnson, Monmouth 1760 June 

Wi irden, Mary, and Henry Mead, Bergen 1789 

Worden, Phebe, Monmouth, and Safety Bowne, Monmouth 1743 April 22 

Worden, Sarah, Shrewsbury, and Job Cornel, Shrewsbury 1755 Way 30 



Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


26 


Jan. 


23 


Dec. 


29 


Dec. 


5 


Feb. 


7 


Dec. 


11 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


17 


Oct, 


4 


Dec. 


11 


Nov. 


14 


May 


4 


Dec. 


7 


Aug. 


20 


April 


18 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


20 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


2 


Dec. 


25 


Oct. 


24 


Dec. 


27 


July 


13 


May 


31 


Oct, 


15 


Dec. 


31 


■Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


21 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


6 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 


22 


Oct. 


2 


July 


27 


May 


2 


May 


22 


Jan. 


12 


Nov. 


20 


Oct. 


14 


June 


4 


Feb. 


3 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 461 

Wbrldin, Mary, Salem, and Samuel McClenan,! Salem 1711 Nov. 31 

W'.H-l din, Mary, 2 Salem, and Samuel McLanning,2 Salem 1741 Dec. 31 

Worley, IVnelope, Northampton, and David Wilson, Northampton . . 1748 July 15 

Worley, Mary, Burlington, and Daniel Hoffe, Burlington 1741 Mar. 4 

Wbrlidge, Ann, Salem, and William Braithwaite, Salem 1702 July 2 

Worne, Sarah, Cumberland, and Nicholas Dowdney, Cumberland ...1771 Dec. 18 

Wort, Mary, and Elijah Morrell, Middlesex 1780 Mar. 28 

Worthingtou, Elizabeth, and James Dunlap, Salem 1731 Mar. 29 

Worthingtou, Hanuah, Gloucester, Bartholomew Alder, Gloucester. .. 1766 Dec. 16 

Worthingtou, Mary, and Daniel Harris, Cumberland 1784 Nov. 9 

Worthingtou, Rachel, aud Jacob Ludlam, Cumberland 1784 Jan. 21 

Worthiugton, Sarah, Salem, and John Fiulaw, Salem 1759 Sept. 11 

Worthier, Lidy, Monmouth, and Josiah Halstead, Monmouth 1766 Sept. 27 

Worthley, Lydia, Monmouth, aud John Borden, Monmouth. 1767 Jan. 28 

Worthley, Mary, Monmouth, aud Aaron Robens, Monmouth 1740 Dec. 13 

Worthley, Wernchey, and Thomas North, Shrewsbury 1766 Oct. 14 

Wortman, Christiana, Somerset, and Alford Harriot, Woodbridge 1774 Nov. 26 

Wortman, Hannah, aud John Moore, Hunterdon 1772 July 22 

Wortman, Mary, and Joseph Corwin, Morris 1778 Mar. 27 

Wertou, Sarah, and John Filer, Jr., Cumberland 1759 Mar. 6 

Worth, Jamima, Barnegat, and Duncan Murray, Maryland 1749 July 10 

Wright, Abigail, Moumouth, and Robert McElvey, Monmouth 1766 Mar. 18 

Wright, Abigail, Burlington, aud William Hazeltou, Burlington 1775 April 22 

Wright, Alice, and Isaac Merritt, Mount Holly 1784 April 13 

Wright, Ann, Gloucester, and Nathan Wright, Cumberland 1764 Jan. 31 

Wright, Ann, and Christian Bryenberg, Salem 1777 Aug. 1 1 

Wright, Anne, and Patterson Wright, Bristol, Pa 1785 Mar. 26 

Wright, Edith, Burlington, and Richard Harrison, Burlington. . 1765 Aug. 14 

Wright, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Samuel Reeve, Burlington. ... .1778 Feb. 16 

Wright, Elizabeth, and Jacob Van Hart 1782 Nov. 16 

Wright, Ester, Burlington, aud William Maxwell, Burlington 1730 Dec. 22 

Wright, Esther, Monmouth, and William Emley, Monmouth 1775 Sept. 22 

Wright, Hannah, and Edward Kemble, Burlington 1777 Oct. 3 

Wright, Lydia, aud Isaac Bilderback, Salem 1784 Mar. 24 

Wright, Margaret, Allentown, Marmaduke Newland, Upper Freehold. 1745 Jan. 18 

Wright, Martha. Pennsylvania, aud Timothy Titus, Pennsylvania. . . . 1764 Aug. 21 

Wright, Mary, Burlington, and William Duckworth, Burlington 1731 Dec. 6 

Wright, Mary, Stateu Island, and Joseph Soper, B.irnegat 1746 June 3 

Wright, Mary, aud Hendrick Cremer, Middlesex 1761 May 23 

Wright, Mary, Bucks, and William Burroughs, Bucks 1763 Sept. 9 

Wright, Mary, Bordentown, aud Marick Weller, Upper Freehold. . . 17(57 Jan. 3 

Wright, Mary, Moumouth, aud John Robius, Monmouth 1766 Jan. 6 

Wright, Mary, Hanover, and Henry Ridgeway, Springfield 1771 Feb. 25 

1 ''Blacksmith of Salem Co.." according to the record. 

2 Thus duplicated in the record, but with different dates, and different spelling of the 
■'room's name, as here given, 



462 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Wright, Miriam, Burlington, and Benjamin Fowler, Monmouth 1730 Dec. 29 

Wright, Priscilla, Monmouth, and Thomas Cooper, Monmouth 1749 Nov. 6 

Wright, Prudence, Mansfield, and Phillip Spaching,! Mansfield 1763 Oct. 22 

Wright, Rachel, Burlington, and George Shinn, Burlington 17*51 Sept. 1 

Wright, Rebecca, Burlington, and Thomas Potts, Bucks, Pa 

Wright, Rebekah, and Amos Weller, Hanover 1766 Dec. 22 

Wright, Rebecca, and William Clap, Burlington 1768 Jan. 30 

Wright, Ruth, Woodbridge, and David Wright, Woodbridge 1745-6 Jan. 7 

Wright, Ruth, Salem, and Thomas Langton, Salem 1746 Jan. 15 

Wright. Sarah, Bucks, Pa., and William Brodnax, Bucks, Pa 1761 July 14 

Wright, Sarah, Salem, and Johu Hoffman, Salem 1769 July 22 

Wright, Susanna, Burlington, and Benjamin Genkius, Burlington 1754 Oct. 19 

Wright, Zipporah, Richmond, N. Y., John Androvet, Richmond, N. Y. 1747 Jan. 14 

Wright, Zubeth, Gloucester, and Jacob Homer, Gloucester 1740 Feb. 28 

Wyck, Pheby, Morris, and William Leddel, Morris 1770 April 4 

Wychoff, Mary, Monmouth, and Abraham Hendricks, Monmouth 1754 Dec. 17 

Wycof, Geertie, Hunterdon, and Samuel Wyckof, Hunterdon ... 1749 Nov. 25 

Wycoff, Gertie, Somerset, and Cornelius Vanhorne, Hunterdon 1714 May 12 

Wycoff, Ida, Monmouth, and David Covenhover, Monmouth 1763 Aug. 18 

Wycoff, Nelly, Freehold, and Johu Covenhoven, Middletown 1755 Dec. 8 

Wycoffe, Catherine, and Benjamin Covenhoven, Freehold 1750 Feb. 5 

Wycott, Sarah, Somerset, and Adrian Hagerman, Jr., Somerset 1744 May 14 

Wykoff, Analtie, Somerset, and Jacobus Van Duyn, Somerset 1740 Nov. 7 

Wykoff, Sarah, and Jacob Kinuey, Somerset 1779 Feb. 10 

Wykoff, Sarah, and William Cornel, Somerset 1781 Jan. 7 

Wykoff, Wiliiampy, and Peter Kinney, Somerset 1779 Feb. 6 

Wynants, Catharine, and Henry Wiser, Richmond, N. Y 1 7 68 July 11 

Wynds, Catty, and John Wills, Burlington 1790 July 7 

MALES. * 

Yard, Archibald Wm., Trenton, and Katherine Pearson . 1768 Jan. 25 

Yard, William, Trenton, and Mary Peace, Trenton 1746 Sept. 11 

Yard, William, Monmouth, and Catherine Allen, Monmouth 1756 May 29 

Yard, John, Trenton, and Mary Cluuu 1779 Jan. 18 

Yard, John, Trenton, and Jane Ward 1732 Sept. 6 

Yard, Nahor, Trenton, and Betsey Beggs 1784 Mar. 19 

Yates, John, < !ape May, and Elizabeth Swain, 1768 April 9 

Yates, William, Cape May, and Sarah Iszard, Cape May 1762 Aug. 24 

Yatman, John, Monmouth, and Margaret Gordon, Monmouth 1744 Dec. 31 

Yawger, William, Hunterdon, and Anne Person 1778 May 22 

Yingling, Jacob, Monmouth, and Charity Homor 1759 May 1 5 

Yorke, Thomas, Philadelphia, and Elizabeth Tioli, Philadelphia 1771 July 1 

Young, Andrew, Bucks, Pa., and Sarah Dare, Bucks, Pa 1761 Aug. 21 

Young, Henry, Cape May, and Phoebe Norton, Capo May 1757 Dec. 28 

1 Thus signed; in the bodv of the bond 1 be name is entered as "Speches/' 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 463 

Young, Hezekiah, Trenton, and Smah Hendrickson. 1778 

Young, James, Hopewell, and Mary Sincher 1757 

Young, Jeremiah, Hopewell, and Sarah Dovvdney 1783 

Young, Job, Cape May, and Mary Norton, Cape May 1757 

Young, John, Chesterfield, and Mary MoVay, I Ihesterfield 1768 

Young, John, Maidenhead, and Jean Norton . . 1779 

Touug, Peter, Gloucester, and Eleanor Best, Gloucester. . . 1761 

Young, Peter, Hunterdon, and Phebe Boram 1784 

Young, Philip, Amwelh and Rachel Johnson, Amwell 1771 

Young, Philip, Somerset, and Catharine Crigh 1779 

Young, William, Morris, and Elizabeth Lowrance, Somerset 1773 

Y'oung, William, New Jersey, and Sarah Smith 1775 

Young, William, Alloways Creek, and Sarah Shephard 1777 

Youngs, Johu, Middletown, and Esther Harbour, Monmouth 1741 

Yournson, John, Penns Neck, and Jane Canneman, Penns Neck 1762 

FEMALES. Y 

Yaets, Margaret, Bucks, Pa., and John Atkinson, Bucks, Pa 1735 

Yandle, Sarah, Hunterdon, and Andrew Todd, Somerset 1771 

Yates, Isabel, Bucks, Pa., and Richard Gliff, Bucks, Pa 1729 

Yates, Lydya, Cape May, and John Leek, Cape May 1763 

Yates, Rebecca, Cape May, and Jonathan Hand, Cape May 1776 

Yard, Ann, and Obadiah Curtis, Hunterdon 1789 

Yard, Elizabeth, Burlington, and Adam Carr, Burlington 1740 

Yard, Margaret, Trenton, and Richard Teunaut, Trenton 1763 

Yard, Margaret, and William O'Neale, Trenton. 1779 

Yard, Mary, Trenton, and Henry Marshen, Trenton 1728 

Yard, Prudence, and James Bowen, Hunterdon 1779 

Yard, Susanuah, Burlington, and Gabriel Blond, Burlington 1739 

Yeates, Margaret, and Hugh Edmiston, Cumberland 1780 

Yeates, Martha, Cape May, and David Hand, Cape May 1769 

Yerks, Jane, and Jacob Smith, Somerset 1778 

Yong, Elizabeth, and Thomas Gandy, Cape May 1768 

Young, , Gloucester, and Samuel Chester, Gloucester 1748 

Y'oung, Abigail, Cape May, and Joseph Ludlam, Cape May ... 1747 

Y'oung, Anne, Morris, and Abraham Drake, Morris 1763 

Young, Catherine, and George Marsh, Morris 1779 

Young, Elizabeth, Cape May, and John Mackey, Cape May 1746 

Young, Elizabeth, and Henry Corson, Cape May 1788 

Y'oung, Jane, and Jeremiah Burch, Monmouth 1768 

Young, Martha, Greenwich, and Samuel Chester, Greenwich 1748 

Young, Mary, New Brunswick, and Abraham Ouke, New Brunswick. .1758 

Young, Mary, and Henry Denny, Bergen ... 1 780 

Young, Naomi, Cipe May, aud Elijah Hewitt, (.'ape May ... 1763 

Young, Phebe, Cape May, aud Williim Robinson, Cape May 1738 

Young, Rachel, Capa May, and James Willets, Cape May 1776 



Dec. 


19 


June 


30 


April 


1 


April 


26 


Mar. 


17 


April 


6 


Sept. 


30 


Feb. 


25 


Aug. 


13 


Jan. 


19 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


11 


Aug. 


26 


Nov. 


10 


Dec. 


16 


July 


28 


Jan. 


26 


Feb. 


17 


June 


14 


Mar. 


25 


Dec. 


17 


July 


25 


Aug. 


25 


Aug. 


23 


Jan. 


20 


Jan. 


13 


April 


18 


April 


14 


May 


Hi 


Dec. 


19 


Dec. 


12 


Jan. 


5 


Aug. 


17 


Feb. 


23 


Nov. 


11 


April 


25 


Feb. 


21 


June 


25 


Jan. 


5 


Oct. 


12 


Sept. 


21 


June 


14 


June 


20 


Dec. 


:> 



4C4 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Youug, Sarah, Morris, and Isaac Hatheway, Morris 1769 

Young, Susanna, Gloucester, aud John Gruffyth, Gloucester 1754 

Young, Tabitha, Cape May, aud John Towusaud, Cape May 17 id 

Youugs, Deborah, and Clement Dauiels, Cape May 1737 

Youngs, Mary, and William llobiusou, Jr., Maurice River 1772 

Yournson, Jean, and Matthias Miller, Salem 1779 

MALES. Z 

Zabriske, Gerrit, Bergen, aud Aunatje Demarest 178G 

Zabriske, Henry, Paramus, and Willemtje Bogert, Bergen 1771 

Zabriske, Henry I., Paramus, and Mary Zabriskie 1782 

Zabriske, Jau, New Barbadoes, and Leah Zabriskie, New Barbadoes. . . 1769 

Zabriske. John, Bjrgen, and Wellimentia Westervelt 1793 

Zabriskei, Jacob, Bergen, aud Sarah Varick, Bergen 1743 

Zabriski, Henry. Bergen, aud Elizabeth (loecheus, Bergen 1767 

Zabriski, Peter, Bergen, and Martyutje Varick, Bergen 1747 

Zabriskie, Albert, Bergen, and Geurteye Westervelt, Bergen 1751 

Zabriskie, Albert, Bergen, aud Amelia Reading 1787 

Zabriskie, Albert, Bergen, aud Frances Nicoll 1789 

Zabriskie, Andreas, Hackeusack, and Jane Lazear 1769 

Zabriskie, Christian, New Barbadoes, and Polly Terhune . . 1771 

Zabriskie, Christian A., Bergen, aud Mary Hausemau 1789 

Zabriskie, John A., Bergen, and Elizabeth Van Dien 1783 

Zabriskie, John A., Bergen, and Cornelia Bjgert. ... 1788 

Zabriskie, John J., Bergen, and Henderiche Van Reypen 1788 

Zabriskie, Joost, Bergen, aud Polly Hopper, Bergen 1772 

Zabriskie, Nicholas J., Bergen, and Weyntje Terhune 1788 

Zabroweski, C.isparus, Bergen, Catharine Wagoner, 1 Acquackanonck. . 1747 

Zaue, Joseph, Salem, and Rebecca Hile, Salem 1750 

Zaue, William, Gloucester, and Aleci Chattin 1775 

Zelley, John, Springfield, aud Hannah Taylor 1773 

Zillay, Abraham, Springfield, and Sarah Croshaw, Springfield 1773 

Zilley, Daniel, Burlington, and Hannah Southwick, Burlington. . . ..1776 

Zilley, Samuel, Northampton, and Martha Green 1781 

Zutpheu, Gysbert, Monmouth, aud Arianche Voorhees, Monmouth. . . . 1749 

FEMALES. ^ 

Zabrisco, Rachel, Hackensack, and Gaspares Westervelt, Hackeusack. . 1763 

Zabriski, Elizabeth, Bergen, and Edmund Seaman, New York 1768 

Zabriski, Leah, New Barbadoes, and Jau Zabriske, New Barbadoes . . 1769 

Zabriskie, Ann, Bergen, and Garrit G. Lansing, Bergen 1789 

Zabriskie, Aultye, and Harman Vaudieu, Bergen 1787 

Zabriskie, Elizabeth, aud Henry V: Blarcom, Acquackanonch 1784 

Zabriskie, Mary, and Jost Bogart, Bergen . 1772 

1 V;ni W'irj -r 



Dec. 


2 


June 


29 


Oct. . 


h! 


June 


20 


Aug. 


19 


Oct. 


6 


Dec. 


16 


Nov. 


2 


April 


21 


May 


11 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


20 


Oct. 


21 


Oct. 


8 


Alar. 


20 


April 


27 


Aug. 


4 


Sept. 


18 


Nov. 


23 


Dec. 


5 


April 


16 


Dec. 


7 


Jan. 


19 


Dec. 


18 


April 


20 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


16 


Jan. 


7 


Oct, 


19 


Mar. 


21 


Mar. 


6 


June 


15 


May 


13 


Dec. 


24 


April 


21 


Nov. 


27 


Sept. 


21 


July 


12 


Sept. 


12 



MARRIAGE LICENSES. 465 

Zabriskie, Mary, ami Henry I. Zabriskie, Paramus. 1782 

Zabriskie, Mary, and Jacob Terhuuo, Bergen 1791 

Zabriskie, Nastia, and Henry V : Dalsem, New Barbadoes 1781 

Zabriskie, Sarah, and Yelles Bartholf, Bergen . 1779 

Zabrisky, Weyntie, and Jac >1> C. Banta, Bergen 1788 

Z ibriskie, Catharine, and John Anderson, Bergen 1792 

Zane, Hannah, and John Murphy, Gloucester 1784 

Zaue, Mary, and William Peas, Gloucester 1784 

Zaue, Rhoda, and Thomas Heppard, Gloucester 17GL 

Zanes, Elizabeth, and Thomas Rakestraw, Evesham 1757 

Zebrisco, Mary, Bergen, and Johannis Bongart, Bergen 1754 

Zelley, Damaras, Burlington, and Abel Harker, Burlington 1782 

Zelley, Mary, Burlington, and Gersham Penquite, Burlington 1780 

Zutphin, Elizabeth, Monmouth, and Joseph Johnston. Monmouth . . . 1756 
Zutphin, Mary, Monmouth, and Abraham Johnson, Monmouth 1767 



Nov. 


2 


May 


6 


April 


28 


Aug. 


6 


Oct. 


10 


Feb. 


23 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


23 


Pel). 


13 


July 


4 


July 


8 


Dec. 


23 


Nov. 


6 


June 


22 


Jan. 


2 



29 



Hackensack Reformed (Dutch) Church Records. 



The earliest marriage and baptismal registers of the Hackensack Reformed (Dutch) 
Church are entered iu a stout folio volume, which, though more than two hundred 
years old, is iu an excellent state of. preservation. For -the first century cf the 
Church's history the records were kept iu Dutch. A cartful translation was pub- 
lished in 1891 by the Holland Society of New York, the printed volume being an ex- 
act reproduction (but iu Euglish) of the original record, giving church members, 
1686-1801; marriages, 1695-1752, 1790-1796, 1799-1802; baptisms, 1686-1802; elec- 
tion of church officers, etc. With the permission of the Holland society, the follow- 
ing alphabetical arrangement is given of that translation, so far as it relates to the 
marriage records. 

Iu 1721 a new church was organized at Schraaleuburgh (pronounced Skrawlen- 
burgh), about four miles from Hackensack. Both churches were under the same pas- 
torate during the rest of the century. Hence, marriages or baptisms in one church 
are often entered iu the records of the other. The hiatus in the marriage register of 
the Hackensack church, 1753-1789, is largely supplied in the register of the Schraal- 
enburgh Church. 

It was the custom in the Reformed Dutch Churches to publish the banns, or to 
announce intended marriages, from the pulpit, three Sundays before the marriage, or 
to have notice thereof set up at the church door. Sometimes the banns would be 
proclaimed at one church, and the marriage would be performed at another. This 
might occur because of the removal of the parties. Usually, no doubt, it was due to 
the fact that there was no service iu the church where the banns hud been proclaimed. 
ami the bride and groom repaired to the nearest clergyman to get married. In the 
following index, the date given is that of the entry in the record, generally after the 
first "calling out" of the parties. Some Dominies kept a careful record of the date 
of the banns and of the marriage also, but that was not customary. 

The statement that one or both the parties to a marriage "lived here," or "lived 
in Hackensack," or in Second River, Paramus, Acquackanonk, etc., often means that 
the person belonged to the Dutch Church of the locality mentioned, not that he or 
she -was actually a resident of such place. The Reformed Dutch Churches iu North- 
ern New Jersey iu the eighteenth century were: Bergen (now Jersey City), English 
Neighborhood, Hackensack, Schraaleuburgh, Acquackanonk (now Passaic), Paramus, 
Second River (now Belleville), t" Noorde (at the North), or de Panne (now Oakland) 
Horseneck (now Fairfield), Pom pton Plains, Montville. 

In these marriage records the names of places are variously written by different 
scribes, some being in Dutch, aud some beiug the results of attempts to reproduce 



468 NEW JERSEY' COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

phonetically in Dutch the English names. Many of the names may be unfamiliar to 
re iders of the present day. Hence the following explanations may be useful: 

Acqueggenonck, Akkwegnonk, Acquegnon, etc. — Acquackanonk. Now Acquack- 

auonk township, the city of Passaic, and the greater part of the city of Pat- 

erson. 
Asemes— Harsimus. Now in Jeisey City. 
Barbaer's Neck, Barbary Neck, etc. —New Barbadoes Neck. Southwestern part of 

Hudson County, between the Passaic and Hackensack rivers. 
Barlenton— Burlington. 
Bast en— Boston. 
Boswyck— Bushwick, L. I. 
Breukel, Breukelen— Brooklyn. 

Choghakes, Goghakens, etc. — Hohokus, Bergen County. 
Cloof — The Clove, or gap, at the northern end of the Ramapo valley. 
Flipsburgh— Phillipsburgh. Tarrytown, N. Y. 

Geemepogh, Gemenipa, Gemoeuepan, etc. —Now written Communipaw, Jersey City. 
Gravesandt— Gravesend, L. I. 
Hedenborgh— Edinburgh, Scotland. 
Hemstee — Hempstead, L. I. 
Husenies— Harsim ;s, in Jeisey City. 

Iapog — Now written Yawpaw. In Bergen Couuty, between Paterson and Pompton. 
Isophus— Esopus, N. Y. 

Kalbrist, France— Probably meant for Quelle Brest. 
Kortlandt— Cortlaudt Manor, N. Y. 
Kwaksak— Quacksack A creek ia Bergen Couuty. 
Manadis Isl. — Manhattan Island. 
Mawe — Mahwah, iu the Ramapo Valley. 
Monachie— Moonacbie, near Rutherfnrd, Bergen County. 
N. Amersfort— Flatlands, L. I. 
N. Barbaris Neck — New Barbadoes Neck. 
N. Bortayen. 
N. Ryssel. 

Narrits — N »rwich, England. 

New Britain— Between Morristown and S imerville. 
New Thuyn— Newtown, L. I. 
Newwyck— Perhaps an error for New York. 

P.inue, de— Ponds, now Oakland, Borgeu County, near Pompton. 
Peghkena— Pacquanac or Pequannock. 
Peghtenaa— Probably Pacquanac. 

Pemmerpogh, Pommerpogh, Pemmery, etc. — Pamrapo, in Jersey City. 
Peremis — Paramus, Bergen County. 
Philipsburgh— Tarrytown. 
Pommerpogh — Pamra] 1 1 >. 
Rawak, Rawe— Probably Rahway. 
Reemepogh, Remmepog, Rympoogh— Ramapo. 



II AC KEN sACk CI II RC1I MARRIAGE RECORDS. 469 

Ringwoet— Ringwood, formerly iu Bergen County; now in the northern part of 
Passaic County. 

Ryinpogh — Ramapo. 

Sacheu— Sachsen, Saxony, Germany. 

Schoonegte, etc. — Schenectady, N. Y. 

Second River— Belleville. 

Segquanek. 

Siapenicke. 

St. Tonne— Doubtless meant for St. Anne. 

Suythool— Southold, L. I. 

Thyne Valley (Dutch, Tuyne Vly) -Garden Meadow. Pomptou Plains. 

Viscoe. 

Vlaeuder, Vlaauderen — Flanders, in Holland. 

Waggereuw, Wegreuw, etc. — Wagaraw, now part of the Borough of Hawthorne, 
near Patersou. 

Wihaecke, Wyhaken — Weehawken. 

Wyremes — YVearimus, in Bergen County, between Patersou and Ridgewood. 

Zykakis, Zykakens, etc. — Secaucus, in Hudson County. 
The names of persons undergo all sorts of transformations, according to the vari- 
ous systems of orthography followed by the different Dominies and Voorlesers who kept 
the records from time to time. The attempts of some of the Dutch writers to repro- 
duce in their language foreign names lead to strange results in some instances: as 
Tsjeems Tsjansen, for James Johnson; Ritsjert, for Richard; Narrits, for Norwich; 
and others more readily intelligible. For explanations of the Dutch system of patro- 
nymics, and translations of Christian names, the reader is referred to the Collections of 
the Holland Society, Vol. I. (containing the Registers above referred to), pp. xix-xxiii; 
also to the Doremus Genealogy (Patersou, N. J., 1897,) p. 202-204, where additional 
translations and the pronunciation of Christian names are given. 

Note. —The names of males and females are arranged under oue alphabet. After 
the names of the males a translation is given of the entire entry in the Church rec- 
ord. In the case of the females only the names of the parties and the dates are 
given in this index, as the full particulars may be found under the names of the 
males. The dates given are of the proclamation of the banns, unless otherwise 
stated. 

Abbreviations— y. d., jonge dochter, young maiden, spinster; y. m., jonge man, 
young man, bachelor; wid., widow; b., bom; 1., living. 

A 

Aalje, Susauna, and Stephanus Terheun 1737 Aug. 6 

Ackerman, Aaltje, and Albert Zaborowesky 1739 Oct. 2G 

Ackerman, Abigael, and Dirk Bliukerhof ... 1733 Sept. 7 

Ackerman, Arie Abramse, y. in., b. Bergen, and Ann a tie" Meyers, y. d., 

b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1716 Oct. 20 

Ackerman, David, y. m. , b. New York, and Gerrebreght Clase Romeyn, 

y. d., b. Gravesandt 1703 April 24 



470 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ackerman, Davidt, y. m., b. Bergen in E. N. Jersey, and Margritie 

Jurcks, y. d., b. Philipsburgh, botb living here 1707 Sept. 20 

Ackerman, David Louwerense, y. m., b. and 1. Ackinsack, and Sara 

Golve, y. d., b. Long Island, 1. VVibaecke 1710 Mar. 19 

Ackerman, Egbert, y. m., b. Bergen in East N. Jersey, and Elisabet 

Breyandt, y. d., b. Ackinsack 1707 April 12 

Ackerman, Hillegontjen, and Steven Westervelt . . . : 1733 Aug. 4 

Ackerman, Jacobus, y. m., b. Hackiusack, and M ugrietje Gentry, y. 

d. , b. N. York. Married Sept, 26. Both 1. Hackinsack 1740 Sept. 6 

Ackerman, Johannes, y. m., b. New York, and Jannetje Lozier, y. d., 

b. Hackinsack 1713 

Ackerman, Sara, and Cornelius Boers 1725 

Ackermans, Abigal, and Audries Hendrikse Hoppe 1707 

Ackermans, Anne Maritie, and Albartus Terhuyne 1719 

Ackermans, Anueke Abramse, and Tomas Dorremns 1712 

Ackermans, Ary Abramse, wid'r of Anuatie Meyiers. and Maritie Jo- 

hauuese Van Blerkum, y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1720 

Ackermans, Elisabeth, and Cornells Van der Hoef 1712 

Ackermans, Elisabeth, and Abram Hildrickse Brouwer 1723 

Ackermans, Gerret Abramse, y. in., b. Bergen, and Jannetie Alberse, 

y. d., b. Ackinsack, both living at Ackinsack 1712 

Ackermans, Maritie, and Sv^aen Hockdon 1711 

Ackers, Sibout, y. m., b. and 1. at manor of Flipsburgh, and Aaltie De 

Ronde, y. d., b. and 1. manor of Kortlaudt 1720 

Akkerman, Aaltjen, and Hermanus Van Blerkum. . . 1743 

Akkermau, Abraham, y. m., from Ackensack, aud Hiuderkje Hoppe, 

y. d , from Choghakes, married Sept, 8 1727 Aug. 

Akkerman, Albert, y. in., 1. Peremus, and Rachel Van Wiukel, y. d., 

1. Akkweguonk Married 1718 

Akkerman, Aunaetje, and Paulus Vander Beek 1743 

Akkerman, Annaetjen, and Jan Zaborisky . . 1739 

Akkerman, Antjen, and David Bauta 1745 

Akkerman, Carstyutie, and Johannes Slot 1730 

Akkerman, Catryn Louwerense, aud Jan Cornelese Verwey 1707 

Akkermau, Cornelia, and Jacob Hoppe ... 1750 

Akkermau, David, y. in., and Elsjiu Eerll, y. d., both b and 1. Ackin- 
sack, married April 21 1738 April 1 

Akkerman, David, y. m., b. New Harlem, and Jannetje Vander Beek, 

y. d., b. Peremus. Married July G. Both 1. Peremus 1742 June 2G 

Akkerman, Hannis, y. m., and Saartje Stillewill, y. d., both 1. Hak- 

kensack. Married June 26 1748 May 26 

Akkerman, Januetjen, aud Jacobus Van Voorheest 1732 Aug. 5 

Akkermau, Joannes, y. in., b. Hackensack, and Rachel Ziboriskwy, 

y. d., b. Peremes, married Jan. 19, 1739. Both 1. Peremis 1738 Dec. 30 

Akkerman, Johannes, wid'r of Maria Wiekvelt, aud Elisabeth Stegge, 

y. d., both from Ackinsack, married Feb. 28 1728 Feb. 9 



June 


6 


May 


22 


July 




Oct. 


24 


Oct. 


4 


April 


2 


Oct. 


18 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


4 


May 


5 


Oct. 


7 


Jan. 


14 



June 


17 


April 


16 


May 


12 


Aug. 


17 


Mar. 


28 


Feb. 


15 


Sept. 


22 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



47t 



Akkerman, Johannes Lawrense, y. m , and Jacomyntje Demarest 

y. d., both from Hackinsack, married April '21 . . .172 

Akkerman, Laurens, y. m., and Geesje Paulussen, y. d., both 1. Ack- 

insack, married Oct. 27 1727 

Akkerman, Lena, and Jacob Zabrowisky 17-47 

Akkerman, Lourens, y. m., and Martyntje Bogeit, y. d., both b. and 

1. 1 [ackinsack. Married Oct. 27 1718 

Akkerman, Louwerens, y. m. , b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Martha Van 

Brakel, y. d., b. and 1. Staten Island. Married Nov. 27. ... . 1745 

Akkerman, Maritjen, and Arend DeMareest 1739 

Akkerman, Metje, and Niclaes Volker 1710 

Akkerman, Pieter, y. m., b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Autjiu Hoppe, 

y. d., b. and 1. Peremis, married Sept. 7 1738 

Akkerman, Tjelletje, and Albert Zaborisky 1739 

Akkerman, Trientjen, and Roelof Westervelt 1737 

Akkermaus, Elisabeth A., and Johannes Doremus 1710 

Akkermans, Geertjen, and Fraus Hendriksen 1733 

Akkermaus, Geertjen, aud Joannes Bogert 1733 

Akkermaus, Grietje, aud Isaak Huysmau 1718 

Akkermaus, Heudrikjen, and Adryaen Post 1736 

Akkermaus, Januetjen, aud Heudrik Heudriksen 1731 

Akkermaus, Marytje, aud David DeMarest 1712 

Akkermaus, Sara, and Heudrik Ziggeleusin 1733 

Alberse, Cornelia, aud Jurriaen Westerveldt 1703 

Alberse, Jauuetie, aud Gerret Abramse Ackermaus 1712 

Alberse, Margritie, aud Pieter Aliee 1716 

Alberse, Steven, y. m., b. Ackinsack, aud Jaunetie Alliee, y. d., b. 

Ackiusack, both living here „ 1707 

Alberse, Willemtie, and Johauues Slodt 1720 

Albertse, Willem, y. m., and Susanue Laroe, y. d., both b. aud 1. 

Ackiusack 1718 

Albertse, Willemtie, aud Coruelis Bongaert 1710 

Aliee, Jan, wid'r of Susanna Laroe, and Maritie DeGrave, wid. of Al- 
bert Terhuyue, living here 1709 

Aliee, Pieter, y. m., aud Margritie Alberse, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Ackinsack 1 7 i I i 

Aliee, Susanna, and Jan Jause Vau Geste 1715 

Alje, Albert, y. m., b. aud 1. Hakkiusack, aud Maria Westervelt, y. <!., 

b. Schraaleuburg, 1. Tappau. Married Nov. 10 1748 

Alje, Jacobus, y. in., b. Hackinsack, aud Anuaetje Zika, y. d., b. N. 

Ryssel Married 1752 

Alje, Lena, aud Willem Nagel 1718 

Alje, Rachel, and Albert Hoppe 1714 

Aljee, Jan. y. in., 1. Worch, aud Maria Bauta, y. d., 1. Wyremes. Mar- 
ried June 27 17H0 

Alliee, Jaunetie, and Steven Alberse 1707 



28 Mar. 30 



Sept. 30 

Aug. 7 

Sept. 17 

Oct. 25 

Oct, 22 

Aug. 2 

July 28 

June 15 

Aug. 6 

Aug. 19 

Sept. 28 

Oct. 13 

Oct, 1 

April 24 

June 22 

Dec. 25 

Dec. 8 

April 17 

Oct. 4 

April 6 

Oct. 18 

Sept. 17 

April 19 

Sept. 30 

Sept. 23 

April 6 

April 17 

Oct. 15 

May IS 

April 16 

June 9 

May 31 

Oct. 18 



Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


1 


Dec. 


24 


Mar. 


25 


April 


8 



Aug. 


30 


April 


21 


Jan. 


13 


April 


17 


Sept. 


26 


Jan. 


26 


Aug. 


19 


July 


28 


Aug. 


4 



472 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Alyee, Pietertie, and Daaiel Van Home 1800 

Alyee, Sapphira, and Steven Bogert 1801 

Anderson, William, and Sally Van Rypen 1800 

Ariaense, Jan, y. in., b. on York Island, and Tanneke Waldron, y. d. , 

b. N. Harlem, botb 1. Tappan. Married at Tappan April 12, 1720.1720 
Ariaense, Mary tie. and Jan Koerte 1711 

B 

Baelmoor, Lieving, y. in., b. Lisbetb Town, 1. intbeCloof, and Racbel 

Van Seyl, y. d., b. Peremis, 1. tbere Married 1735 Oct. 17 

Banta, Abrabam, y. m., and Auuaetjen Van Hoorn, y. d., botb 1. 

Scbraelenburg. Married Sept. 19 1735 

Banta, Aeltie Sibese. and Lucas Vau Hoorn 1705 

Banta, Agnietjen, and Hannis Banta 1733 

Banta, Angenitie Hendrickse, and Jacobus Hendrickse Blinkerbof. . . . 17U8 

Banta, Aunatye, and Albert Van Dien 1730 

Banta, Antie Dirckse, and Claes Losier 1709 

Banta, Antie Sibese, and Jurriaen Westervelt 1699 

Banta, Arie, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Feytie Louwerense VanBjs- 

kerke, botb living bere 1711 

Banta, Belitje, and Samuel DeMarest 1744 

Banta, Cornells, y. m. , and Aguietje Bongert, y. d., botb b. Hackin- 

sack Married 1752 Ju— 25 

Banta, Cornelis Epke, wid'r Jannetie DePree, and Magdeleena De- 

Maree, y. d , from Ackinsack 1699 Nov. 18 

Banta, Cornelis Epke, last wid'r of Magdaleena Samuelse DeMaree, 

and Abeltie Slot, wid. of Adam Van Nordeu, botb 1. Ackinsack 1719 Mar. 1 
Banta, Cornelus, y. m., and Racbel Banta, y. d., botb from Hackio- 

sack and 1. bere, married April 26 ... 1730 April 4 

Banta, David, y. m., aud Antjen Akkerman, y. d., botb b. and 1. Hack- 

ensack. Married Sept. 27 1745 Aug. 17 

Banta, Dirck Sibese, y. m., b. Ackinsack, aud Racbel DeGroot, y. d., 

b. at tbe Bay Bowery, botb living bere . . 1714 April 17 

Banta, Dirk, y. in., and Autje Van Giesen, y. d., botb b. Hackin- 

sack Married 1752 

Banta, Divertje, and Albert Berdan 1727 

Banta, Elisabetb, and Dirk Lizier 1738 

Banta, Elizabetb, aud Jacob Day 1734 

Banta, Elsia, and Jobannis Herty .... 1711 

Banta, Epke Gornelisse, y. in., and Jannetie du By, y. d., botb b. and 

1. Ackinsack 1708 

Banta, Frauciutje, and Natbaniel Earle 1737 

Banta, Gysbert, and Lea Bogert 1800 

Banta, Hannis, wid'r, and Agnietjen Banta, y. d., botb b. and 1. Hack- 

insack, married Feb. 7 1733 Jan. 13 






•»:, 


Aug. 


26 


Mar. 


4 


Mar. 


26 


April 


14 


April 


3 


Aug. 


19 


Feb. 


1 



HACKENS.U'k cm KCII MARRtAGE records. 4;3 

Banta, Hendrick Hendriokse, y. in., and Gertrut Terhuyne, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Hackiusack 1717 Jau. 26 

Banta, Hendrick Wiertse, y. m., and Trintie Loots, y. d., both b. and 

1. Aekinsack 1715 Feb. 4 

Bauta, Heudrik Jacobisseu, y. in., ami Elisabeth Bensing, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Hackensack. Married July L6 1743 June 11 

Banta, Hendryck Sibese, y. in., b. and 1. Hackiusack, and Aimetie 

Janseu DeGroot, y. d., 1>. and 1. Bergen Co 1719 May 9 

Bauta, Jacob Cornelisse, y. m., and Rachel Terkeun, y. d., both 1. 

Hackiusack 1728 April 13 

Bauta, Jacob Dirckse, y. m., and Hendriktie Terhuyue, y. d., both b. 

and 1. Aekinsack 1718 May 31 

Bauta, Jacob Hendrickse, y. m., from Hackiusack, and Diwer Heu- 

drickse, y. d., b. Bergen 1703 Feb. 27 

Bauta, Jacob Hendrikse, wid'r of Diewer Hendrikx, and Jauuetie Van 

Horen, y. d., from Ackiusack 1705 Sept. 28 

Banta, Jacob Heudriekse, wid'r of Jannitie Van Horen, and Cornelia 

De Graeuw, y. d., b. New York, both 1. Ackiusack 1719 Aug. 8 

Bauta, Jacob Sibese, y. m., and Cornelia Pieterse DeGroot, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Ackiusack 1721 Sept. 23 

Banta, Jau Cornelisse, y. m., b. Ackiusack, aud Cornelia Van Siegelen, 

y. d., b. X. Amersfort, L. I., both 1. here 17u8 April 3 

Bauta, Januetje, aud Heudrik Kip .. 1711 Nov. 14 

Bauta, Jannetie Cornelese, and Johannes Meyyer 1G96 Aug. 22 

Bauta, Jannetye, aud Jacob Van Saeu 1728 Aug. 31 

Banta, Johauues Dirckse, y. m., b. Ackiusack, aud Metie Hessels, 

y. d , b. aud 1. Acquiggenouck. 1714 Oct. 16 

Bauta, Johannes Sibese, y. m., aud Margritie Jause DeGroot, y. d., 

both b. aud 1. Ackiusack 1716 Mar. 31 

Banta, Lea Cornelisse, and Johannes Lozier 1727 Aug. 13 

Banta, Lyda, aud Cornells Meyer 1735 Nov. 1 

Bauta, Mareytje, aud Daniel Van Hooru 1749 Sept. 28 

Bauta, Margritie Dirkse, and Dirk Harternausche 1702 Oct. 17 

Banta, Margrittie Hendrikse, and Roelof Martese 1722 April 21 

Banta, Margrietjen, and Joris Blinkerhof 1716 Feb. 22 

Bauta, Margrietje, and Daniel Haring 1726 April 2 

Bauta, Maria, aud Jau Aljee 1790 May 31 

Bauta, Maritie Coruelisc, and . roost DeGroot 1712 May 3 

Bauta, Marya, and Gulyain Bogert 1 725 Mar. 27 

Bauta, Rachel, and Cornel us Banta 1730 April 4 

Bauta, Sara Cornelese, and Jacobus Peeck 1717 Jan. 5 

Banta, Sitske Dirkse, and Dirck Johanneso Vrelandt 1716 May 12 

Bauta, Sitske Hendrikse, aud Johauues Jacobse Van Wiukel 1712 April 19 

Bauta, Sytske Sibese, aud Samuel DeMaree 1705 April 2 1 

Banta, Wiert, y. m., and Mary DeMaree, d. of David, both b. and liv- 
ing at Ackiusack 1706 April 27 



474 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Banta, Wiert, y. in., and Geertruyd Van Boskerk, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackinsack 1732 Nov. 25 

Banta, Weintje, and Samuel Durje 1744 Aug. 5 

Banta, Zybe, y. m., b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Catelyntje DeMarest, 

y. d. , b. aud 1. Schralenburg 1741 Aug. 4 

Bardan, David, y. m., and Christyntjin Roraeyn, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackeusack, married May 12 . 1738 April 15 

Bardau, Jau, y. m., and Christyntjen Van Giesen, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackensack, married May 11 1738 May 11 

Bardan, Jan, wid'r, and Vrouwtjen Van Dien, wid. both 1. Ackiusack, 

married Nov. 6 1733 Oct. 10 

Bardan, Maritjen, aud Jacob Tisort 1733 Nov. 17 

Bardau, Keinier, y. m., and Autjen Routein, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackeusack, married Nov. 3 1738 Sept. 30 

Bartley, Elyas, y. m., b. New England, aud Cornelia Cornelise, y. d , 

b. ou the Bowery 1697 April 17 

Bartolf, John, and Polly Bogert 1801 May 10 

Batton, Maria, and Pieter De Maree 1722 Oct. 15 

Bavri, Samuel, y. m., b. aud 1. N. Barbaris Neck, and Hendrickjen 

Kip, y. d., b. and 1. Hackiusack, married Dec. 17 1747 Oct. 24 

Beek, Nathaniel, y. in., and Auna Hooglaud, y. d., married with a 

license 1741 Aug. 29 

Baekman, Christina, and William Sager 1801 Jan. 28 

Beekman, Gerrardus, and Catharina Provoost, upon a license from His 

Excellence 1727 June 10 

Beem, Joost, y. m., b. Peremis, and Catrina Slot, y. d., b. on the 

Thieneold, married May 23, both 1. Pompton 1740 May 10 

Beer, Annaetje, and Barend Sinit 1748 May 30 

Beer, Cathrina, aud Jacob Server 1744 Juue 16 

Beer, Grietjen, and Hendrik Bogert 1748 April 9 

Bel, Harmanus, y. m., 1. Long Island, aud Maritjen Poppelsdorf, y. d., 

1. Hackiusack, married May 31, both b. Germany 1737 May 2 

Bense, Johannes, y. in., from N. Haerlern, aud Elisabeth Leydecker, 

y. d., b. aud 1. Ackiusack. . 1724 May 2 

Benseu, Johannes, y. m., 1. N. Harlem, and Marytje Leydekker, y. d., 

1. Hackensack Married 1747 May 18 

Bensing, Elisabeth, aud Hendrik Jacobisseu Banta 1743 Juue 11 

Berdan, Albert, y. m., aud Divertje Banta, y. d., both 1. Ackinsack, 

married Sept. 29 1727 Aug. 26 

Berdan, Annaetjeu, and Abraham Leroe 1736 Nov. 6 

Berdau, Eva, and Cornells Kip 1720 Sept. 17 

Berdan, Helena, aud Jacob Kip . . 1728 Mar. 30 

Berdau, Marretie, aud Joris Doremus 1717 Mar. 16 

Berdan, Willemintie, and Isack Kip 1723 Mar. 30 

Berry, Jan, y. in., b. New Barbadus, 1. there, aud Mary Braetberry, 

y. d., b. Acquiggenouck, 1. there 1709 Nov. 12 



ItACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 475 

Berry, Philip, y. m., and Helena DeGrauw, y. d., both 1. Hackin- 

sack Married 1743 Nov. 15 

Bertholf, Anna, and Abram Varick 1718 July 12 

Bertholf, Anna, and Peter Post 1734 Sept. 29 

Bertholf, Corynes, y. in., b. Acquiggenonck, and Anna lleyerse, y. d., 

b. New York, both living here 1718 Aug. 30 

Bertholf, Elisabeth, and Jan Alberse Terhuyne -. 1699 Sept. 23 

Bertholf, Elisabeth, and Jacobus Bertholf 1742 Sept. 10 

Bertholf, Elisabet, aud Roelof Bongaert 1718 Aug. 23 

Bertholf, Hendrick, y. m., b. Acquiggenonck, and Marritie Ter 

Huyne, y. d., b. Amersfoort, on Long Islaud 17o7 Mar. 29 

Bertholf, Jacobus, y. m. , aud Elisabeth Van Emburgh, y. d., both 

from Hackinsack and 1. here, married March 1 1729 Jau. 18 

Bertholf, Jacobus, y. m., b. Schralenburg, and Elisabeth Bertholf, 

y. d. , b. Hackinsack, married Sept. 10, both 1. Pomptou . ..1742 
Bertholf, Joannes, y. in., b. Hackinsack, 1. Pompton, aud Wyberig 

Laroe, y. d., b. and 1. Bemmepog, married Dec. 3 1742 Oct. 23 

Bertholf, Maria, and JanBjngaeit 1699 Mar. 25 

Bertholf, Martha, and Albert Bongaert 1713 Feb. 28 

Bertholf, Sara, and David DeMaree 1697 April 24 

Bens, Pieter, y. in., b. Bergen, and Geerte Hoppe, y. d., b. New York. 1702 April 5 
Beuys, Jacob, y. in., b. Bergen, 1. Acquiggeuonck, and Maritie De- 

Vouw, y. d., b. Ackinsack, 1. Philipsburgh 17 10 Sept. 29 

Bien, Antony, y. in., b. Flammersveld, Germany, aud Margritie 

Leyne, y. d., b. Darmstadt, Germany, both 1. Remmepogh ...1719 Dec. 
Blanch, Richard, y. m., from old England, aud Antye Van Hoorn, 

y. d., from Hackensack, married Oct. 30, both 1. here 1730 Sept. 27 

Blaenvelt, Diicktie Huyberse, and Jau Lubberse Westerveldt 1709 May 28 

Blaeuvelt, Jacob, y. m., and Maria Haring, y. d., both 1. Tap- 
pan Married 1748 June 25 

Blaeuvelt, Lena, and Jan Talama 1735 Sept. 19 

Blanvelt, Abraham, y. in., b. Tappan, and Martyne Demare, y. d., b. 

Ackinsack 1724 Oct, 10 

Blauvelt, John, and Lea Detnarest 1801 

Blanvelt, Sara, and Abraham Kuyper .1750 July 1 

Blauvelt, Sara, aud Hermanus Van Huysen 1749 June 25 

Blens, Ritsjert,! wid'r, b. old England, and Klaesjeu Vau Giesen, y. d., 

b. Gemonipa, married Dec. 21, both 1. Ackinsack 1733 Nov. 24 

Blinkerhof, Aarjiu, y. m., and Margrietjen Stegge, y. d., both from 

Hackinsack, married Oct. 7 1731 Sept. 15 

Blinkerhof, Dirk, wid'r, b. Gemenipa, 1. Ackinsack, aud Abigael Ack- 

erman, wid., b. Bergen, 1. Peremes 1733 Sept. 7 

Blinkerhof, Hendrick, y. m., and Lisabeth Kip, both b. and 1. Hack- 
insack, married Nov. 19 1731 Oct. 23 



1 Richard. 



476 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Blinkerhof, Jacobus, y. in., and Aaltjeu Dideriks, y. d., both b. Hack- 
insack Married 1752 Dec. 7 

Blinkerhof, Jacobus Hendrickse, y. m., and Angenitie Hendrickse 

Banta, y. d. , both b. and 1. Hackinsack 1708 April 17 

Blinkerhof, Joris, y. in., and Martyntjen Bongert, y. d., both b. and 

1. Hackinsack, married Nov. 23 1745 Oct. 19 

Blinkerhof, Joris, wid'r, b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Margrietj en Banta, 

y. d., b. Pereinis, 1. Ackinsack, married March 21 1746 Feb. 22 

Blinkerhof, Margrita, and Mattys DeMot 1705 April 14 

Blinkerhof, Marrytjen, and Jacobus Huysman 1741 Oct. 23 

Blinkerhof, Zybe, y. in., and Beelitje DeGroot, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackinsack, married Oct. 26 1744 Sept. 22 

Boers, Cornelius, y. m., from Acgqueggenonck, and Sara Ackermau, 

y. d., from Ackinsack 1725 May 22 

Bogaert, Guliaem, y. m , and Januetjen Van Saen, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackensack, married Sept. 7 1736 July 31 

Bogaert, Isack, y. m., and Willeinyntje Van Alen, y. d., both 1. Pere- 
inis, ent. at Peremis Married 1735 Sept. 19 

Bjgaert, Katalintie, and Pieter Meby 1715 June 19 

Bogaert, Maritie Pieterse, and Mouweris Klaerwater 1713 April 18 

Bogardus, Evert, and Eleanor Dougan 1800 Mar. 29 

Bogart, Albert, y. m., b. and 1. Peremis, an r l Machtel Zabriskwy, 

y. d ••• Married 1737 Oct. 21 

Bogert, Gulyam, y. m., and Marya Banta, y. d., both b. Ackinsack. ..1725 Mar. 27 
Bogert, Hendrik, y. in., b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Grietjen Beer, y. d , 

b. and 1. at Hackinsack, married May 15 1748 April 9 

Bogert, Joannes, y. m., and Geertjen Akkermans, y. d , both b. and 1. 

Ackinsack, married Nov. 9 1733 

Bogert, Lea, and Gysbert Banta 1800 

Bogert, Martyne, and Abraham Haring 1725 

Bogert, Martyntje, and Lourens Akkerman 1748 

Bogert, Mattheus, and Willempje Herring • 1801 

[Bogert, Pieter,]i y. m., and Jannetje Perrelman, y. d., b. Peremis, 1. 

Hackinsack. 1744 

Bogert, Polly, and John Bartolf 1801 

Bogert, Rachel, and Jacob DeMot 1790 

Bogaert, Sara, and David Ter Heuu 1735 

Bogert, Steven, and Sapphira Alyee 1801 

Bongaert, Aeltie, and Kasparis Westerveldt 1715 

Bongaert, Albert, y. m.. b. Hackensack, and Martha Bertholf, y. d., 

b. Acquiggenonck, both living here 1713 

Bongaert, Angenitie Jansen, and Jan Dory 1718 

Bongaert, Angenitie Boelofse, and Jacob Pieterse DeGroot 1717 

i Blank in the record; tin' name is supplied from other sources. 



Oct. 


13 


Feb. 


1 


Mar. 


27 


Sept. 


17 


May 


16 


Mar. 


31 


May 


10 


Feb. 


5 


Sept. 


20 


Dec. 


1 


May 


7 


Feb. 


28 


Aug. 


30 


Oct. 


26 



Oct. 


16 


Ju- 


25 


Oct. 


19 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 477 

Bongaert, Cornelis, y. m., and Willeintie Albeitse, y. d., both born 

and living at Ackinsack 1710 Sept. 30 

Bongaert, Hendrikie, and Benjamin Roelofse Westerveldt. 1723 Feb. 10 

Bongaert, Jacobus, y. m. , b. Ackinsack, and Willemtie Terhuyne, y. d., 

b. on the Bay 1704 Oct. 7 

Bongaert, Jan, y. in., b. Ackinsack, and Maria Bertholf, y. d., b. at 

Sinys, in Vlaanderen 1699 Mar. 25 

Bongaert, Lammetie, y. d., b. Ackinsack, and Jan Klaesen Rotneyn, 

y. in., b. on the Bay 1699 May 20 

Bongaert, Maritie, and John Stegge 1697 Mar. 1 

Bongaert, Rachel, and Jacob Van S leu 17U5 Aug. 25 

Bongaert, Roelof, y. m., from Flatbush (the Vlacke Bosch), and 

Geertruyt Breyhandt, y. d., from Bergen 1695 Oct. 25 

Bongaert, Roelof, wid'r of Geertruy Breyandt, and Elisabeth Bertholf 

wid. of Jan Terhune 1718 Aug. 23 

Bongart, Lucas, y. in., b. and 1. Peremis, and Dorethy Vander Hoef, 

y. d., b. N. Bortayen, 1. Hackinsack, married Nov. 11. 1739 

Bongert, Aguietje, and Cornelis Banta 1752 

Bongert, Martyntjen, and Joris Blinkerhof 1715 

Boogaert, Jacobus, y. m., b. Peremus, and Elsjen Franse, y. d., b. 

New York, both 1. Peremis Married 1736 July 30 

Boogaert, Steven, y. in., b. Peremis, and Rachel Van Alen, y. d. , b. 

on the Neck, both 1. Campgauw, ent. at Peremis Married 1739 

Boon, Elena, and Michiel Mallenoth 1708 

Bord, Catharina, and Tade Van Wiukel 1736 

Borded, Steven, y. in., b. New York, and Geesjin DeGroot, y. d., b. 

Hackinsack, married Sept. 25, both 1. Hackensack 1741 Aug. 29 

Bordeth, Steven, y. in., from New York, and Anna Erie, wid. of 

Pieter Stoutenburgh, both 1. Ackinsack, married April 11. .... . .1720 April 2 

Bos, Abraham, y. in., and Anna Van Zeyl, y. d., both 1. Akkwegke- 

nunck Married 1710 July 31 

Bos, Coenradus, y. m., b. N. York, and Marytjen Van Blerkum, y. d., 

b. Bergen, married Nov. 24, both 1. Ackinsack 1732 Sept. 26 

Bos, Heudrick, y. m., b. New York, and Maritie Steeger, y. d., b. 

Essex Co., both 1. Essex Co 1721 July 1 

Bosch, Henricus, y. m., and Lea Van Blerkum, y. d., both 1. Ackin- 
sack, married Oct. 27 1727 Sept. 23 

Boskerk, Hendrikje, and Lourens Boskerk 1745 June — 

Boskerk, Lourens, wid'r, and Hendrikje Boskerk, y. d., both 1. Hack- 
insack, married June 27 1 745 June — 

Braas, Aerlie, and Jan Reyt 1713 April 11 

Braetberry, Mary, and Jan Berry 1709 Nov. 12 

Bras, Elisabeth, and Andries Hoppe 1710 Aug. 12 

Bras, Geertie, and Abram Spier 1721 June 17 

Bras, Herman, wid'r of Auna Winaert, and Geertie Koemans, y. d.. 

from Albany 1695 Oct. 5 



Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


31 


Dec. 


17 



May 


3 


Oct. 


10 


Sept. 


14 


Dec. 


7 


April 


12 


Oct. 


26 


Oct. 


30 


June 


16 



Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


13 


Nov. 


25 



478 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bras, Haruian, wid'r of Geertie Koemans, aixl Geertie Egbers, wid. of 

Louwerens Ackermaus 1707 

Breyand, Anna, and Isack Van Gysse 1713 

Breyandt, Antie, and Cornells Juriese Westerveldt 1723 

Breyhandt, Cornells, y. m., b. Bergen, and Margrita Sirnese Van "Win - 

kel, wid. of Marte Winne 1700 

Breyandt, Elisabet, and Egbert Ackerman 1707 

Breyhandt, Geertruyt, and Roelof Bongaert 1695 

Brickers, Geertrnut, and Jacob Walingse 1697 

Brickers, Hester, and Albert Sliugerland 1695 

Brickers, Thomas, y. m., b. Albany, and Susanna De Vouw, y. d., b. 

Ackiusack 1697 July 17 

Brinckerhoff. Heudrick, y. in , and Marytie Westervelt, y. d., both 

from Hackiusack, and 1. here, married Oct. 28 1728 Sept. 28 

Brinkerhoff, Roelof, and Tina Kuyper 1800 Feb. 8 

Brinkerhoff, Siba, and Jan Dnrie . 1800 April 27 

Brouwer, Abrabam, y. m., b. Schoonegte, and Lea DeMaree, y. d., b. 

Hackensack 1700 Mar. 29 

Brouwer, Abram Hildrickse, l y. m., b. Bergen, and Elisabeth Acker- 
mans, y. d., b. Ackiusack, both 1. Ackiusack 1723 

Brouwer, Antje, and William Ennas 1726 

Brouwer, Beelitje, and Hermauus Talerna 1752 

Brouwer, Daniel, y. in., 1 Schraelenburg, and Maria Koniug, y. d., 1. 

Second River Married with a license 1743 Oct. 10 

Brouwer, Huldrick, y. m., b. Schoonegte, and Hester DeVouw, y. d., 

b. New Haerlem 1698 Nov. 5 

Brouwer, Isack, y. m , b. Bergen, and" Rachel De Maree, y. d., b. Ack- 

insack, both 1. Ackiusack 1722 Dec. 8 

Brouwer, Johanues Pieterse, y. m. , b. N. Haerlem, 1. in Juris. Newark, 

and Antie Hendrickse Mandevile, y. d., b. Hemstee, 1. Acquig- 

genonck 1708 

Brouwer, Petius, y. m., and Dyua De Groot, y. d., both b Ackiusack. 1724 

Brouwers, Adriaentie, and Heudrick Klasen 1708 

Brouwers, Magdaleena, and Willem Stegge 1697 

Brouwers, Maritjen, and Pieter Herdewy 1738 

Brouwers, Vrouwtie, and Jau Hause Jeraleman 1701 

Bruyn, Aeltie, and Jan Oadtwater . . 1722 

Bruyn, Hendrik, y. m., b. Pemmerpogh, and Margrita Lacomba, y. d., 

b. Gemoenepan 170 1 

Bruyn, Magdaleena, and Hessel Pieterse ... 1714 

Bruyn, Magdalaentie Hendrickse, and Heudrick Cornelise. 1710 

Buliers, Louwys, y. m., b. St. Tonne, and Anne DeKoninck, y. d., b. 

Dergroede ... . . • - • 1697 

Buys, Christina, and Dirck Van Tessel 1723 

1 Uldrickse. 



April 


10 


May 


30 


April 


10 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


19 


Aug. 


16 


Mar. 


17 


Sept. 


6 


Feb. 


G 


Oct. 


15 


May 


23 


Feb. 


9 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 479 

Buys, Geertru, and Roelof Kobes ] 700 Oct. 21 

Bays, Hendricktie, and Mr. Reynier Van Gysse 1699 Sept. 28 

Buys, Joannes, y. m. , b. aud 1. Fishkill, and Sua DeBaeu, y. d., b. 

Hackinsack, 1. Peremis Married 1712 Sept. 25 

Buys, Xeeltie, aud Siaquel Vigoor 1699 April 8 

Buys, Neeltje, aud Jan Stratemaker 1707 Feb. 

c 

Cadrnis, Marritje, and Johanues Van Hooru 1710 June 19 

Cadmus, Catharine, aud Joannan Van Houten 1730 Nov. 11 

Cadmus, Joannes, v. in., and Feitje Van Houten, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Acquiggenonck Married 1741 Nov. 22 

Cadmuys, Ariaentie Cornelisse, and Ide Sip 1718 April 12 

Cammenga, Daniel, y. m. , b. Long Island, 1. Ackinsack, and Geesjen 

Loets, y. d., b. Hackinsack, 1. here, married Aug. 29 1735 Aug. 9 

Canklyn, Isaek, wid'r, b. Westchester county, and Lena Van Zeyl, y. d. , 

b. Peremus, married Aug. 6, both 1. Peremus 1710 

Chapel, Jane, and Peter John Roebuck 

Ckristi, Jaeonryutje, and David Van Norden 1727 

Christien, John, y. m , and Naomy Moore, y. d., both from Hackin- 
sack aud 1. here, married Dec. 21 1728 

Christy, Lena, and Johauues Westervelt 1751 

Christyn, Jeem«, y. m., b. Scotland, and Magdaleeua DeMaree, y. d., 

b. Hackinsack 1703 

Christyu, Maritie, aud Jacobes Post 1723 

Christyn, Sara, and Leendert DeGraeuw 1717 

Claeseu, Geurt, y. m., aud Neesje Van Wageuen, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Akk wegkeuonk M arried 1714 Dec. 8 

Claesien, Louwies, y. m., from Gemoenepa, and Maria Mattyse, y. d., 

from Hackensack, married Jane 29 ... 1730 

Coddemis, Maritie Cornelese, and Ide Marselese 1713 

Coens, Dom., pastor at Acqueggeuouck, etc., aud Belia Provoost, mar- 
ried upon license 1726 

Cool, Tryutje, and David Westervelt . . 1727 

Cornelise, Cornelia, and Elyas Bartley 1697 

Coruelise, Dircktie, and Fraus Johannisse Spier 1705 

Cornelise, Gerritie, and Tyme Valeutyn 1699 

Coruelise, Heudrick, b. and 1. Acquiggenonck, and Magdahteutie 

Hendrickse Bruyu, y. d., b. Pommerpogh, 1. Acquiggenouck. . . 1710 

Coruelisse, Auuaetjen, aud Margeu Greveu 1 711 

Cornelius, Matheus, y. m., b. Hackinsack, 1. Peremus, and Cristina 

Schoou, y. d., b. New York, 1. Mawe- Married 1710 

Couenhoven, Hester, aDd Eieuier Van Giese 1711 

Couweuhove, Sara, and Arie DeGroot 172S April 21 

1 Jacques - Mahwah. 



July 


5 


April 


3 


Oct. 


20 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


18 


May 


18 


June 


2 2 



May 


19 


April 


25 


Sept. 


1 


May 


7 


April 


17 


Mar. 


17 


July 


24 


Oct. 


15 


Sept. 


5 


Oct. 


3! 


Mar. 


26 



480 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Carrie, Jane, and John Mackarel . 1801 May 2-1 

Was I 

Curtenius, Antonius, pastor at Hackensack, united in marriage to Elis- 
abeth DeForeest, y. d. , born at New York, by Do. Mancius, at 
that time pastor at Schraelenburg and Peremes, married with 
license 1732 July 16 

D 

Darje, Grietje, and David DeMaree 1751 Nov. 9 

Darje, Jan, y. 111 , and Sara Roniein, y. d., both b. and 1. Hackensack, 

married Nov. 12 1736 Oct. 9 

Darje, S ira, and Casparis Westervelt 1752 Nov. 10 

Day, Jacob, y. in., and Elizabeth B.inta, y. d., both 1. and b. Hackin- 

saek, married March 29, with license 1734 Mar. 26 

Day, Risyer,! y. in., 1. Hackensack, and Elisabeth Verwey, y. d., 1. 

under Peremis, both. b. Hackinsack Married 1737 

De, Annaetjen, and Adam Koniuk 1733 

De, Salomon, y. m., 1. Ackinsack, and Susanna Hammin, y. d., 1. 

Pompton, both b. N. Y. Isl . Married 1737 

DeBiau, Abigael, and Reyer Tibouw. 1746 

DeBaan, Jacob, y. m. , and Rachel Kool, y. d., both b. Schralen- 

burg Married 1752 

DeBaan, Sally, and Daniel Perry 1799 

DeBaen, Jacob, y. m., and [Marritie Thibouw],'- both living 

at Married 1747 

DeBaen, Sara, and Joannes Buys 1742 Sept. 25 

de Bane, Christiaen, y. in , b. New Utrecht, and Judick de Maree, d. 

of Samuel, y. d., b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1709 Jan. 29 

DeBaue, Matie, and David DeMaree 1705 Nov. 10 

de Boog, Auuaet je, and Isaek Vander Beek 1736 May 29 

DeBoog, Salomon, y. m., b. and 1. Hackensack, and Jennike Yan 

Hoorn, y. d., b. Pemmery, 1. at Barbados Neck, married May 30. 1747 April 18 
De Boogh, Bareudt, wid'r, b. Albany, 1. Hackensack, and Willemtje 

Ter Heuu, wid., b. Long Island, 1. Peremis, married Aug. 20, 

1736, ent. at Peremes 1736 July 22 

DeForeest, Elisabeth, and Antonius Curtenius 1732 July 16 

DeForeest, Margrita, and Harmanus Rutgers 1739 Sept. 17 

DeGraeuw, Cornelia, and Jacob Hendrickse B.inta . . 1719 Aug. 8 

DeGraeuw, Jan, y. m., 1. Hackensack, and Lena Reyersen, y. d. , 1. 

Wegreuw, married June 9 1748 April 30 

DeGraeuw, Leendert, y. m., b. N. York, 1. N. Berbades, and Sara 

Christyn, y. d , b. and 1. Ackinsack 1717 June 22 

DeGrauw, Elizabeth, and Simon Van Winkel 1 738 Mar. 21 

DeGrauw, Elizabeth, and Niciaes Kerlach 1749 Sept. 8 

1 Richard. 

2 Blank in tin record supplied from other sources 



June 


l:; 


Mar. 


10 


Dec. 


17 


Sept. 


20 


April 


17 


Nov. 


16 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 48 I 

DeGrauw, Helena, and Philip Berry 1743 Nov. 15 

DeGraves, Maritie, and Albert Terhuynen 1705 Sept, 8 

DeGrave, Maritie, and Jan Alice 1709 Sept. 23 

DeGroot, Annetie Jansen, and Hendryck Sibese 1719 May 9 

DeGroot, Arie, wid'r of Francyntje Etsel, and Sara Couwenhove, both 

1. Hackinsack 1728 April 21 

DeGroot, Arie Pieterse, y. in., and Francintie Etsels, y. d., both b. 

and 1. Bergen Co * 1716 

DeGroot, Beelitje, and Zybe Blinkerhof 1741 

DeGroot, Billotje, and William Ellis 1742 

DeGroot, Cornelia Pieterse, and Jacob Sibese Bauta .... 1721 

DeGroot, Cornells, y. ru., 1>. and 1. Hackensack, and Geesjen Vander 

Beek, y. d., b. and 1. Perernes . Married 1742 

DeGroot, Dyna, and Petrus Brouwer 1724 

DeGroot, Egie Pieterse, and Johannes Roelofse Westerveldt, 1718 

DeGroot, Elisabeth, and Benjainiu DeMaree 1713 

DeGroot, Geartjin, and Joannes Edsel 1741 

DeGroot, Geesjhi, and Steven Borded 1741 

DeGroot, Gerrit, y. m., b. Bay Bowery, and Anuatie Etsal, y. A., b. 

Bergen Co., both living iu Bergen Co 1714 

DeGroot, Jacob Pieterse, y. m., b. and 1. Bergen, and Angenitie R le- 

lofse Bongaert, y. d., b. and 1. Ackiusaek 1717 

DeGroot, Jan, y. m., b. Hackinsack, -1. Haverstraw, and Annaetjen 

Moor, y. d., b. W. Rawak, 1. Hackinsack, married Sept. 15.... 1738 
DeGroot, Joannes, y. m., and Franzina Moor, y. d., both b. audi, 

Ackinsack, married May 4 1731 April 1 

DeGroot. Joost, y, m , b. and 1. Tappan, and Maritie Cornelise Banta, 

y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1712 

DeGroot, Lea, and Jacobus DeMaree 1707 

DeGroot, Margrita. and Jacobus DeMarest 1726 

DeGroot, Margritie, and Johannes Sibese Bauta 1716 

DeGroot, Marytje, and Roelof WesterTelt 1744 

DeGroot, Nettie, and Joris Juwel 1704 

DeGroot, Pieter, y. rn., b. Ackinsack, and Lena Koienhoven, y. d., b. 

New York, married Dec. 8, both 1. Hackinsack. . . 1743 

DeGroot, Rachel, aud Dirck Sibese Banta 1714 

DeGroot, Rebecka, and Daniel DeMaree . 1707 

DaGroot, Zj irritjen, and Marthen Roelofsen 1746 

DeKonmck, Anne, and Louwys Buliers J 69 7 

Demare, Martyne, and Abraham Blauvelt 1724 

DeMaree, Annaetjen, aud Benjamiu DeMaree 174 1 

DeMaree, Benjamiu, y. m., b. Bergen couuty, and Elisabeth DeGroot, 

y. d., b. Siapenicke, both 1. iu Bergen couuty . . , 1713 Nov. 7 

DeMaree, Benjamin, y. rn., aud Aunaetjeu DeMaree, y. d., both b. 

aud 1. Sckraelenburg, married Sept. 25. 1741 Aug. 29 

30 



Dec. 


lS 


Sept. 


22 





16 


Sept. 


23 


May 


13 


May 


30 


Oct. 


11 


Nov. 


7 


Sept. 


11 


Aug. 


29 


Oct. 


30 


Oct. 


26 


A ii- 


12 



May 


3 


Mar. 


8 


Oct, 


1 


Mar. 


31 


Nov. 


3 


June 


3 


Oct. 


29 


April 


17 


Aug. 


2 


July 


27 


May 


23 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


29 



482 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

DeMaree, Crostyaan, y. m., b. and 1. Schralenburg, and Geesje Ro- 

inein, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married Oct. 30 1741 Sept. 19 

DeMaree, Daniel, y. m., b. Ackiusack, and Rebecka DeGroot, y. d., 

b. on the Bay B iwery, both living here 1707 Aug. 2 

DeMaree, David, and Beleetje Westervelt, both 1. Schralenburg, mar- 
ried Jan. 4 1750 Dec. 1 

DeMaree, David, (son of Samuel), y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Matie De- 
Bane, y. d., b. N. Utrecht 1705 Nov. 10 

DeMaree, David, y. m , b. New Haarlem, and Sara Bertholf, y. d., b. 

Sluys, Vlaanderen (Eoll.) 1697 April 24 

DeMaree, David, wid'r, b. Schralenburg, and Grietje Darje, b. Hack- 

ensack Married 1751 Nov. 9 

DeMaree, Davidt, y. in, and Maritie Van Blerckum, y. d. , both b. 

and 1. Ackinsack 1720 Dec. 10 

DeMaree, Davidt, Junior, y. m., and Marytie Losier, y. d. , both b. 

and 1. Ackinsack 172 1 June 3 

DeMaree, Jacobus, y. in., and Trientje Lisier, y. d., both b. Schralen- 
burg Married 1751 Nov. 16 

DeMaree, Jacobus, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Lea DeGroot, y. d., b. at 

the Bowery, on the Bay 1707 Mar. 8 

DeMaree, Jacobus, wid'r of Lea Pieterse De Groot, and Gritie Cosinse 

Herringh, y. d., b. and 1. Tappan 1719 

DeMaree, Jacoiniute Davids, and Audries Louwerense Van Boskerck. .1717 

DeMaree. Jacquemina, and Samuel Elling 1705 

DeMaree, Jacquemiue, and Cornelis Van Hooren 1711 

DeMaree, Jaquemyne, and Jan Stuwaert 1700 

DeMaree, Jan, wid'r of Marritie Jacobse, and Magdalena Louwerense, 

wid. of Jan Dulier 1702 

DeMaree, Judicb, and Pieter Du Rie 171 1 

de Maree, Judick, and Christiaeu de Bane 1709 

DeMaree, Lea, and Abraham Brouwer 1700 

DeMaree, Lea, and Samuel DeMaree 1742 

DeMaree, Lea Davids, and Reynier Van House. 1718 

DeMaree, Lidia, and Steven Terhuyne 17U7 

DeMaree, Magdaleena, and Jeems ( Ihristyn 1703 

DeMaree, Maritie Davidse, and Oomeles Mattyse 1718 

DeMaree, Mary, and YViert Banta 1706 

DeMaree, Pieter, y. in., and Maritie Meet, y. d., both b. and 1. at Ack- 
insack. 1709 May 14 

DeMaree, Pieter, wid'r of Marittie Meet, and Maria Batton, y. d., b. 

and 1. Ackinsack 1722 Oct. 15 

DeMaree, Pieter, y. m., and Aaltjen Van Hoorn, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackensack, married March 27 1740 Feb. 23 

D- M tree, Pieter Samuelse, y. in., b. and 1. Ackinsack, and Margritie 

Cornelese Herringh 1717 Sept. 14 

DeMaree, Rachel, and Audries Janse 1700 Aug. 31 



Sept. 


26 


Jan. 


26 


Nov. 


10 


July 


16 


Mar. 


29 


Dec. 


20 


July 


21 


Jan. 


29 


Mar. 


2J 


Aug. 


21 


Jan. 


26 


Oct. 


18 


Sept. 


18 


Aug. 


8 


April 


27 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 483 

DeMaree, Rachel, and Tammes Heyet 1702 May 9 

DeMaree, Rachel, and [sack Brouwer 1722 Dec. 8 

DeMaree, Rachel, ami Hannis Loots 1735 Dec. G 

DeMaree, Samuel, (sou of David), y. in., and Sytske Sibese Banta, 

y. d., bath from Ackinsack 1705 April 21 

DeMaree, Samuel, (sou of Samuel), y. in., and Anuatie Vau Horen, 

y. d., both b. and 1. at Ackinsack 1713 Aug. 1 

DeMaree, Samuel, y. m., and Lea DeMaree, y. d, both b. and 1. 

Schralenburg, married Sept. 29 .... 1 7 12 

DeMaree, Sara Sarnuelse, and Jan Jurriaense Westerveldt 1718 

DeMaree, Susanna, and Pieter Lubberse Westerveldt 1704 

DeMaree, Symon Sarnuelse, y. rx, b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Vroutie 

Gornelisse Heerinck, y. d. , b. and 1. Tappan 1722 

DeMaree, Trientje, and Lourens Verwey 1738 

DeMarest, Arend, y. m., b. and 1. Schraelenburg, and Maritjen Akker- 

man, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married Oct. 25 1739 

DeMaresse, Rachel Jacobse, and Paulus Martense 1730 

DeMarest, Catelyntje, and Zybe Banta 1744 

DeMarest, David, y. m., b. audi. Schraelenburg, and Marytje Akker- 

mans, y. d., b. and I. Hakkensack, married Jan. 22, 1713 1712 

DeMarest, David P., and Sally Romeyu 1800 

DeMarest, Jacobus, y. m., and Margrita DeGroot, y. d., both 1. Schral- 
enburg, married Oct. 28 1726 

Demarest, Jacomyntje, and Johanues Lawrense Akkerman 1728 

Demarest, Lea., and John Blauvelt 1801 

DeMarest, Lea, and Pieter DeMarest 1790 

DeMarest, Magdeleena, and Cornelis Epke Banta 1699 

DeMarest, Pieter, y. m., b. and 1. Sohraelenberg, and Osseltjiu Vander 

Linde, y. d., b. and 1. Hackensack, married Oct. 21 1735 Sept, 20 

DeMarest, Pieter, y. in., and Lea DeMarest, y. d., both 1. in the 

community of Schralenburg, married May 30 1790 

Demarest, Polly, and Jacobus Voorhesen 1801 

Demarest, Rachel, and Albert Zabriskie 1799 

DeMarest, Rachel Sa — , and Jacobus Peek 1726 

DeMarest, Samuel, y. m., b. and 1. Schralenburg, and Belitje Banta, 

y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married Sept. 7 1741 

Demarest, Tina, and Peter Smith 1801 

DeMot, Jacob, y. m., 1. in Thyne Valley, and Rachel Bogert, y. d., b. 

and 1. Hackinsack, married March 4 1790 Feb. 5 

DeMot, Mattys, y. m., b. Kingstown in the Esopus, and Margrita 

Blinkerhof, y. d., b. Ackinsack 1705 April 14 

DePeyster, Maria, and Daniel Henuion 1731 Sept. 14 

DeRemis, Abraham, y. m., b. Wesel, 1. Prekenis, and Aunaetjen 

Tibouw, y. d., b. Peremus, 1. there, married Nov. 18 1742 Oct. 16 

Deremis, Abraham, y. m, and Helena Van Houten, y. d., both 1. at 

Akkwegkenack Married 1740 July 8 



Aug. 


21 


May 


31 


April 


22 


Dec. 


1 


April 


8 


Oct. 


22 


Nov. 


6 


Aug. 


4 


Dec. 


25 


Dec. 


19 


Oct, 


1 


Mar. 


30 


May 


15 


Nov. 


18 



May 


i:» 


Feb. 


13 


Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


17 


Aug. 


4 


Sept, 





484 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

DeRemis, Cornells, b. Prekeuis, and Sara II syerse, y. d , b. Wag- 

gereuw, married March 30, both 1. Prekenis 1741 

DeRemis, Jan, y. m., 1. Sloterdam, and Mareytje Lutkens, y. d., 1. 

Peremus, married March 31 17-48 

De Rie, Margrita, and Jan Zaboriscoo 1712 

DeRoude, Aaltie, and Sibout Ackers 17:20 

DeVoaw, Hester, and Huldrick Brouwer 169S 

DeVouw, Maritie, and Jacob Beuys 1710 

DeVouw, Nicolaes, wid'r of Mary Sy, and Margrita Sause, will, of 

Jaeckl Batton, both living here 1706 

DeVouw, Susanna, and Thomas Briekers 1697 

DeVouw, Susanna, and Jacobus Everse Van Gelder 1706 

Dey, Dirk, y. m., and Sara Toers, y. d , both 1. Akquegnonk, married 1736 
Dey, Johannes, y. m , and Johanna Moor, y. d., married June 12 ...1726 

Dey, S ira, and Hendrick Jause Spier , . . 1709 

Dideriks, Aaltjen, and Jacobus Bliukerhof 1752 

Doremus, Hendrik, y. m., and Aunetie Essels, y. d., both b. and 1. Ac- 

quiggenonck 1716 

Doremus, Johanues, y. m., b. Middelburgh in Zeelaud, 1. at Acqui 

nonck, and Elisabeth A, Akkermans, y. d., b. Bergen, East 

N. J., 1. here 1710 

Doremus, Joris, y. m., b. and 1. Aequiggenonck, and Marretie Berdan, 

y. d., b. N. Amersfort, 1. Ackinsack 1717 

Dorremus, Jaunetie, and Fraus Oudtwater . 1715 

Dorremus, Tomas, y. m., b. and 1. at Aequiggenonck, and Anneke 

Abramse Ackermans, y. d.. b. Bergen, 1. Ackinsack 1712 

Dory, Jau, y. m , and Angenitie Jansen Bongaert. y. d., both b. and 

1. Ackinsack 1718 

Dougan, Eleanor, and Evert Bogardus 1800 

DuRey, Maria, and Samuel Etsal 1726 

Dureye, Januettye, and Thomas Outwater 1730 

Durie, Jane, and Siba Briukerhoff .... 1800 

Da Rie, Pieter, y. m., b. Ackensack, anil Judich DeMaree, wid. of 

Christiaen DeBane, both living here 1711 

Durje, Samuel, y. m , and "Wieutje Biuta, y. d., both b. and 1. Hack- 

insack. Married 1744 

du Ry, Jaunetie, and Epke Cornelisse Banta 1708 

Dy, Hendrik, y. 111., b. Bergen, 1. here, and Meeri Sautfoort, y. d. , b. 

New B.ubaris Neck, 1. there. Married with certificate in June 1731 



Mar. 


14 


Mar. 


5 


Dec. 


6 


Oct. 


7 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


29 


April 


20 


July 


17 


June 


25 


Dec. 


11 


May 


14 


April 


30 


Dec. 


7 



April 14 



Aug. 19 

Mar. 16 

Oct. 22 

Oct. 4 

Aug. 30 

Mar. 29 

Dec. 27 

June 28 

April 27 

July 21 

Aug. 5 

April 3 

May 20 



I '. ball, Sara, and Job Smith 1748 May 31 

Edsel, Joannes, y. in., and Geertjin DeGroot, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackinsack, married Oct. 15 1741 Sept. 11 



1 Jacques. 



11ACKKNSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 485 

Edwards, Marietje, and John March 1737 

Earl, Rebecca, and Stephen Hunt 1733 Sept. 18 

Earle, F.l-ic, and George Simmons ... 172'.) Mar. 23 

Earle, Elsjiu, and ( unit Hoppe 1748 Dec. 11 

Earle, Enoch, wid'r, and Grietje Vander Hoetf, y. d., married at Hack- 

ensack 1737 Aug. 19 

Earle, Nathaniel, y. m., an 1 Francintje Banta, y. d., married at Hack- 

eusack 1737 

Earle, Rebecca, and Phillip Smith . 173G 

Eerl, Edward, y. m., b. and 1. Zykakis, and Elizabeth Otje, y. d., b. 

New York, 1. Zykakis, married Sspt. 6 17-10 

Eerie, Elsie, aud Hendrik Meyer 1716 

Eerie, Morris, y. m., arid Rebecca Hastier, y. d., both 1. Bergen 

county Married 1747 

Eerie, Polly, aud Abraham Lesier 1711 

Eerll, Eisjin, aud David Akkermau 1738 

Eerte, Jacob, y. m , b. at the Bowery, ou York Island, and Trintie 

Stratemakers, wid. of Jan Klase Kuyper, both 1. Tappan 170G 

Eerie, William, and Maria Fraus, upon license of the Governor 1723 

Egbers, Geertie, and Harman Bras 1707 

Egberae, Sander, wid'r of Elsie Staets, and Magdalena Van Gysse, 

wid. of Gornelis Roelofse . . 1701 

Ekkecen, Matthias, wid'r, aud Jenueke Strae, both 1. Tappan 1726 

Ellen, Angenietjen, and Louwerens Vander Hoef 17-43 

Ellen, Hillegont, and Pieter Van Bommel 1740 

Elliug, Samuel, y. m., and Jacquemina DeMaree, y. d., both b. and 

1. at Ackiusack 1705 Nov. 10 

Ellis, William, y. m , b. aud 1. New York, and Billotje DeGroot, y. d., 

b. and 1. Hackinsack Married 1742 16 

Emmet, Jau, y. m., from Bisten, and Engeltie Mattyse, from Ham- 
burg, etc 1696 May 17 

Enuas, William, and Autje Brouwer, married upon license 1726 Nov. 13 

Enters, Joaunes, y. m , from Spyten Duivel and Maria Regtmeyer, 

y. d., from here, married Nov. 21 ! 1730 Nov. 1 

Erickson, Reinhart, pastor of N. Barbades, Schralenburg and Peremes, 

and Maria Provoost, by Do. Coen, pastor at Acqueggenonck, etc 1726 

Erie, Anna, aud Steven B :>rdeth 1720 

Errese, Elisabeth, and Braudt Jacobusse 1714 

Essels, Annetie, and Hendrik Doremus 1716 

Essels, Rachel, and Abram Gerritse 1719 

Etsal, Anuatie, and Gerrit DeGroot 1714 

Etsel, Antie, aud Jan Larens 1725 

Etsel, Samuel, and Maria DuRey, married upon license 1726 

Etsels, Franciutie, and Arie Pieterse DeGroot 1716 



Aug. 


19 


Her. 


28 


Aug. 


9 


June 


24 


Mar. 


7 


Nov. 


3 


April 


1 


Sept. 


28 


June 


14 


May- 


3 


April 


20 


May 


20 


May 


7 


June 


2 



May- 


22 


April 


2 


Oct. 


30 


April 


11 


Mar. 


14 


Oct, 


30 


April 


10 


Dec. 


27 


Dec. 


15 



Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


9 


Dec. 


10 


June 


14 


July 


30 


Oct. 


26 


April 


14 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


6 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


19 



486 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

F 

Fallo, Anna, and Lucas Lusier 1734 

Ferm, Margrit, and Hendrik Kammegaa 1717 

Flipse, Tarnines, wid'r of Anna Ageer, and Auna Rytsmont, wid. of 

Jan Ritsmont 1715 

Fraus, Marin, and William Eerie 1723 

Frause, Elsjen, and Jacobus Boogaert. 173(1 

Frederiks, Elisabeth, and Hendrik Wauueinaker 1745 

Freeland, Abraham, y. m., b. and 1. Barbadis Neck, and Cristyntjen 

Roinein, y. d., b. and 1. Hikkeusack, married May 24 1744 

Freelaud, Anuaetjen. and Roelof Romeiu. . 1733 

Freeland, Lea, and Nicasy Kip 1750 

Freland, Hartman Enocbse, y. m., 1. Essex count} 7 , and Januitje Vau 

Norstrand, y. d., 1. Bergen county Married 1747 

Freucis, Sara, and Daniel Pextun . 1732 

G 

Gardinier, Pieter, y. m., and Sara Linninton, y. d., both 1. New 

York... Married 1749 Dec. 10 

Gerrisen, Froutje, and Jacob Vau Wiukel 1749 Dec. 8 

Geerliugh, Margrit, and Adolf Sivert 1719 Oct. 23 

Gerrits, Pieter, wid'r of Margridt Wennel, both 1. Peghtenaa, aud Eva 

Lasientia, b. Germany 1723 July 13 

Gerritse, Abram, y. m , b. aud 1. Pemmerpoch, aud Rachel Essels, 

y. d , b. aud 1. Acquiggenonck 1719 Mar. 14 

Gerritse, Pieter, y. in., b. Hoboke, 1. Pemmerpoch, Bargen Co., East 
N. J., and Vroutie Hesselse, y. d., b. Bergeu, E. N. J., 1. Ac- 
quiggenonck 1709 Mar. 26 

Gerou, Bsujamiu, y. in., from New York, aud Auna Kuipers, y. d., 

from Bergen, married upon license 1726 Jan. 29 

Gentry, Margrietje, and Jacobus Ackerman . 1740 Sept. 6 

Gibbs, Richard, y. in., and Catrine Van Imburg, y. d., married at 

Hackeusack 1737 Aug. 20 

Gis, Jan, y. in., aud Sara Van Imbnrg, y. d. , both 1. Hackeusack, 

married with license 1741 Jan. 6 

Goetschius, Domineer J. Hendrikns, y. m, and Rachel Zabrowisky, 

y. d., both 1. Bergen county Married 1750 Aug. 26 

Golve, Sara, and David Louwerense Ackerman 1710 Mar. 19 

Greven, Margen, y. m , b. Ireland, 1. Riugwoet, aud Anuaetjen Cor- 

nelisse, y. d., b. Hackinsack, 1. Rempog, married Sept. 19 1741 Sept. 5 

Groman, Elizabeth, aud Salomon Pietersen 1732 Dec. 2 

Grootvelt, Samuel, y. m., aud Saertjen Immet, y. d., both b. on Men- 

adis Isl. and 1. at Hackinsack, married Nov. 28. ... . 1735 Nov. 1 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 487 

H 

Haal, Oasparus, and Elizabeth Van Donk, married Jan. 26 1728 Jan 6 

Hammin, Susanna, and Salomon De 1737 Dec. 17 

Sanse, Koenraedt, y. m., b. ou the Bowery, and Lsuntie Miggielse, 

y. d., b. in Zeeland at Seradtskerkei 1693 Dec 3] 

Hause, Reyer, y. in., b. at the Bowery, and Sara Janse, y. d., b. 

Gravesandt 1702 Aug. 15 

Haring, Abraham, y. m., b. Tippan, and Martyne Bogert, y. d., b. 

Ackinsack 1725 Mar. 27 

Haring, Daniel, y. in., from Tappan, and Margrietje Banta, y. d., from 

Ackinsack, married April 28 1726 April 2 

Haring, Maria, and Jacob Blaeuvelt 1748 June 25 

Hart, Jonetan, y. m., b. Long Island, at Suythool, and Autie Slot, 

wid. of David DeMaree 170G Sept. 7 

Harteuiansche,- Dirk, y. m., from Gemoeuepau and Margritie Dirkse 

Banta, y. d., b. Ackinsack 1702 Oct. 17 

Hartje, Trientje, and Kornelis Van Hoorn. 1732 Nov. 25 

Hastier, Bebecca, and Morris Eerie ... 1717 Mar. 7 

Heerinck, Vroutie Cjrnelisse, and Symon S imuelse 1722 Dec. 1 

Heerings, Feytie Gornelese, and Jan Jurriaense Westerveldt 1719 Oct. 31 

Helhaecke, Maritie, and Gysbert Van Inburgh 1 7lS July 26 

Helling, Hendrick Teunisse, wid'r of Gritie Sanmelse, and Stiutie Jans, 

wid. of Pieter Pira 1700 June 1 5 

Hendrickse, Diwer, and Jacob Hendrickse Banta 1703 Feb. 27 

Hendriksen, Fiaus, y. m., b. N. York, 1. Ackiusack, and Geertjeu Ak- 

kermans, y. d., b. and 1. Ackiusack, married Oct. 19 . . . 1733 Sept. 28 

Hendriksen, Heudrik, y. m., b. X. York, and Jauuetjen Akkermans, 

y. d., b. Hackinsack, married July 2, both 1. Hackinsack 1734 June 22 

Hennion, Annaetjen, and Hermanns Veder 1748 May 10 

HennioD, Daniel, y. m., from N. York, 1. Hackinsack, and Maria De- 

Peyster, y. d., from O. England, 1. N. York, were not married 1731 Sept. 14 
Herdewy, Pieter, y. m., b. Ireland, 1. Ackinsack, and Maritjen Brou- 

wers, y. d., b. Scraleuburg, 1. Barbary Neck, married March 5 1738 Feb. 19 

Herring, Willempje, and Mattheus Bogert 1801 May 16 

Herringh, Gritie Cosinse, and Jacobus DeMaree 1719 Sept. 26 

Herringh, Margritie, Cornelese, and Pieter Sanmelse DeMarest 1717 Sept. 14 

Herte, Amelyntie, and Johannes Vervele 1703 J uu . 2 

Herte, Magdaleentie, and Wouter Willemse 1710 Feb. 2 1 

Herty, Johannes, y. m., b. at the Bay Bower)', and Elsia Banta, y. d., 

b. Hackensack, both living in Bergen county 1711 April 14 

Hese, Wdm, wid'r of AguietjeGamminga, and Geertjeu Pieterscn, y. d., 

b. 1. Cloister, married Sept. 9 1727 Aug. 1 3 

Hessel, Elisabeth, and Abram Tamese 1721 April 29 

1 Serooskerke. 

2 Dirk Hartmanse Vreeland; that is, Dirk (Richard), son of Hartman Vreel 



Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


16 


Mar. 


26 



May 


5 


Oct. 


6 


July 


2 


Aug. 


29 


April 


12 



488 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hessel, Willem, y. in., b. Germany, and Augenitie Kammegaer, y. d., 

b. N. Utrecht 1716 

Hessels, Metie, and Johannes Dirckse Banta 1711 

Hesselse, Vroutie, and Pieter Gerritse 1709 

Heyet, Tammes, wid'r of Elizabeth Eyke, and Rachel DeMaree, y. d., 

b. at Hackensack 1 702 M ay 9 

Hockdou,! Swaen, y. m., b. and 1. Newark, and Maritie AckermauH, 

y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1711 

Hoebacke, Maria Berbra, and Johau Evert Moleg 1711 

Honther, Robert, y. m., b. New York, 1. Ackinsack, and Sara Jausen, 

y. d., b. Lisbeth town, 1. Ackiusack . . 1749 

Hoogland, Anna, and Nathaniel Beek 1711 

Hoogland, Neeltje, and Jacobus Koieuhoven. . 1743 

Hoppe, Albert, y. in., b. and 1. Peremis, and Rachel Alje, y. d. , b. and 

1. Hackensack . . 1714 June 9 

Hoppe, Andries Hendrikse, y. m. , and Abigul Aekermaus, y. d., both 

b. at Bergen and 1. here 1707 July 

Hoppe, Andries, y. in., and Elisabeth Bras, y. d., both b. aud 1. at Ack- 
insack 1710 

Hoppe, Antjin, aud Pieter Akkermau 1738 

Hoppe, Catrientjen, and Steven Zaboriskwy ... 1742 

Hoppe, Christina, aud Johaunes Huysman 1709 

Hoppe, Elizabeth, aud Jacob Zabriski 1792 

Hoppe, Geerte, and Pieter Bans 1702 

Hoppe, Geertvu Hendrikse, and Hendrick Zabborwisco 1719 

Hoppe, Gerrit, y. ni , and Elsjiu Earle, y. d., both 1. Bergen 

county Married 1718 Dec. ] 1 

Hoppe, Gerrit, y. m., and Hundrikjeu Ter Heuu, y. d., both b. aud 1. 

Peremis, married Dec. 4 1711 Oct. 31 

Hoppe, Heudrick, y. m., b. Bargen, 1. Peremes, and Weiutjen Huys- 

maus, y. d., b. aud 1. Hackinsack, married Nov. 7 1733 Oct. 13 

Hoppe, Hendrik, y. m., b. aud 1. Peremus, aud Cathrina Yau Houteu, 

v. d. , b. aud 1. Akquegnonck . Married 1735 April 3 

Hoppe, Hiuderkje, and Abraham Akkermau 1727 Aug. 5 

Hoppe, Jacob, y. in., and Cornelia Akkermau, y. d., both 1. Hacken- 
sack, married Oct. 26 1750 Sept. 22 

Hoppe, Jau, y. m., b. and 1. Peremes, aud Elisabeth Kip, y. d., b. and 

1. Hackinsack, married April 9 1736 Mar. 13 

Hoppe, Jau Hendrikse, y. m., and Rachel Terhuyne, y. d., both b. aud 

1. at Ackiusack 1707 July 

Hoppe, Lea, aud J.ihauues Vander Hoef ... 1714 May 15 

Hoppe, Lea, and Heudrik Zabrowisky. 1746 Oct. 18 

Hoppe, Lea Hendrikse, aud Christiaeu Zaborischo 1715 May 28 

Hoppe, Maritje, and Albert Westervelt 1728 Mar. 9 

1 Ogden. 



Aug. 


12 


July 


28 


Jan. 


30 


May 


21 


Aug. 


11 


April 


5 


May 


16 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 489 

Hoppe, Maritjen, ami Albert Zaborisky 1739 April 28 

Hoppe, Marytjen, and Isaek Van Giesen 1744 Aug. 16 

Hoppe, Trintie Hendrikse, and Pieter Gerritse Van Haleni 1706 July 14 

Housman, Abram, y. m., b. Boswyck, and Gerrebreght Terhuyne, y. d., 

b. on tbe Bay , 1701 Nov. 29 

Housman, Hendriktie, and Johannes Stegge 1722 Aug. 11 

Housman, Magdaleena, and Jan Van der Voort 1701 April 5 

Hudeu, Rachel, and Jacob Van Norstrant . . 1747 Aug. 20 

Hunt, Stepheu, y. m., 1. W. Cbester, and Rebecca Earl, y. d., 1. Hack- 

iusack, married Sept. 21, with license. . . 1733 Sept. 18 

Huysman, Antjen, aud Joannes Post 1734 Oct. 5 

Huysmau, Ariaautje, aud Johannes Pietersen 1727 April 1 

Huysman, Isaak, y. m , and Grietje Aklcermaus, y. d., both b, and 1. 

Hackinsack, married Nov. 3 . . . 1 748 Oct. 1 

Huysman, Jan, y. m., and Marytjen Blinkerhof, y. d., both b. aud 1. 

Hackinsack Married 1741 Oct. 23 

Huysuiau, Jan, y. m., and Marytje Huysmau, both b. Hackeu- 

sack Married 175 1 Dec. 22 

Huysman, Johaunes, y. 111., aud Christina Hcpr.e, y. d. , both b. and 

1. at Ackinsack „ 1709 May 21 

Huysrnan, Marytje, and Jan Huysman 1751 Dec. 22 

Huysmau, Marytjen, and Jan Janseu 1743 Dec. 2 

Huysmans, Weintjen, and Hendrick Hoppe 1733 Oct. 13 

I 

Iinmet, Aunatie, and Arie Toers 172 1 May 13 

Immet, Saertjeu, aud Samuel Grootvelt 1735 Nov. 1 

J 

Jacobese, Hendrick, y. m., b. Albany, and Aeltie Lubberse Wester- 
veldt, y. d., b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1707 Mar. 1 

Jacobissen, Jacobus, y. m., b. aud 1. Hanover, aud Marritjen Kip, y. d., 

b. and 1. Peekenis, l married June 23 1743 May 2 1 

Jacobus-se, Brandt, y. m., b. Albany, aud Elisabeth Errese, wid. of 

Hendrick Mandevyle, both 1. at Ackquiggenonck „ 1714 Oct. 30 

Jans, Stintie, and Hendrick Teuuisse Helling 1700 June 15 

Jause, Adam, y. in., b. New York, and Abeltie Sloth, y. d., b. Esopus 1700 July 28 
Jause, Andries, y. m., b. New York, and Rachel DeMaree, dau. of 

David, b. Ackinsack 1700 Aug. 31 

Janse, Jau, y. m., b. Long Island, 1. Hackensack, aud Seletje Pieterse, 

y. d . b. N. York Islaud, 1. Perernis Married 1737 May 7 

Janse, Sara, and Reyer Hanse 17n2 Aug. 15 

Jansen, Jau, y. m., 1. New York, and Marytjen Huysman, y. d., 1. 

Hackinsack Married 1743 Dec. 2 

1 Query: Preakness. 
31 



490 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Jansen, Sara, and Robert Horitber 1749 July 2 

Jeralenian, Jan Hanse, y. m., b. Albany, and Vrouwtie Brouwers, y. d., 

b. Brooklyn 1701 Aug. 16 

Jonkbloet, Vroutie, and Jobannes Kaminigaa 1723 Jan. 19 

Joris, Antie, and Tomas Pbilipse 1707 Feb. 22 

Jurcks, Margritie, and Davidt Ackerman 1707 Sept. 20 

Juwel, Joris, y. in., b. Westcbester, and Nettie DeGroot, y. d. , b. Ack- 

insack 1704 June 3 

K 

Kammega, Auneke, and Jan Maris 

Kanitnegaa, Hendrik, wid'r of Aune Mary Vervele, and Margrit Ferm, 

last w. of Nicolas DeVouw, botb 1. Ackinsack 1717 Feb. 9 

Kammigaa, Jobannes, y. in., b. N. Utrecbt, L. Isl., and Vroutie Jonk- 
bloet, w. of Jan Ariaense, botb 1. Gloster 1723 

Kammegaer, Angenitie, and Willem Hessel ... 1716 

Kanckely, Mattys, y. m., b. and 1. manor of Fiipsburg, and Feytie 

Meeby, y. d., b. New York, 1. New Rocbelle 1719 

Kerlacb, Niclaes, y. in , and Elizabeth DeGrauw, y. d., botb 1. Rern- 

mei^og Married 1749 

Kierstede, Lucas, y. in., b. Isopbus, and Jannetie Laroe, y. d., b. 

Bergen 1703 

Kip, Annaetjen, and Albert Zaborisky 1734 

Kip, Anuatje, and Lucas Van Voorbese 1726 

Kip, Catbarina, and Derk Terbeun 1727 

Kip, Catrientje, and Jan D. Rornein 1750 

Kip, Cornells, y. in., and Eva Berdan, y. d., botb b. and 1. Ackinsack. 1720 

Kip, Elisabetb, and Klaas Rotnein 1 746 

Kip, Elisabetb, and Jan Hoppe 1736 

Kip, Evaetjen, and Joannes Van Winkel . . , 1747 

Kip, Hendrickjeu, and Samuel Bavril 1747 

Kip, Hendrik, y. in. , and Geertrui Van Dien, botb b. at Ackinsack, 1. 

bere 1714 July 24 

Kip, Hendrik, y. m., and Jannetje Bauta, y. d., botb b. and 1. Hack- 

ensack, married Dec. 4 1741 Nov. 14 

Kip, Isack, y. m., and Willemintie Berdan, y. d., botb b. and 1. Ack- 
insack 1 723 

Kip, Jacob, y. m. , and Helena Berdau, y. d., botb from Hackensack. .1744 

Kip, Lisabetb, and Hendrick Blinkerbof 1731 

Kip, Marritjen, and Jacobus Jacobissen 1743 

Kip, Nicasy, y. m., and Lea Freelaud, y. d., botb b. and 1. Ackinsack, 

married Nov. 11 1750 Oct, 6 

Kip, Nikasi, y. m, and Margrietje Koinein, y. d., botb b. and 1. Ack- 
insack, married Oct. 11 1745 Sept. 4 

i An ( rror for Berri. 



Jan. 


19 


Mar. 


17 


Sept. 


27 


Sept. 


8 


Feb. 


27 


Oct. 


5 


July 


30 


Sept. 


9 


Oct. 


20 


Sept. 


17 


July 


6 


Mar. 


13 


Oct. 


24 


Oct. 


24 



Mar. 


30 


Mar. 


31 


Oct. 


23 


May 


21 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 49 I 

Kip, Pieter, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Elsie Van der Beek, y. d., b. New 

York, both 1. Ackinsack 1720 Mar. 5 

Kip, Vrouwtjeu, and Jan Van Blerkum . . ; 1738 Sept. 9 

Klaerwater, Mouweris, y. m., b. Isopus, and Maritie Pieterse Bogaert, 

y. (1. , b. New York, both 1. in Bergen Co 1713 April 18 

Klasen, Hendrick, y. m., b. in juris. Newark and both 1. there, and 

Adriaentie Brouwers, y. d. , b. Breukelen, L. 1 1708 April 10 

Kobes, Eoelof, y. ra , and Geertru Buys, y. d., both b. at Bergen 1700 Oct. '21 

Koernan, Johannis, y. m., b. Albany, 1. within juris. New York, and 

Rachel Symese Van Wiuckel, y. d., b. and 1. AequigLjenouck. . . 1708 Mar. 6 

Koemans, Geertie, and Herman Bras 1G95 Oct. 5 

Koemans, Jannetie and Gidion Symese Van Wiukel 1708 Mar. 13 

Koemans, Marytie, and Cornelis Tomese 1696 Aug. 8 

Koerte, Jan, y. m., and Marytie Ariaense, y. d., both b. and 1. Ac- 

kuiggenonck 1711 April 8 

Koetser, Dorethe Katrina, and William Mack 1736 April 3 

Koienhove, Jacomyntje, and Elias Van Bentschouten 1748 Nov. 3 

Koieuhoven, Elizabeth, and Hendrik Van Blerkum 1719 May 27 

Koienhoven, Jacobus, y. m., 1. Hackensack, and Neeltje Hooglaud, y. 

d., 1. Blommendaal, married May 18, both b. New York 1743 April 12 

Koienhoven, Lena, and Pieter DeGroot 1743 Oct. 29 

Konick, Adam, y. m., b. N. York, and Maritie Hanse Spier, y. d., b. 

Acquiggenonck, both 1. by Second River, Essex Co 1722 Oct. 27 

Koning, Maria, and Daniel Brouwer 1743 Oct. 10 

Konink, Adam, y. m., b. N. York, 1. Wykaken, and Annaetjen De, y. 

d., b. and 1. Akinsack, married March 30 .1733 Mar. 10 

Konink, Jacob, y. m., b. Hackensack, and Maria Watson, y. d., b. in 

the Highlands Married 1 752 Nov. 26 

Kool, Geertie, and Nicolaes Pessel 1717 Oct. 5 

Kool, Jacob, y. m., b. Tappan, and Sara Pouwer, y. d , b. Ackinsack, 

both 1. at Ackinsack 1717 Feb. 23 

Kool, Jacob, wid'r of Sara Pouwer, and Jannetje Von Schyven, y. d. , 

b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. Bergen county 1723 July 28 

Kool, Jan, and Elisabeth Lassing, married Jan. 26 1728 Jan. 6 

Kool, Rachel, and Jacob DeBaan 1752 April 17 

Kornel, Albert, y. in., b. Kalbrist, France, and Maria Laroe, y. d., b. 

Ackinsack, both living here 1714 April 17 

Kraen, 1 Jasper, y. m., b. and 1. Newark, and Sara Mackeleen, y. d., b. 

Bergen, 1. Ackinsack '. .. 1 705 Oct. 20 

Kreson, Rachel, and Roelof Van der Linde 1702 April 25 

Krom, Willem Florisse, y. m., b. Flatbush (Vlacke bos), and Gerritie 

Van Houte, y. d., b. on Husemes 1699 Sept. 29 

Krommel, Jan, y. m., and Elena Mattys, y. d., both b. York Island 

and 1. Bergen county .... 1717 Oct. 26 



July 


1 


Dec. 


23 


Feb. 


22 


Feb. 


8 



492 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kuipers, Anna, and Benjamin Gerou Married upon license 1726 Jan. 29 

Kuyper, Aart, y. m., b. audi. Hackinsack, and Trientje Lisier, y. d., 

married Nov. 15 1749 Oct. 8 

Kuyper, Abraham, y. in., and Sara Blauvelt, y. d., both 1. Tappan. 

Married 1750 
Kuyper, Claes, and Helena Westerveldt, married after due proclamat'ri 1725 

Kuyper, Geesie Janse, and Harme Jacobse Roos 1718 

Kuyper, Tina, and Roelof Briukerhoff 1800 

L 

Labbach, Johannes, y. in., and Rachel Meyer, y. d., both 1. Hacken- 

sack, married May 19. 1727 

Lacomba, Margrita, and Heudrik Bruyn 1701 

Lareus, Daniel, y. in., b. on New Thuyn, and Gessie Theunise, y. d., 

from New Utrecht 1G96 

Larens, Debera, and Jan Stnidt 1711 

Larens, Jan, y. m., from Long Island, and Antie Etsel, y. d. , from 

Ackiusack 1725 

Larens, Jaunetje, and Fransoeys Moor 169G 

Laroe, Angenitie, and Isaack Van Dense 1718 

Laroe, Antie, and Andries Van Norden 1710 

Laroe, Elisabeth, and Marten Reyersen 1734 

Laroe, Jannetie, and Lucas Kierstede 1703 

Laroe, Lambertus, y. in., aud Abigel Van Voorheese, y. d., both 1. un- 
der Peremus. Married 1748 

Laroe, Margrieta, and Jonathan Traphageu .... 1734 

Laroe, Maria, and Albert Kornel 1714 

Laroe, Pieter, y. m., and Luyda Romeyn, y. d., b. Ackiusack, both 1. 

at Ackinsack 1710 

Laroe, Rachel, and Abrain Van Gelder 1737 

Laroe, Susanue, and Willem Albertse 1718 

Laroe, Wyberig, and Joannes Bertholf 1742 

Lasientia, Eva, and Pieter Gerrits 1723 

Lassing, Elisabeth, and Jan Kool 1723 

Latkens, Tanuitje, and Jan Van der Beek . 1752 

Leroe, Abraham, y. m. , and Annaetjeu Bsrdan, y. d., both b. aud 1. 

Hackeusack, married Dec. 10 173G Nov. G 

Lesier, Abraham, y. m., b. Hackinsack aud 1. there, and Polly Eerie, 

y. d., b. Zykakens, 1. Kwaksak, married Dec. 2 1744 Nov. 3 

Lesly, Jan, y. m , b. Berbadus, and Rachel Woerteudyck, y. d. , b. 

Bowery, both 1. at Wischenl 1713 April 3 

Lewis, Jan, y. m., from O. England, and Jenneke Van Deursen, y. d., 

b. Tappan, married with license, both 1. Iapog 1731 Mar. 20 

Leydecker, Elisabeth, and Johannes Bense 1724 May 2 

1 Query: Wiachen. 



April 


23 


Sept. 


6 


May 


23 


Nov. 


27 


April 


lu 


May 


23 


May 


24 


Aug. 


12 


Sept. 


6 


Feb. 


27 


Sept. 


16 


Dec. 


5 


April 


17 


Sept. 


23 


Aug. 


6 


Ajjril 


19 


Oct. 


23 


July 


13 


Jan. 


G 


Ju— 


6 



April 


5 


May 


18 


May 


9 


Dec. 




Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


11 


Feb. 


11 


April 


12 


Sept. 


2 


Dec. 


10 


Nov. 


19 


Oct. 


5 


Oct, 


8 


Nov. 


16 


Mar. 


4 


Aug. 


9 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 493 

jLeydecker, Genet, y. m., and Weyntie Terhuyne, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Ackiusack 1723 

Leydekker, Marytje, and Johannes Bensen 1747 

Leydekkers, Klaertie, and Geresolveert Nagel 1713 

Leyne, Margritie, and Antony Bien 1719 

Leyue, Marytie, and Petrus Slodt 1721 

Lezier, Hesther, an<l Samuel Moore 1736 

Lie, Catrientjen, and Jan Smit 1742 

Lie, Tabitha, and Jan Oots . . 1 743 

Lie, Wilhelmus, y. m., b. New York, 1. Hackensack, and Maria Moor, 

y. d., b. Hackensack, 1. there, married Oct. 6 1738 

Linuiuton, Sara, and Pieter Gardinier 1749 

Lisier, Margrietje, and Jacob Nagel 1752 

Lisier, Marytje, and Benjamin Westervelt 1751 

Lisier, Trientje, and Aart Kuyper 1749 

Lisier, Trientje, and Jacobus DeMaree 1751 

Lizier, Dirk, y. in., aud Elisabeth Banta. y. d., both b. and 1. Ackin- 

sack, married April 7 1738 

Loets, Geesjen, and Daniel Cammenga 1735 

Loots, Hannis, y. in., and Rachel DeMaree, y. d., both b. aud 1. Hack- 

insack, married Jan. 1, 1736 1735 Dec. 6 

Loots, Jan, y. m., b. Narrits, in old England, aud Hilletje Pauwels, 

wid. of Lubbert Westervelt 1695 Oct. 12 

Loots, Triutie, and Hendrick Wiertse Banta 1715 Feb. 4 

Losier, Autonie, y. m., and Heudrikie Zaborischo, y. d., both b. and 

1. Ackiusack 1720 April 2 

Losier, Claes, wid'r of Trintie Slot, aud Antie Dirckse Banta, y. d., b. 

Ackiusack, both. 1. here 1709 

Losier, Marytie, aud Davidt DeMaree, Junior 1721 

Losverens,! Temprens, and Willem Van Norden 1719 

Lots, Paulus, y. m , and Rachel Van Orden, y. d., both b. Ackiusack. 1724 Oct. 30 . 

Louwerense, Magdalena, aud Jau DeMaree 1702 

Lozier, Jannetje, and Johannes Ackermau 1713 

Lozier, Johannes, y. m , and Lea Cornelisse Banta, y. d., 1. both at 

Ackinsack, married Sept. 8 1 727 Aug. 13 

Lozier, Petrus, y. m., aud Fey tie Zabriscoo, y. d., both b. aud 1. Ack- 
iusack 1723 Mar. 2 

Lusier, Lucas, y. in., and Anna Fallo, y. d., both 1. and b. Hackin- 

sack, married Feb. 24, with license 1 734 

Lutkens, Harmau, and Baletie Zabriskie 1801 

Lutkens, Harmen, and Elizabeth Terheun 1800 

Lutkens, Mareytje, and Jan DeRemis 1748 

1 Loveridse. 



Jan. 


6 


June 


3 


Mar. 


1 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


20- 


June 


6 



Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


9 


July 


30 


Mar. 


5 



494 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

M 

McDowel, John, y. m., and Maritjen Yarick, y. d. , both 1. Hacken- 

sack, married Sept. 5, with license 1733 Aug. 1 

Mack, William, y. m., b. Germany, 1. Haekinsack, and Dorethe 

Katrina Koetser, y. d., b. Germany, 1. Barbaer's Neek, married 

May 1 1736 April 3 

Mackarel, John, aud June Carrie 1801 May 24 

Maekeleen, Sara, and Jasper Kraen '. 1705 Oct. 20 

Mallenotb, Micbiel, y. m., b. Dukedom of Savoy, and Elena Bood, 

wid. of Jan Christyn, both 1. here 1708 Jan. 31 

Mandevile, Antie.Hendrickse, and Johannes Pieterse Brouwer 1708 April 10 

Mandevile, Gerretie, and Inkrees Pouwer 1699 July 24 

Mangel, Joannes, y. m., b. Germany, and Maria Eethan, y. d., b. 

Philipsbnrg, both 1. Pereinis Married 1737 Jan. 28 

March, John, aud Marietje Edwards, y. d., both 1. Bergen county ... 1737 
Maris, Jan, y. m., b. Bergen Co., and Anneke Kammega, y. d., b. 

New Utrecht, Long Island 1718 Sept. G 

Maris, Lea, and Cornelius Matheus Van Nieukerk 1749 Sept. 24 

Maris, Piackel, aud Jacob Van Schive 1724 Feb. 7 

Marselese, Ide, y. m., b. and 1. at Bergen, and Maritie Cornelese Cod- 

demis, y. d. , b. and 1. Acquiggenonck 1713 April 25 

Marten-, Catryn, and Pauwelis Van der Beeck 1703 June 12 

Martense, Paulus, y. m., from Akkinsak, aud llachel Jacobse De Mar- 

esse, y. d., from Schralenburg, married Dec. 4 1730 Nov. 6 

Martese, Marite, and Albert Terhuyne 1723 April 27 

Martese, Roelof, y. m., and Margrittie Hendrikse Banta, y. d , both b. 

Haekinsack . 1722 April 21 

Maryuus, Johannes, y. m., b. Oostburgh, Vlaender, and Christina Pau- 

wels, y. d., b. Bergen 1703 

Matthyse, Rachel, and Augustyn Van Donk 1726 

Mattys, Elena, and Jan Krommel. . . . 171 7 

Mattyse, Corneles, y. m., and Maritie Davidse DeMaree, both b. and 

1. Ackinsack 1718 

Mattyse, Eugeltie, and Jan Emmet ... 1696 

M tttyse, Joseph, y. m., b. Haekinsack, and Anna Pieterse Salomonse, 

y. d., b. Menadis Isl., both 1. Haekinsack, married Nov. 4 1743 

Mattysse, Margrita, and Albert Janse Van Nordeu 1717 

Mattyse, Maria, and Louwies Claesieu 1730 

Meby, Cri-tina, and Joost Zaboriskoo 1712 

M< by, Pieter, y. m., b. New York, and Katlintie Bogaert, y. d., b. New 

York, both 1. Bergen Co 1715 

Meeby, Feytie, and Mattys Kanckely 1719 

Meet, Maritie, and Pieter DeMaree 1709 

Meyer, Cornelis, y. m., b. Haekinsack, 1. Peremis, and Lyda Banta, 

y. d., b. Haekinsack, 1. there, married Dec. 12 1735 Nov. 



July 


24 


April 


2 


Oct. 


26 


Aug. 


8 


May 


17 


Sept. 


4 


Feb. 


9 


May 


19 


Nov. 


1 


June 


19 


Sept. 


27 


May 


14 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 495 

Meyer, Hannes, y. m., b. Hackiusack, 1. Peremns, and Lena Rethan, 

y. d., b. Second River, 1. Rosendal, married Sept. 27 174j Aug. 24 

Meyer, Hendrik, and Elsie, wid. of Eduwaert Eerie, tbe younger, were 
united in marriage upon licence of tbe Governor, dated 

May 8, 1716 1716 

Meyer, Joannes, y. m., b. and 1. New York, and Jannetje Van Voor- 

hees, y. d., b. and 1. Wyckof Married 1717 

Meyer, Racbel, and Johannes Labbacb 1727 

Meyers, Annatie, and Arie Abramse Ackerman 1716 

Meyiers, Antie, and Pieter Janse Van Blerckum 1719 

Meyyer, Johannes, y. m., from New York, and Jannetie Cornelese 

Banta, y. d., from Ackinsack 

Meyyers, Maritie, and Samuel Prevoost 17j:j 

Miggielse, Leuntie, and Koenraedt Hanse 1698 

Miller, Annatie, and Frederik Temont 1722 

Moleg, Johau Evert, wid'r of Aenne Mary Jonghen, and Maria Berbra 

Hoebacke, wid. of Johannes Hoeck, both 1. here 1711 

Moor, Annaetjen, and Jan DeGroot . 1738 

Moor, Frauciutjen, and Sjeems Moor 1739 

Moor, Fransoeys, y. m., b. at Basten, and Jannetie Larens, y. d., b. at 

New Thuyn 1696 

Moor, Franzina, and Joannes DeGroot 1731 

Moor, Johanna, and Johannes Dey 1720 

Moor, Maria, and Wilhelmus Lie 173-' 

Moor, Samuel, y. m., b. New York, and Sara Smidt, y. d., b. Bergen 

county 1705 Sept. 14 

Moor, Sjeems, l y. in., b. Rawe, and Francintjen Moor, wid., b. Ackin- 
sack, both 1. Hackensack, married Feb. 16 1739 Jan. 20 

Moore, Naomy, and John Christien 1728 Nov. 17 

Moore, Samuel, y. m., and Hesther Lezier, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Ackinsack, married Feb. 26 1736 Feb. 1 1 

Morgen, Abram, y. m, b. Stateu Island, 1. Gravesend, and Barentie 

Van Blerkum, y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1715 July 25 

N 

Nagel, Geresolveert, y. in., b. N. Harlem, and Klaertie Leydekkers, 

y. d., b. New York, both 1. Bergen Co 1713 May 9 

Nagel, Jacob, y. m., b. Tappan, and Margrietje Lisier, y. d., b. Hack- 
ensack... ' Married 1752 Nov. 10 

Nagel, YVillern, y. m., b. and 1. Tappan, and Lena Alje. y. d.. b. and 

1. Hackinsack 1 7iS April 16 

o 

Oots, Jan, y. in., b. Ireland, and Tabitha Lie, y. d., b. New York, both 

1. Hackensack. married March 4 1743 Jan. 22 

1 James. 



June 


24 


Mar. 


14 


April 


23 


Oct, 


20 


Nov. 


14 


Aug. 


22 


M ar. 


2 


Dec. 


:;l 


April 


14 


Oct. 


6 


Aug. 


12 


Jan. 


20 


May 


23 


April 


1 


May 


14 


Sept. 


2 



496 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Otje, Elizabeth, and Edward Eerl 1740 Aug. 9 

Oudtwater, Catharina, and Dirk Van Dien 1729 April 19 

Oudtwater, Frans, y. m., b. New York. 1. Monachky, and Jauuetie 

Dorremus, y. d., 1. Aequiggeuonck. . 171G Oct. 22 

Oudtwater, Jan, y. in., b. Bergen, 1. Monachie, and Aeltie Bruyn. y. d., 

b. Newark Co., 1. there 1722 Mar. 17 

Oadwater, Thomas, y. in., b. ami 1. Ackinsack, ami Saertjen Slot, 

y. d., married June 27 1735 Juue 7 

Outwater, Annaetye. and Johannis Shurrig 1730 Oct. 3 

Outwater, C athrina, and Jan Rornein ..1735 Aug. 23 

( hitwater, Jannetjen, and Thomas Yau Bremen 1748 

Outwater, Marritjeu, and Kobus Van der Hoef 1748 April 9 

Outwater, Thomas, wid'r of Mettye Pieterse, aud Januettye Dureye, 

wid. of Epke Cornelise Banta, both from Hackensack and 1. here. 1730 June 28 

Outwaters, Elisabeth, and Ciaas Romeyn 1726 April 23 

Outwalers, Jenneke, aud Johannes Van Houten . 1734 May 4 

P 

Parleinan. Isaac, and - - Van de Water 1800 Nov. 17 

Pauer, David, y. m., and Christjntje Van Camp, y. d., married at an- 

other place 1728 Mar. 23 

Paulense, Grietjen, and Willem Pit-terse 1741 Dee. 18 

Pauls, Egie, aud Jacob Jacobse Yau VVinkel, Junior. ... 1703 Mar. 6 

Paulussen, Geesje, and Liureus Akkermau 1727 Sept. 30 

Pauwels, Christina, and Johanues Maryuus ... 1703 July 24 

Pauwels, Hilletje, and Jan Loots 1695 Oct, 12 

Peeck, Jacobus, y. m., b. New York, and Sara Cornelese Banta, y. d., 

b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1717 Jan. 5 

Peek, Jacobus, wid'r of Sara Banta, both 1. Schraleuburg, aud Rachel 

Si DeMarest, y. d., married Oct. 14 1726 Sept. 17 

Pell, Catrientje, and Jan Ter Heun 1749 April 29 

Perrelman, Jannetje, and Pieter Bogert 1744 Mar. 31 

Perry. Daniel, and Sally 1 >eBaan 1799 Nov. 16 

Perry, Elizabeth, and Abraham Post 1800 Nov. 22 

Pessel, Nieolaes, y. in., b. Long Island, and Geertie Kool, y. d., b. 

New York, both 1. Bsrgen Co 1717 Oct. 5 

Pextun, Daniel, y. m., b. O. England, aud Sara Frencis, y. d., b. Bar- 

lenton, married Sept, 29, both 1. Ackinsack 1732 Aug. 19 

Philipse, Tomas, y. in., b. New York, and Antie Joris, y. d., b. New 

York, both 1. here 17('7 Feb. 22 

Pier, Abram, y. m., b. and 1. Aequiggenonck, and Sua Yau Imburgh, 

y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1722 Oct. 27 

Pier, Rachel Teunese, and Hendrick Hause Spier 170S Oct. 23 

Pieters, Geertie, aud Jan Michiel Sperlingh 1709 Dec. 10 

Pieters, Johannes, y. m., b. aud 1. at Bergen, aud Antie Tadus, y. d., 

b. Wyhake, 1. Aequiggeuonck 1710 May 27 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



497 



Pieterse, Hessel, wid'r of Elisabet Knyper, ami Magdaleena Bruyn, 

wnl. of Hendrick Coruelise Van Houte, both 1. at Acquiggenonck. 1714 Feb. 6 

Pieterse, Rachel, ami ( 'asparis Stimets 1713 Oct. .''» 

Pieterse, Seletje, and Jan Janse 1737 May 7 

Pieterse, Triutie, and Johannes Coruelise Van Houte 1712 Nov. 1 

Pieterse, Willem, y. m., b. on N. York Isld. , and Grietjeu Paulense, 

y. d., b. N. York, both 1. Reniniepog, married Dec. IS 1711 

Fietersen, Geertjen, and Wilm Hese 1727 Aug. 13 

Pieterseu, Johannes, y. m., from Aquiggeuonck, and Ariaantje Huys- 

man, married May 6 1727 April 1 

Pietersen Salomon, y. m., 1). N. York Isl. . 1. Remepog, and Elizabeth 

Groman, y. d., b. Long Isl., 1. Hackensack, married Dec. 29.. 1732 Dec. 2 

Poppelsdorf, Maritjen, and Hermanns Bel 1737 May 2 

Post, Abraham, and Elizabeth Perry 1800 Nov. 22 

Post, Adryaen, y. in., b. and 1. Acquegnon, aud Hendrikjen Akker- 

mans, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married May 20 .... 1736 April 24 

Post, Frans, wid'r of Maeyke Jacobes, aud Elena Van Schyveu, y. d. , 

b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. at Acquiggenonck 1721 June 3 

Post, Jacobes, y. m., b. aud 1. Acquiggenonck, aud Maritie Christy n, 

y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1723 May 18 

Post, Jaunetie, aud Casparus Tadus 1714 Oct. 30 

Post, Jauuitje. and Hessel Van Wageuen 1747 Oct. 8 

Post, Joaunes, y. m., b. and 1. Ackquaggenonck, and Autjeii Hays- 
man, y. d , b. and 1. Hackensack, married X jv. 15 1734 Oct. 5 

Post, Peter, wid'r, 1. Ackquegnou, and Anna Bertolf, wid., 1. Hakken- 

sack, married Oct. 5, with license 1734 Sept. 29 

K- Poulisou, Oatharina, aud Walen Van Winkel 1800 Nov. 20 

Pouwer, Inkrees, y. ri , b. near Basten, aud Gerretie Mandevile, wid. 

of Peter Meet 1699 July 24 

Pouwer, Sara, and Jacob Kool 1717 Feb. 23 

Prevoost, Samuel, y. m., b. and 1. New York, and Maritie Meyyers, 

y. d., b. aud 1. Ackinsack 1723 Mar. 2 

Provoo't, Balia, aud Dom. Coens 1726 Sept. 1 

Provoo3t, Cathariua, and Gerrardus Beekman 1727 June 10 

Provoost, Maria, aud Reinkart Erickson 1726 May 22 

R 

Rapp, Elisabeth, aud Benjamin Westfield 1801 June 16 

Ratan, Rachel, and Abraham Volk 1741 May 15 

Regtmeyer, Maria, aud Johannes Enters 1730 Nov. 1 

Rethan, Lena, and Hannes Meyer 1 745 Aug. 24 

Rethan, Maria, and Joannes Mangel. . 1737 Jan. 28 

Retau, Daniel, Junior, y. in., b. Isopus, and Armtie Hanse Spier, 

y. d., b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. at Acquiggenonck 1710 Mar. 9 

Rettan, Maria, and Tomas Spier ... 1721 Aug. 26 

32 



Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


30 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


3 


Mar. 


14 


April 


30 



498 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Rettan, Pieter, y. m., b. in the Isopus, and Geertruy Van der Hoef, 

y. d., b. Albany, both I. at N. Berbadus. . . 1713 

Reyerse, Anna, and Corynes Bertholf 1718 

Reverse, Elizabeth, and Johannes Uralemon 1719 

Reyerse, Johannes, y. ax., b. New York, and Maritie Janse Spier, y. d., 

b. and 1. Acqueggenonck . 1716 

Reyerse, Margritie, and Pieter Tibout 1716 

Reyerse, Sara, and Cornells DeRemis 1711 

Reyersen, Lena, and Jan DeGraeuw 1748 

Reyersen, Marten, y. in., b. N. York, 1. Pomptaw,! and Elisabeth 

Laroe, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married Oct. 4 1734 Sept. 6 

Reyt, Jan, y. m., b. Flat lands, and Aertie Braas, y. d., b. Hackinsack, 

both 1. here 1713 

Riejersen, Sara, and Cornells Van Blerkum 1727 

Roebuck, Peter John, and Jane Chapel 1800 

Roelofsen, Martha, y. in., and Zjarritjen DeGroot, y. rn., both b. and 

1. Hackinsack, married Sept. 12 . . . 1746 

Romein, Agnietjeu, and Tsaak Stagge 1738 

Romeiu, Antjen, and Reinier Bardan. i 738 

Romein, Arjaentje, and Roelef Westervelt 1749 

Romeiu, Cristyntjen, and Abraham Freeland 1744 

Romein, David, y. m., and Angnietj en Westervelt, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackensack, married July 2 1736 

Romein, Geesje, and Crostyaan DeMaree 1741 

Romein, Gessjeu, and Petrus Van Voorheest. . . 1 7 :J 4 

Romein, Isaak, y. m., and Osseltjen Westervelt, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Hackensack, married Sept. 15 1738 Aug. 5 

Romein, Jan, y. m. , b. and 1. Hackensack, and Cathrina Outwater, 

y. d., b. Acquegenonck, 1. Prekemis - married Sept. 19 1735 Aug. 23 

Romein, Jan D., b. and 1. Hackensack, and Catrientje Kip, b. and 1. 

Prekenis, married Nov. 22 1700 Oct. 20 

Romein, Klaas, y. m., b. and 1. Hackensack, and Elisabeth Kip, y. d., 

b. Prekenis, 1. Hackensack, married Aug 22 : 1746 

Romein, Leentje, and Michiel Vreelandt 1790 

Romein, Leude, and Jurjen Westervelt 1738 

Romein, Margrietje, and Nikasi Kip ... 1745 

Romein, Osseltyn,3 and Isack Van Voorheest 1731 

Romein, Roelof, y. m., b. and 1. Hackensack, and Annaetjen Freeland, 

y. d., b. and 1. New Barbadis Neck, married Nov. 2 17!:! 

Romein, Sara, and Jan Darje 1736 

Rorneyn, Albert, y. m., and Jaunetie Roelof si ■ Westerveldt, y. d., both 

b. and 1. at Ackinsack 1710 

Romein, Christyutjiu, and David Bardan . . 1 738 

1 Pompton. 2 Preakness. 3 Ursseltje, 



April 


11 


Sept. 


4 


April 


3 


July 


27 


Aug. 


5 


Sept. 


30 


May 


13 


April 


14 


June 


5 


Sept. 


19 


May 


25 



July 


6 


June 


13 


Sept. 


7 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


16 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


9 


April 


8 


April 


15 



Mar. 


17 


Sept. 


20 


April 


24 


May 


20 


Sept. 


23 


July 


23 


April 


30 


Mar. 


22 


Dec. 


19 


Aug. 


28 


Feb. 


22 


Dec. 


14 



HACKENSACK CIll RCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 499 

fiomeyn, Claas, y. in., and Elisabeth Outwaters, y. d., both from Ack- 

insack, married May 20 1726 April 23 

Romeyn, Dauiel, y. in., and Maritie Westerveldt, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Ackiusack 171G 

Romeyn, Elysabeth, aud Jan Zaborischo 1706 

Romeyu, Gerrebreght < llase, and David Acker mac 1703 

Romeyn, Jan Klaeseu, y. m., b. on the Bay, and Lammetie Bongaert, 

y. d. , b. Ackiusack 1699 

Romeyn, Luyda, aud Pieter Laroe 1710 

Romeyu, Luyde, and Jobauuis Slingerland 1715 

Romeyn, Lydia, aud Stheveu Terheuu 1790 

Romeyn, Rachel, and J< iris Yau Gyse 1724 

Romeyn, Sally, and David P. Demarest 1800 

Romeyu, Sara, and Heudrik Van Gisse 1715 

Roos, Harme Jacobse, y. m., b. Amsterdam, aud Geesie Janse Kuyper, 

y. d., b. Hasemes, both 1. Bergen Co 1718 

Rooseboom, Elisabeth, and Isack Van Deuse. . . 1723 

Rutgers, Harmanus, wid'r, and Margrita DeForeest, y. d., both 1. New 

York, married with a license 1739 Sept. 17 

Ryersen, Lucas, wid'r, 1. at Pompton, aud Susauna Van der Linden, 

y. d., 1. Hackiusack Married 1745 12 

Rytsmout, ! Auna, aud Tammes Flipse 1715 Dec. 10 

s 

Sager, William, aud Christina Beekman 1801 

Salomonse, Anua Pieterse, and Joseph Mattyse. 1743 

Sauderse, Antie, aud Johauues Simese Van Wiukel 1704 

Sauderse, Egbert, y. m., b. Staten Islaud, aud Trintie Waliugse Van 

Winckel, y. d., b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. at Acqaiggenouck . . .1710 

Sanse, Margrita, and Xicolaes DeVouw . . 1706 

Santfoort, Meeri, and Heudrik Dy 1731 

Sautfort, Mr. Willem, y. m., b. on the Berbades Neck, aud Sara Smidt, 

b. in the jurisdiction of Bergen 1G96 Feb 

Server, Jacob, y. m.. b. aud 1. Tappau, aud Cathrina Beer, y. d., b. 

aud 1. Hackensack 1744 

Schoert, Maria, ami Pieter Wauuemaker 1716 

Schoon, Christina, aud Mitheus Cornelius 1740 

Schors, Michiel, y. m., b. Darmstadt, aud Elisabet Suiden, wid. of 

Frederik Smidt, both 1. at Hackensack 1711 

Schuyler, Elisabeth, and Dominus Beujamiu Van de Liude 1748 

Shurrig, Johannis, y. in , from Germany, aud Auuaetye Outwater, 

y. d. , from Hackiusack, married Oct. 30, both 1. here 1730 

Siggels, Fey tie, aud Roelof Helmigse Van Houte 1712 

1 Query: Richmond. 



Jan. 


28 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


14 


Sept. 


16 


April 


20 


May 


20 



Juue 


16 





14 


Oct. 


31 


Feb. 


2 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


3 


Jau. 


3 



500 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Simmons, George, from Philadelphia, and Elsie Earle, y. d., from 

Hackinsack Married 

Sip, Ide, y. m, b. and 1. Bergeu, and Ariaentie Coruelisse Cadmuys, 

y. d., b. and 1. Acquiggenonck 1718 

Sivert, Adolf, y. m., b. Pruymes, in Germany, and Margrit Geerlingh, 

y. d., b. Newwyck, both 1. Reininigpogh 1719 

Sliugerland, Albert, y. m., and Hester Brickers, y. d. , both from 

Albany 1695 

Sliugerland, Johanois, y. m. , b. Albany, and Claesie Van der Linde, 

y. d., b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1710 

Slingerland, Johannis, wid'r of Geesie Vauder Linde, 1. Acquigge- 
nonck, and Luyde Rorneyn, wid. of Peter Luroe, 1. Ackinsack. .1715 
Slodt, Johannes, y. m., b. and both 1. Ackinsack, and Willemtie Al- 

berse, wid. of Cornelis Bongaert 1720 

Slodt, Petrus, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Mary tie Leyne, y. d , b. Darm- 
stadt, both 1. Ackinsack 1721 

Slot, Abeltie, and Cornelis Epke Banta 1719 

Slot, Autie, and Jonetan Hart 1706 

Slot, Catrina, and Joost Beem , 1740 

Slot, Johannes, wid'r of Willemptie Van Voorhees, and Carstyntie Ak- 
kermau, y. d., both from Hackinsack and 1. here, married 

April 10 1730 

Slot, Saertjen, and Thomas Oudwater 1735 

Sloth, Abeltie, and Adam Janse 1700 

Smidt, Anna Clara, and Pieter Wannamaker 1713 

Smidt, Jan, y. in., b. Bergeu county, and Debera Lirens,l y. d., b. 
Smit, Margen, y. in., b, Ireland, and Cathryna Tadas, y. d., b. 

Wihake, both 1. Acquiggenonck 1723 

Smidt, Sara, aud Samuel Moor 1705 

Smidt, Sara, and Mr. Willem Santfort 1696 

Smit, Barend, y. in., b. Germany, 1. N. York, and Annaetje Beer, y. d., 

b. and 1. Hackinsack, married June 19 1748 

Smit, Jan, y. in., b. Hackinsack, and Catrieutjen Lie, y. d., b. New 

York, both 1. Hackinsack, married March 26 1742 

Smit, Malli, and Michgel Smit 1741 

Smit, Michgel, y. m., b. and 1. Hackinsack, and Malli Smit, y. d., b. 

Long Isld. , 1. Zykakis, married Nov. 12 1741 

Smith, Job, y. in., and Sara Edsall, y. d., both 1. Bergen 

county Married 1748 

Smith, Phellip, y. m., and Rebecca Earle, y. d., both 1. Bergen county. 

married Dec. 28 1736 

Smith, Peter, aud Tina Demarest 1801 

Suideu, Elisabet, and Michiel Schors 1711 



May 24 

April 12 

Oct. 23 

June 1 6 

June 3 

July 23 

Sept. 17 

Nov. 18 

Mar. 1 

Sept. 7 

May 10 



Mar. 28 

June 7 

July 27 

Feb. 28 



Aug. 10 

Sept. 14 

Feb. 1 

May 30 



Feb. 


11 


Sept. 


26 


Sept. 


26 


May 


31 


Dec. 


28 


Sept. 




Feb. 


2 



i Deborah Lawrence. 



April 


30 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


28 


Oct. 


27 


Oct. 


27 



1IACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 5OI 

Snyer, Abram, y. m., b. Predeuhein, Germany, and Margritie Wyndor, 

wid. of Johannes Pieterse Eugelbert, both 1. Ackiusack 1718 Sept. 1 9 

Sperlingh, Jan Michiel, y. in. , b. Sachen, aud Geertie Pieters, y. d., b. 

Acquiggenonck, both living at Acquiggenonck 1709 Dec. 10 

Spier, Abram, y. in., b. and 1. Acquiggenonck, aud Geertie Bras, y. d., 

b. Ackinsack, 1. Essex Co 1 72 1 June 17 

Spier, Armtie Hanse, aud Daniel Retail 1710 Mar. 9 

Spier, Fraus Johannisse, y. m., and Dircktie Comelise, y. d., both b. 

at Acquiggenonck 1705 Mar. 17 

Spier, Geertruy Jausen, and Arent Louwerse Toers 1704 Mar. 18 

h'pier, Heudrick Hanse, y. m., aud Rachel Teunese Pier, y. d., both b. 

and 1. in juris. Newark 1708 Oct. 23 

Spier, Heudrick Janse, y. m. , b. Pemmerpogh, 1. Acquiggenonck, and 

Sara Dey, y. d., b. New York, 1. Peghkena 1709 

Spier, Jannetie Janse, and Roelof Cornelese Van Houte 1715 

Spier, Magdalaentie Janse, and Thomas Louwerense Toers 1710 

Spier, Maritie Hanse, and Adam Koninck 1722 

Spier, Maritie Janse, and Johannes Reyerse 1716 

Spier, Tomas, y. m., aud Maria Rettan, y. d., both b. aud 1. Acquig- 
genonck 1721 Aug. 26 

Stagge, Isaak, y. in., b. aud 1. Barbaris Neck, and Aguietjen Romeiu, 

y. d., b. aud 1. Hackinsack, married Sept. 14 1738 Aug. 5 

Steeger, Maritie, and Hendrik Bos 1721 July 1 

Stegge, Elisabeth, and Johannes Akkerman 1728 Feb. 9 

Stegge, Jan, wid'r of Maritie Bongaert, and Neeltie Verwey, y. d., b. 

Siemeka 1698 ■ Nov. 26 

Stegge, Johannes, y. m., and Hendriktie Housman, y. d., both b. and 

1. Ackinsack : 1722 Aug. 11 

Stegge, John, y. in., b. Bergen, East N. Jersey, and Maritie Bougaert. 

y. d., b. Long Island 1697 Mar. 14 

Stegge, Margrietjeu, and Aarjin Blinkerhof 1731 Sept. 15 

Steege, Neeltje, and Jacob Van Houteu 1747 April 16 

Stegge, Tomas, y. m., b. N. Berbades, and Feytie Van Gelder, y. d., 

b. Long Island, both 1. Peerems 1721 Dec. 23 

Stegge, Willem, y. m., b. New Berbades Neck, and Magdaleena Brou- 

wers, y. d , b. Breukel 1G97 Oct. 23 

Stegh, Jacobus, y. m., b. N. Barbadus Neck, and Sarie Valk, y. d., b. 

Achkwcguonk, both 1. Peremus Married 1737 

Sterre, Amene Margridt, and Johannes Vilisveldt 1723 

Stillewill, Saartje, and Hannis Akkerman 1748 

Stimets, Auuatie, aud Jacob Van Noorstraut 1715 

Stimets, Casparis, 3'. in., and Rachel Pieterse, y. d., both born and liv- 
ing at Acquiggenonck 1713 Oct. 3 

Storm, Hendrik, y. in., and Cornelia Vauder Beek, y. d , both 1. Pere- 

mis? Married 1747 Sept. 24 



Feb. 


3 


Mar. 


2 


May 


26 


Sept. 


10 



Oct. 


27 


May 


27 


Oct, 


30 


Aug. 


10 



502 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Stout, David, y. in., 1. Burlington, and Margarita Valleau, y. d., 1. 

Hackinsack Married 1744 Jan. 11 

Strae, Jenueke, and Matthias Ekkecen 172G May 20 

Strateinaker, Jau, wid'r of Geesie, and Neeltjc Bays, wid. of Jacob 

Vigoor, here united in wedlock 1707 Feb. 

Stratemakers, Triutie, and Jacob Eertel 1700 Sept. 28 

Stuwaert, Jau, y. m., b. Sterling, Scotland, aud Jaquemyne DeMaree, 

y. d., b. Hackeusack ' 1700 Mar. 29 

Stymets, Jannetie Chrisstoffelse, and Casparus Van Noortstrandt 1720 Oct. 22 

T 

Tadese, Annetie, and Arie Simese Van Winckel 1705 

Tadus, Antie, and Johannes Pieterse. . 1710 

Tadus, Casparus, y. in., b. Wyhake, and Jannetie Post, y. d., b. Ac- 

qniggenouck, both living at Acquiggeuonck 1714 

Tadus, Cathryna, aud Margeu Smidt .... 1723 

Tadus, Michiel, y. rn., b. Bergen, E. N. Jersey, and Autie Verwey, 

y. d., b. Acquiggenouck, both 1. at Acquiggeuonck 170G Oct. 19 

Talama, Jan, y. m., and Lena Blaeuvelt, y. d., both 1. Tappau, mar- 
ried Sept. 19, 1735, eut. at Tappan 

Talema, Herrnauus, y. m., b. Tappan, aud Beelitje Brouwer, y. d., b. 

Schralenburg Married 1752 Nov. 25 

TeBouw, Audries, y. rn , and Jannetje Van Blerkum, y. d., both b. aud 

1. Pereinus, married June 27 1740 June 7 

Temout, Fredrik, y. m., b. Darmstadt, and Annatie Miller, y. d., b. 

Hedenborgh, both 1. Geemepogh. 1722 April 14 

Ter Heuu, Aaltjeu, and Jacob Zabrowisky 1748 April 8 

Ter Heun, Albert, y. in., and Jannitje Van der Hoef, y. d., both b. 

Hackinsack Married 1752 May 17 

Ter Heuu, Annaetje, and Joost Zabrowisky 1749 Oct. 14 

Ter Heun, David, y. m., b. and 1. Peremis, aud Sua Bogaert, y. d., b. 

aud 1. Hackinsack, married Oct. 17 1735 Sept. 20 

Terheun, Derk, y. m., and Catharina Kip, y. d., both 1. Ackiusack, 

married Oct. 13 1727 

Terheuu, Elizabeth, aud Harmeu Lutkens 1800 

Ter Heuu, Hendrikjen, and Gen-it Hoppe 1741 

Ter Heun, Jau, y. in., and Catrieutje Pell, y. d., both 1. Hackinsack, 

married May 28 1749 

Terheuu, Rachel, aud Jacob Cornelisse Banta 1728 

Terheuu, Sara, aud Laurens Van Boschkerkeu 1726 

Terheun, Stephauus, y. m., and Susanna Aalje, y d., both b. aud 1. 

Hackinsack 1737 

Terheun, Stheveu, and Lydia Romeyn Married 1790 

Ter Heun, Weintje, aud Joaunes Waederum 1745 

1 Or Heerti'. 



Sept. 


9 


July 


30 


Oct, 


31 


April 


29 


April 


13 


May 


7 


Aug. 


6 


April 


30 


April 


28 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 503 

Ter Heuu, Willemtje, and B irendt de Boogh 1736 July 24 

Terhuyn, Johannis, y. m., from Backensack, and Gesie Westerveldt, 

wid. of Pieter Van de Liude 172 1 April 10 

Terhuyne, Albartus, y. in., and Aune Maritie Ackermans, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Ackinsack 1719 Oct. 24 

Terhuyne, Albert, y. m , and Maritie Martese, y. d., both b. and 1. Ac- 

insaek 172:5 

Terhuyne, Gerrebreght, and Abram Housman 1701 

Terhuyne, Gertrut, and Hendrick Hendrickse Banta 1717 

Terhuyne, Hendriktie, and Jacob Dirckse Banta 1718 

Terhuyne, Jan Alberse, y. m., b on the Bay, and Elisabeth Bertholf, 

y. d., b. Sluys, in Viaender 1699 

Ter Huyne, Marritie, and Hendrick Bertholf 1707 

Terhuyne, Rachel, and Jan Heudrikse Hoppe 1707 

Terhuyne, Steven, y. m , b. New Amersfoort, and Lidia DeMaree, y. d. , 

b. Ackinsack, both 1. here. 1707 

Terhuyne, Weyntie, and Gerret Leydekker 1723 

Terhuyne, Willemtie, and Jacobus Bongaert 1704 

Terhuynen, Albert, wid'r of Weyntie Brickers, and Maritie DeGraves, 

wid. of Audries Tibout 1 705 

Terhuynen, Antie, and Jacob Zaborisco 1699 

Tlaeunese, Geesie, and Daniel Larens 1G96 

Thibouw, Marritie, and Jacob DeBaen 1747 

Thomassen, Dirk, y. m., and Jaunetje Van Houten, y. d., both 1. at 

Acqueguonk. . Married 1737 

Tibouw, Annaetjen, and Abraham Deltemis. .1712 

Tisort, Jacob, y. nx., b. Acquiggenonck, 1. Pomptan, and Mar it j en Bar- 
dan, wid., b. on the bay, 1. Piekenis, 1 married Dec. 6 1733 Nov. 17 

Tibout, Pieter, y. 111 , b. and 1. Ackinsack, and Margritie Reverse, 

y. d., b. New York and 1. Ackinsack 1716 Mar. 3 

Tibouw, Reyer, y. in., b. and 1. Peremus, and Abigael DeBaan, y. d . 

b. Hackinsack, 1. Peremus, married Oct. 21 1746 Sept. 20 

Toers, Antie Louwerense, and Jacob Elyasse Vreelandt 1703 Sept. 17 

Toers, Arent Louwerse, y. m., b. Bergen, and Geertruy Jauson Spier, 

y. d., b. Acquiggenonck 1704 Mar. 18 

Toers, Arie, y. m., b. Bergen, and Annatie Immet, j d., b. in the 

Highlands, both 1. Acquiggenonck 172 L 

Toers, Lena, and Joannes Van Houten 1746 

Toers, Sara, and Dirk Dey 1736 

Toers, Thomas Louwerense, y. m , b. Bergen, and Magdalaentie Jause 

Spier, y. d., b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. Acquiggeuonck 1710 Oct. 28 

Tomsse, Abram, y. in., and Elisabeth Hessel, y. d., both b. and 1. Ac- 
quiggenonck ....... 172 1 April 29 

Tomese, Cornelis, y. m , from New York, and M uytie Koemans, y. d. , 

from Albany 1696 Aug. 8 

1 Preakness. 



April 


27 


Nov. 


29 


Jan. 


26 


May 


31 


Sept. 


23 


Mar. 


29 


July 




Oct. 


18 


April 


5 


Oct. 


7 


Sept. 


8 


April 


22 


May 


23 


June 


10 


Oct. 


10 



May 


13 


Dec. 


2 


Dec. 


4 



504 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tomese, Juriaen, y. m, and Aeltie Siernense Van "Winckel, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Aquiggenonck 171-4 Jaue 12 

Tomesen, Isack, y. m., and Lsa Simese Van Wiukel, y. d., both b. and 

1. Acquiggeuonck 1722 Aug. 4 

Trapkagen, Joannes, y. m , b. Esopos, and Metje Van Blerkiun, y. d., 

b. Pereniis, both 1. Peremis Married 1737 Oct. 7 

Trapkagen, Jonatban, y. m., b. Esopus, 1. Hockakens, and Margrieta 

Laroe, y. d., b. Eempoch, 1. there Married 1734 Dec. 5 

u 

Uralenion, Johannes, y. m., and Elizabeth Reverse, y. d., botb 1. Un- 
der Akquegnonk Married 1749 

V 

Valentyn, Tyme, y. m., b. Albany, and Gerritie Cornelise, y. d., b. 

YVikake 1699 July 24 

Valentyn, Tyme, wid'r of Gerretie Cornelise, and Maritie Van Deuse, 

y. d., b. at Albany 1701 Mar. 22 

Valk, Sarie, and Jacobus Stegh 1737 Feb. 3 

Valleau, Margrita, and David Stout 1744 Jan. 11 

Van Alen, Rachel, and Steven Boogaert 1739 Jan. 2fi 

Van Alen, Willemyntje, and Isack Bogaert 1735 Sept. 19 

Van Bentsckouten, Elias, y. m., 1. Viscoe, and Jacomyntje Koieuhove, 

y. .d. , 1. Hickensack Married 17 18 Nov. 3 

Van Blerckom, Rachel, and Abram Van Seyl 1715 June 4 

Van Blerckum, Maritie, and Davidt DeMaree 1720 Dec. 10 

Van Blerckam, PieterJanse, wid'r of Jacornine Cornelese, and Antie 

Meyiers, last w. of Sam nel Leedt, both 1. Ackinsack 1719 Nov. 14 

Van Blerckum, Trintie, and Dirck Van Seyl 1717 June 22 

Van Blerkorn, Johannes, y. m., b. and 1. Ackinsack, and Jannetie Van 

Zeyl, y. d., b. and 1. Acquiggenonck 171G Mar. 31 

Van Blerkum, Barentie, and Abram Morgen 1715 July 25 

Van Blerkum, Cornelis, and Sara Riejersen, married upon license . . .1727 Feb. 4 
Vau Blerkum, Heudrik, y. m., and Elizabeth Koienhoveu, y. d , both 

b. and 1. Haekinsack, married June 15 1749 May 27 

Van Blerkum, Hermanns, y. m., and Aaltjeu Akkermiu y. d., both 1. 

at Peremis Married 1743 Jan. 14 

Van Blerkum, Jan, y. m., b. Bergen, and Vronwtjen Kip, y. d., b. 

Hakkensack, married Oct. 13, both 1. Hackensack 1738 Sept. 30 

Van Blerkum, Jauuetje, and Andries TeBouvv 1740 June 7 

Van Blerkum, Lea, and Heuricus Bosch ... 1727 Sept. 23 

V:in Blerkum, Maritie Johannese, and Ary Abramse Ackermans 1720 April 2 

Van Blerkum, Marytjen, and Coenradus Bos 1732 Sept. 26 

Van Blerkum, Metje, and Joannes Traphagen 1737 Oct. 7 

Van Blerkum, Rachel, and Paulus Vauder Beek 1748 Mar. 12 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



505 



Van Boramel, Pieter, y. in., and Eillegont Ellen, y. d., both 1. Hack- 

insack Married 1749 Juue 2 

Van B »s, Jenuikke, and Johannes Van Winkel 1718 Dec. 8 

Van Bosehkerken, y. m., and Sara Terheun, y. d., both from Ackin- 

sack. .'. 1720 May 7 

Van Boskerck, Andries Louwerense and Jacominte Davidse DeMaree, 

both b. and 1. Ackinsack .1717 Jan. 26 

Van Boskerk, 1 > lertruyd, and Wiert Banfca 1732 Nov. 25 

Van Boskerk, Hendrikjen, and Abraham Westervelt 1741 Mar. 31 

Van Boskerk, Jan, wid'r, and Mareyfcje Van der Liude, wid., both 1. 

Hackeusaek Married 1719 13 

Vau Boskerk, -Tan Louw srense, y. m., and Ge ssie Jnrriaense Wester- 

veldt, y. d , both b. and 1. Ackinsack ... 1721 April 1 

Van Boskerk, Laurens, y. in. , b. and 1. Hackensack, aud Lea Wester- 

velt, y. d. , b. aud 1 Schraelenburg, married Sept. 20 1739 Sept. 15 

Van Boskerke, Fey tie Louwerense, aud Arie Riuta 1711 July 28 

Vau Doskerken, Pieter, the younger, y. m., aud Marietje Van Hoorn, 

y. d , both 1. Ackiusack 1727 Sept. 1 

Van Brakel, Martha, and Louwerens Akkerman 1745 Oct. 25 

Van Bremen, Thomas, wid'r, 1. Peremus, aud Jannetjen Cutwater. 

y. il , 1. Segqnanek Married 1718 

Van Camp, Christy utje, aud David Pauer 1728 Mar. 23 

Van de Liude, Dominus Banjarniu, y. m., and Elisabeth Schuyler, y. d , 

Married at Pompton 1718 Dec. 5 

Vander Beeck, Pauwelis, y. m , b. Gouwaues, aud Catryn Martens, 

wid. of Samuel Berry 1703 June 12 

Vander Beek, Cornelia, aud Heudrik Storm 1747 Sept. 21 

Van der Beek, El-ie, and Pieter Kip 1720 Mar. 5 

Vander Beek, Geesjen, and Cornells DeGroot 1712 May 13 

Vander Beek, Isaek, y. m., b. Hackensack, and Auuaetje de Boog, 

y. d., b. New York, married June 25, both 1. Hackiusack 173(5 May 29 

Van der Beek, Jan y. in., b. Hackensack, and TannitjeLatkeus, y. d., 

b. Pel emus Married 1752 Ju — 6 

Vander Beek, Jannetje, and David Akkerman 1742 June 26 

Vander Beek, Paulus, y. m , b. Hackinsack, and Auuetje Akkerman, 

y. d., b. Peremis, married June 18, both 1. PereruR 1713 April 16 

Vander Beek, Paulus, y. m., and Rachel Van Blerkum, y. d , both 1. 

Peremis, married April 8 1748 Mar. 12 

Van der Beke, Coenradus, y. m., b. New York, aud Augenitie "Wester- 

velt, y. d , b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1717 May 25 

Van der Hoef, Cornells, y. in., b. Albany, aud Elisabeth Ackermans, 

y. d., b. Hackinsack, both 1. here ' 1712 Get. 18 

Van der Hoef, Dorothy, and Lucas Bongart 1739 Oct. 10 

Van der Hoef, Geertruy, and Pieter Rettan 1713 Nov. 7 

Vander Hoeff, Grietje, aud Enoch Earle 1737 Aug. 19 

Vau der Hoef. Jannitje, aud Albert Ter Heun 1752 May 1 7 

33 



May 


7 





13 


Sept. 


20 


Oct. 


21 


April 


25 


April 


7 





12 


June 


12 



506 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vander Eoef, Johannes, y. m., b. Albany, and Lea Hoppe, y. d., b. 

Ackinsack, both 1. here 171-1 May 15 

Van der Boef, Kobus, y. m . b. and 1. Hackensack, and Marritjen Out- 
water, y. d., b. at the Panne, 1. Hakkensack, married Mar. 2D. .1718 April 9 
Vander Hoef, Louwerens, y. m.. b. New Britain, and Angenietjen 

Ellen, y. d., b. New York, married June 9, both 1. Hackensack 1743 May 7 

Van der Lindie, Claesie, and Johannis Slingerland 1710 Juue 3 

Vander Linde, Hendrik, y. in., and Ariaentie Westerveldt, y. d., both 

b. and 1. at Ackinsack 1715 

Van der Linde, Mareytje, and Jan Van Boskerk 171i' 

Vander Linde, Osseltjin, and Pit ter DeMarest 1735 

Vander Linde, Filter, y. in., and Geesie Roelofse Westerveldt, y. d., 

both b. ami 1. at Ackinsack 1710 

Van der Liude, Roelof, wid'r of Susanna Hendrikse Blinkerhof, and 

Rachel Kit sou. wid. of Jan Du Ry 1702 

Van der Linde, Susanna, and Domineer Samuel Verbryk 175'J 

Van der Lin leu, Susanna, and Lucas Ryerson 17-15 

Van der Schuere. Margrietje, and Elias Willems 1731 

Van der Voort, Jan, y. m., b. Betfort, and Magdaleena Housnian. 

y. d. . b. B -u \ ck . . 1701 April 5 

Van Deuse, Catryna, and Pieter Visser 1722 Aug. IS 

Van Deuse, Isaack, y. m., b. X. York, 1. Tappan, and Augcnitie 

Laroe, y. d. . b. Ackiusack, 1. there. 1718 May 2 1 

Van Dense, Isack, wid'r of Angenitie Laroe, and Elisabeth Eoose- 

boom, y. d.. she from N. York, 1. Reniepogh. 1723 

Van Deuse, Maritie, and Tyme Yaleutyu 1701 

Van Deursen, Jenueke, and Jau Lewis 1731 

Van Deusen, L a. and Wynnant Van Gelderen 1735 

Van Dieu, Albert, y. m., and Annatye Bauta, y. d. , both from H.uk- 

insack aud 1. here, married Oct. 30 1730 Sept. 2(1 

Van Dien. Dirk. y. m., and Catharina Oudtwater, y. d.. both from 

Hackinsack and 1. here, married June 3. . . . 1729 

Van Dien. Geertrui, and Hendrik Kip 1711 

Van Dien. Gerrit, y. m., b. New York, and Vrouwtie Verwey, y. d., b. 

Bergen 1696 

Van Dieu, Hendirkje, and Eeinier Van Gysen 1728 

Van Dieu, Vrouwtjen, and Jau Bardau 1733 

Van Donk, Augustyn, y. m.. and Rachel Matthyse, y. d., both 1. Ber- 
gen county, married April 28 .1726 

Van Donk, Elizabeth, and Casparus Haal 172s 

Van de Water, , and Isaac Parleman 1800 

Van Emburgh, Elisabeth, and Jacobus Bertholf 1729 

Van Galen, Louwerens wid'r of Anna DeMasuer, aud Triutie Elyasse 

Vreelandt, y. d., from Gem inepan 1700 

Van Gelderen, Wynnant, y. m., b. Peremis, 1. Kempoogk, aud Lea 

Van Deusen, y. d.. b. Rympoogh 1. in the Cloof Married 1735 



Dec. 


11 


Mar. 


22 


Mar. 


20 


Dec. 


12 



April 


L9 


July 


21 


Oct. 


21 


Mar. 


30 


Oct. 


10 


April 


2 


Jan. 


6 


Nov. 


17 


Jan. 


18 


July 


13 


Dec 


12 



hackensack church marriage records. 507 

Van Gelder, Abram. y. m., and Rachel Laroe, y. d., both 1. under 

Peremis 1737 Aug. 6 

Van Gelder, Feytie, and Tomas Stegge 1721 Dec. 23 

Van Gelder, Jacobus Everse, wid'r of Diver Tyse, 1. Breukelen, and 

Susanna DeVouw, wid. of Tomas Bricker, 1 here 170G June 25 

Van Geste, Jan Janse, y. in., b. Bergen, an<l Susanna Aliee, wid. of 

A in tries Tibouw, both 1. under jur. <>f ch. of Acquiggenonck. . . 1 7 1 o April 17 

Van Gelder, Maria, and Wilm Van Voorhese 1728 -Jan. 6 

Van Giese, Rienier, wid'r, and Hester Couenhoven, y. d., both 1. Hack- 

insack Married 1744 Mar. 26 

Van Giesen, Antje, and Dirk Banta 1752 25 

Van Giesen, Cornelia, anil Albert Van Voorhease 1735 Maj 2 1 

Van Giesen. Cristyntjen, and Jan Banian 1738 April 15 

Van Giesen, Isaek, y. in., and Marytjen Hoppe, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Haekiusack Married 1744 Aug. 16 

Van Giesen, Elaesjen, and Ritsjert Blens 1733 Nov. . 4 

Van Gisse, Hendrik, y. m., b. Gemoenepa, and SaraRomeyn, y. d., b. 

Ackinsack, both 1. Ackinsack 7. 1715 Aug. 28 

Van Gyse, Joris, y. in., b. Gemenpou, and Rachel Romeyn, y. d. , b. 

Ackinsack, both 1. Ackinsack 1724 Mar. 22 

Van Gysen, Johannes, v. in., from Acqueggenonck, and Annatje Wes- 

tervelt, y. d., from Ackinsack, married June 16 1727 May 20 

Van Gysen, Reinier, y. m., and Heudirkje Van Dien, y. d., both from 

Hackinsack 1728 Mar. 30 

Van Gysse, Isaek, wid'r of Hillegond Kuyper, and Anna Breyand, wid. 

of Nicasis Kip, both living here 1713 Oct. 10 

Van Gysse, Magdalena, and Sander Egberse. . . 1701 April 20 

Van Gysse, Mr. Reynier, wid'r of Dircktie Cornelese Van Greenland, 

and Hendricktie Buys, wid. of Comelis Verwey 1699 Sept. 28 

Van Halem, Pieter Gerritse, y. in., b. Rotterdam, and Trintie llen- 

drikse Hoppe, y. d., b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 17C6 July 14 

Van Hooreu, Comelis, y. in., b. at Ackinsack, and Jacquemiue De- 

Maree, wid. of Samuel Hellingh, both 1. here 1711 July 16 

Van Hoorn, Aaltjen, and Pieter DeHaree 1740 Feb. 23 

Van Hoorn, Annaetjen, and Abraham Banta 1735 Aug. 30 

Van Hoorn, Antye, and Richard Blanch 1730 Sept. 27 

Van Hoorn, Daniel, y. m., and Mareytje Banta, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Schralenburg Married 1 719 Sept. 28 

Van Hoorn, Jennike, and Salomon DeBoog 1747 April 18 

Van Hoorn, Johannes, y. m., and Marritje Cadmis, y. d., both 1. Ak- 

kwegkenonk Married 1740 June 19 

Van Hoorn, Kornelis, wid'r, 1. Schraelenburg, and Treintje Hartje, 

y. d., both b. Hackensack, 1. here 1732 Nov. 25 

Van Hoorn, Lucas, y. m., and Aeltie Sibese Banta, y. d., both from 

Ackinsack 1705 April 21 

Van Hoorn, Marietje, and Pieter Van Bjskerken 1727 Sept. 1 



5o8 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Van Horen, Aunatie, and Samuel DeMaree 1713 Aug. 1 

Van Home, Daniel, and Pietertie Alyee 1800 Nov. 14 

Van Horen, Januetie, and Jacob Hendrikse Banta 1705 Sept. 28 

Van House, Reyuier, wid'r of Anne Stevens, 1. York Island, and Lea 

Davids DeMaree, b. and 1. Ackinsack 1718 Jan. 26 

Van Houte, Gerritie, and Willem Florisse Krom 1699 Sept. 29 

Van Houte, Johannes Cornelise, and Trintie Pieterse, y. d., both b. 

and 1. at Acquiggenonck 1712 Nov. 1 

Van Houte, Roelof Cornelese, y. m., b. Bergen, and Jannetie Jause 

Spier, y. d., she b. and both 1. at Acquiggenonck 1715 Jan. 1 

Van Houte, Roelof Helmigse, wid'r of Erie Cornelese Vreland, and 

Fey tie Siggels, y. d., both 1. Bergen Married 1712 Jan. 3 

Van Houten, Cathriua, and Hendrik Hoppe 1735 April 3 

Van Houten, Feitje, and Joannes Cadmus 1714 Nov. 22 

Van Houten, Helena, and Abraham Deremis 1740 July 8 

Van Houten, Helming, y. in., and Jannetje Van Rype, wid., both 1. 

Bergen county Married 1750 Oct. 25 

Van Houten, Jacob, y. m., b. and 1 by the Panne, and Neeltje Stegge, 

y. d., b. Hackensack, 1. by the Panne, married June 8 1747 April 16 

Van Houten, Jannetje, and Dirk Thomassen 1736 June 10 

Van Houteu, Joaunan, y. m., and Catharine Cadmus, y. d., both b. 

and 1. Agkwegkenunck, ent. at Acquiggenonck Married 1736 Nov. 11 

Van Houten, Joannes, wid'r, 1. Essex county, and Lena Toers, y. d. , 1. 

Bergen county Married 1746 Dec. 2 

Van Houten, Joannes, y. m., b. and 1. Tappau, and Jenueke Outwa- 

ters, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married June 6 1734 May 4 

Van Huysen, Hermanus, y. m., and Sara Blauvelt, y. d., both 1. 

Tappan Married 1749 June 25 

Van Imburg, Catrine, and Richard Gibbs 1737 Aug. 20 

Van Imburgh, Sara, and Abram Pier 1722 Oct. 27 

Van Imburg, Sara, and Jan Gis 1741 Jan. 6 

Van Imburgh, Gysbert, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Maritie Helhaecke, 

y. d., b. New York, both 1. here 1718 July 26 

Van Nieukerk, Cornelius, y. in., b. Bergen, 1. Hackinsack, and Lea 

Maris, wid., b. audi. Schraleuburg, married Oct. 18 1749 Sept. 21 

Van Noortstrandt, Casparus, y. m., b. New York, and Januetie Cbris- 

stoffelse Stymets, y. d., she b. and both 1. at Acquiggenonck. . . 1720 Oct. 22 
Van Noortstrant, Jacob, y. m , b. New York, and Aunatie Stimets, 

y. d., bride b. and both 1. Acquiggenonck 1715 Sept. 10 

Van Norden, Albert Janse, y. m., and Margrita Mattysse, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Ackinsack 1717 Feb. 9 

Van Norden, Audries, wid'r of Rachel DeMaree, and Antie Laroe, 

y. d., b. Ackinsack, both 1. here 1710 Aug. 12 

Van Norden, David, y. in., and Jacomyntje Christi, y. d., both 1. 

Scralenburg, married Nov. 16 1727 Oct. 20 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 5OC) 

Van Norden, I., y. m , and Rachel Van Sehieve, y. d., both 1. Sehral- 

enburg, mairied Oct, 14 1726 Sept. 17 

Van Norden, Willem, y. id., b. audi. Ackinsack, ami Temprens Los- 

vereus, 1 y. d., b. Amboy, 1. Raritau 1710 Mar. 1 

Van Nprstrand, Jannitje, and Hartman Enochse Freland^ 1747 Aug. 20 

Van Norstrant, Jacob, y. in., and Rachel Huden, y. d., both 1. Bergeu 

couuty Married 1747 Aug. 20 

Van Orden, Elisabeth, and Jan Albertse Van Voorkese 1721 Mar. 18 

Van Orden, Rachel, and Paulus Lots 1724 Oct. 30 

Van Rype, Jan net je, and Helming Van Houten 1750 Oct. 25 

Van Rypen, Sally, and William Anderson 1800 Dec. 24 

Van Saeu, Jacob, y. m., and Jaunetye Banta, y. d., both from Hack- 

insack and 1. there, married Oct. 1 1728 Aug. 31 

Van Saeu, Jacob, y. m., b. New York, and Rachel Bongaert, y. d. , b. 

Hackinsack. ... . 1705 Aug. 25 

Van Saeu, JauDetjen, and Guliaem Bogaert 1736 July 31 

Van Sehieve, Rachel, and I. Van Norden 1726 Sept. 17 

Van Schive, Jacob, y. m., b. Acquiggenouck. and Rachel Maris, y. d., 

b. and 1. Ackinsack 1724 Feb. 7 

Van Schy ven, Elena, and Frans Post 1721 June 3 

Van Schy ven, Januetie, and Jacob Kool 1723 July 28 

Van Schyveu, Trientjen, and Isack Verweele 1737 July 2 

Van Seyl, Abram, y. m., b. and 1. at Acquiggenouck, and Rachel Van 

Blerckom, y. d., b. and 1. at Ackiusack 1715 June 4 

Van Seyl, Dirck, y. m. , b. aud 1. at Acquiggenouck, and Trintie Van 

Blerckum, y. d., b. aud 1. Ackinsack 1717 June 22 

Van Seyl, Jacomyntje, and Joseph Woedt 1735 Nov. 6 

Van Seyl, Rachel, aud Lieving Baelmoor 1735 Oct. 17 

Van Sicgelen, Cornelia, aud Jan Cornelisse Bauta 1708 April 3 

Van Tessel, Dirck, y. in., b. Flipsburgh, and Christina Buys, y. d., b. 

Acquiggenonck, both 1. Flipsburg 1723 Feb. 9 

Van Voorkees, Jaunetje, and Joannes Meyer. . . 1747 Mar. 14 

Van Voorheese, Abigel, aud LambertusLaroe 1742 Sept. 16 

Van Voorheese, Albert, y. in. , aud Cornelia Van Giesen, y. d., both b. 

aud 1. Ackiusack, married Juue '20. 1735 May 24 

Van Voorheest, Isack, y. m., and Osseltyn Romein, y. d., both b. and 

1. Hackinsack, married Nov. 26 1731 Oct. 16 

Van Voorheest, Jacobus, y. m., b. aud 1. Hackeusack, and Januetjen 

Akkertnau, b. at Hackensack, 1. Peremes, married Sept. 22 ..1732 Aug. 5 
Van Voorheest, Petrus, y. m., and Geesjeu Romein, y. d., both b. aud 

1. Hackensack, married June 21 1734 May 25 

Van Voorheest, Petrus, y. m., aud Neesjen Romein, y. d., both b. and 

1. Hackensack, married June 21 1734 May 25 

Van Voorhese, Jan Albertse, y. m., and Elisabeth Van Orden, y. d., 

both b. and 1. Ackinsack 1721 Mar. 18 

1 Loveridge. - Vreeland. 



Sio 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Van Voorbese, Lucas, y. in , both from Hackinsack, and Annatje Kip, 

y. d., married Sept. 2 1726 July 30 

Van Voorbese, Wilm, and Maria Van Gelder, married Jan. 26 1728 Jan. 6 

Van Vorst, Gerrit, y. m., b. and 1. at Asemes, and Sara Walingse Van 

Winkel, y. d., b. and 1. at Acquiggenonck 1714 May 22 

Van Wagenen, Hessel, y. m , and Januitje Post, y. d., botb 1. Acqueg- 

uonk ... Married 1747 Oct. 8 

Van Wagenen, Neesje, and Geurt Claesen 1744 Dec. 8 

Van Wageninge, Geesie Henderikse, and Marynes Simonse Van 

Winckel 1721 Sept. 2 

Van Winckel, Aeltie Siemense, and Juriaen Toraese 1714 June 12 

Van Winckel, Margrita Siniese, and Cornelis Bieyhaudt 1700 Dec. 7 

Van Winckel, Margrita Symese, and Maerten Winne 1697 Oct. 30 

Van Winckel, Marynes Simonse, y. m., and Geesie Henderikse Van 

Wageninge, y. d., botb b. and 1. Acquiggenonck 1721 Sept. 2 

Van Winckel, Rachel Symese, and Jobannis Koemau 1708 Mar. 6 

Van Winckel, Trintie Siniese, and Isack Enogse Vreelandt. . . 17U6 Mar. 23 

Van Winckel, Trintie Walingse, and Egbert Sanderse 1710 Sept. 16 

Van Winkel, Arie Simese, y. m., b. Constabelsboek, and Anuetie 

Tadese, y. d , b. Wybaecke, botb living at Acquiggenonck. . 1705 Oct. 27 
Van Winkel, Gidion Symese, y. m., b. and 1. Acquiggenonck, and Jan- 

netie Koemaus, y. d , b. Albany, 1. in juris. New York 1708 Mar. 13 

Van Winkel, Jacob, y. m., and Froutje Gerriseu, y. d., botb 1. Ak- 

kwegnonk Married 1740 Dec. 8 

Van Wmkel, Jacob Jacobse, Junior, y. in., and Egie Pauls, y. d., botb 

b. Bergen 1703 Mar. 6 

Van Winkel, Joannes, y. in., b. and 1. Akquegnonk, and Evaetjen Kip, 

y. d., b. and 1. Hackensack, married Oct. 25 1747 Oct. 24 

Van Winkel, Jobannes, y. in., and Jennikke Van Bos, y. d., botb 1. 

under Akquegnonk , Married 1748 Dec. 8 

Van Winkel, Jobannes Jacobse, y. m. , b. and 1. Bergen, and Sitske 

Hendrikse Bauta, y. d., b. and 1. Ackinsack 1712 April 19 

Van Winkel, Jobaunes Simese, y. m., from Acquiggenonck, and Antie 

Sanderse, y. d., b. Staten Island 1704 Oct. 14 

Van Winkel, Lea Simese, and Isack Tomeseu 1722 Aug. 4 

Van Winkel, Rachel, and Albert Akkermau 1748 June 17 

Van Winkel, Sara, and Gerrit Van Vorst 1714 May 22 

Van Winkel, Simon, y. in., b. and 1. Ackquegnonk, and Elizabeth De- 

Grauw, y. d., b. and 1. Hackensack, married May 5 1738 Mar. 21 

Van Winkel, Tade, y. m., and Catbariua Bord, y. d., both 1. Akkweg- 

nouk Married 1736 Dec. 17 

Van Winkel, Walen, and Oatharina Poulison 1800 Nov. 20 

Van Zeil, Evert, y. m. , and Hendirkje Verwey, y. d., both from Hack- 
insack 1728 April 6 

Van Zeyl, Anna, and Abraham Bos 1740 July 31 

Van Zeyl, Jannetie, and Jobannes Van Blerkom 1716 Mar. 31 



July 


12 


Aug. 


1 


Oct, 


25 


Nov. 


11 


May 


19 


April 


7 



July 


2 


Oct. 


19 


Juue 


13 


April 


6 



HACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 511 

Van Zeyl, Lena, ami Isaek Canklyn 1710 July 5 

Varick, Abram, y. m., b. Now York, and Anna Bertholf, y. d., b. Ack- 

insack, both 1. here 1718 

Varick, Maritjeu, and John Mel towel 1733 

Varick. Martyntje, and Peter Zabrisky 1717 

Varick, Sara, and Jacob Zabrisky 1713 

Veder, Hermanns, y. m., 1. Hackinsack, and Annaetjen Hennion, y. d., 

1. Tapan Married 1748 

Verbryk, Domiueer Samuel, y. m., and Susanna Van der Linde, y. d., 

both 1. in Jersey Married 1750 

Vervele, Johauues, y. m., b. New Utrecht, and Amelyntie Herte, y. d , 

b. Tappan 1703 Jan. 

Yerweele, Isack, y. m , b. and 1. Tappan, and Trieutjen Van Schy ven, 

y. d , b. and 1. Schraelenburg, married Aug. 12. . 1737 

Verwey, Antie, and Michiel Tadus 1706 

Verwey, Elisabeth, and Risyer Day 1737 

Verwey, Hiudirkje, and Evert Van Zeil ... 1728 

Verwey, Jan Cornelese, y. m., b. Loug I-laud, and Catryn Louwerense 

Akkerman, y. d., b. Ackiusack, 1. here 1707 Feb. 15 

Verwey, Lourens, y. m., b. and 1. Peremis, and Trientje DeMaree, 

y. d., b. and 1. Ackiusack, married May 4 1738 April 8 

Verwey, Neeltie, and Jan Stegge 1098 Nov. 26 

Verwey, Vrouwtie, and Gerrit Van Dieu 1696 Oct, 24 

Vigoor, Siacjue, 1 w. of Catryn Pisiaer, and Neeltie Buys, w. of Jan 

Koerte 1699 April 8 

Vilisveldt, Johannes, wid'r of Els Mary Smidt, 1. Tappan, and Amene 

Margridt Sterre, y. d., 1. Reemepogh, from Germany 1723 Mar. 2 

Visser, Pieter, y. m., from Wurtemburg, in Germany, and Catryna Van 

Deuse, y. d., b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. here 1722 

Volk, Abraham, y. m., b. Akkwegnonk, and Rachel Ratan, y. d., b. 

New Barbadis Neck, married Juue 25, both 1. under Peremis. 1711 
Volker, Niclaes, y. m., b. Akkweggenonk, aud Metje Akkerman, y. d., 

b. N. Britain, married Sept. 1 1, both 1. Peremis 1710 

Voorheseu, Jacobus, and Polly Demarest 1801 

Vreelaudt, Isack Enogse, y. m., b. Pemmepock, aud Triutie Simese 

Van Winckel, y. d., b. Acquiggenonck, both 1. at Acquigge- 
nonck 1706 Mar. 23 

Vreelaudt, Jacob Elyasse, y. m,, b. Gemoenepan, and Antie Louwer- 
ense Toers, y. d., b. Bergen 1703 Sept. 17 

Vreelaudt, Michiel, wid'r of Gerritje Van Houten, and Leentje Ro- 

mein, y. d. , 1. Hackinsack. married Jrme 19 1790 June 13 

Vreelaudt, Triutie Elyasse, and Louwerens Van Galen 1700 July 13 

Vreelaudt, Dirck Johannese, y. m., b. Acquiggenonck, 1. Gemceuepa, 

and Sitske Dirkse Banta, y. d., b. and 1. at Ackiusack 1716 May 12 

1 Jacques. 



Aug. 


18 


May 


15 


Aug. 


2 


Feb. 


13 



512 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

W 

Waederum, Joannes, y. ni., b. aud 1. Harlem, and Weiutje Ter Heun, 

y. d. , b. and 1. Hackinsack 1745 April 28 

Waldron, Tauneke, and Jan Ariaense. 1720 Mar. 25 

Walingse, Jacob, y. in., b. Bergen, and Geertruut Brickers, y. d. , b. 

Albany 1G97 Oct. 30 

Wannemaker, Hendrik, y. m.. and Elisabeth Frederiks, y. d , both b. 

and 1. Reinmipog, married Dec. 20 1745 Oct. 2G 

Wannemaker, Margriet, and Jacob ster 1741 Oct. 3 

Wannemaker, Pieter, y. m., b. Darmstadt, and Anna Clara Smidt, 

y. d., b Vigerlaud, both 1. in Bergen Co. 1713 Feb. 28 

Wannemaker, Pieter, y. m., and Maria Schoert, y. d., both b. aud 1. 

Remepog, married Aug. 15 17-16 14 

Watson, Maria, and Jacob Kouink ... 1752 Nov. 26 

Westerveldt, Aaeltie Lubberse, and Hendrick Jacobese 1707 Mar. 1 

Westerveldt, Ariaentie, and Hendrik Vander Linde .. 1715 May 7 

Westerveldt, Benjamin Koelofse, y. m., and Hendrikie Bongaert, y. d., 

b. and 1. Ackinsack 1723 Feb. 16 

Westerveldt, Cornells Juriese, 1 y. m., 1. Ackinsack, and Antie Brey- 

audt, y. d., 1. New Britain, both b. Ackinsack 1723 

Westerveldt, Gesie, aud Johaunis Terhuyn. 1725 

Westerveldt, Geesie Jurriaense, and Jan Louwereuse Van Boskerk . . 1721 

Westerveldt, Geesie Koelofse, and Pieter Vander Linde 1710 

Westerveldt. Helena, and Claes Kuyper 1725 

Westerveldt, Jau Jurriaense, y. in., and S ara Samuelse DeMaree, y. d , 

both b. and 1. Ackinsack 1718 May 31 

Westerveldt, Jan Jurriaense, wid'r of Sara Samuelse DeMaree, and 

Feytie Ccrnelese Herrings, y. d , b. and 1. Tappan 1710 Oct. 31 

Westerveldt, Jan Lubberse, y. m., b. Ackinsack, and Dircktie 11 uy- 

berse Blaeuvelt, y. d., b. Tappan, both 1. here 1709 May 28 

Westerveldt, Jannetie Koelofse, and Albert Romeyn .. 1710 April 8 

Westerveldt, Johannes Koelofse, y. m., b. aud 1. Ackinsack, and Egie 

Pieterse DcGroot, y. d., b. and I. Bergen Co. 1718 Oct. 11 

Westerveldt, Jurriaen, wid'r of Antie Sibese Banta, aud Cornelia Al- 

berse, y. d., b. New Amersfoort . . 1703 April 17 

Westerveldt, Kasparis, y. m., and Aeltie Bongaert, y. d., both b. audi. 

Ackiusack 1715 

Westerveldt, Maritie, and Daniel Romeyn . 1716 

Westerveldt, Pieter Lubberse, y. in., and Susanna DeMaree, y. d. , 

both b. at Ackinsack 1704 

Westervelt, Abraham, y. m., and Hendrikjen Van B tskerk, y. d., both 

b. and 1. Hackinsack . . 1744 

Westervelt, Albert, y. m., and Maritje Hoppe, y. d., both from Ackin- 
sack, married April 16 1727 Mar. 

i Jurianse. 



Sept. 


14 


April 


10 


April 


1 


Oct. 


21 


Dec. 


23 



May 


7 


Mar. 


17 


April 


22 


Mar. 


31 



IIACKENSACK CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



5U 



Westervelt, Angenitie, and Coenradus Van der Beke 1717 

Wester volt, Aguietjen, and David Romein. 173G 

Westervelt, Auuatje, and Johannes Van Gysen 1727 

Westervelt, Beleetje, and David DeMaree 1750 

Westervelt, Benjamin, y. m., both b. Hackinsack, aud Marytje Lisier, 

y. d., both b. Hackinsack Married 17-31 

Westervelt, Casparis, y. m., b. Hackensack, and Sara Darje, y. d , b. 

Scbralenburg Married 1752 

Westervelt, David, y. in., aud Tryntje Cool, y. d., both 1. at Ac-]<in- 

sack, married June 16 1727 

Westervelt, Johannes, y. m. , b. and 1. Hackensack, and Lena Christy, 

y. il., b. aud 1. Scbralenburg Married 1751 

Westervelt, Jnrjeu, wid'r, b. Long Isld., 1. Hackinsack, aud Leude 

Romein, wid., b. Hackensack, 1. Wieremis, married Oct. 6. . . .1738 
Westervelt, Jurriaen, wid'r of Geesie Bongaert, and Autie Sibese Bauta, 

y. d. , b. Ackinsack 169!) 

Westervelt, Lea, aud Loureus Van Boskerk 1 739 

Westervelt, Maria, and Albert Alje 1 748 

Westervelt, Mary tie, aud Heudrick Brinckerhoff 1728 

Westervelt, Osseltjen, and Isaak Romein 1738 

Westervelt, Roelof, y. in., aud Trieutjen Akkerman, y. d. , both b. and 

1. Hackinsack 1737 

Westervelt, Roelof, y. m. , aud Marytje DeGroot, both b. aud 1. Hack- 
ensack, married Dec. 6 1744 

Westervelt, Roelof, y. m., b. Hackinsack, 1. Poughkeepsie, aud Arja- 

entje Romein, y. d., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married June 16. . . . 1749 
Westervelt, Steven, y. m., and Hillegontjen Ackerman, y. d., both b. 

and 1. Hackensack, married Sept. 8 1733 

Westfield, Benjamin, and Elisabeth Rapp 1801 

Willems, Elias, y. m., from O. England, and Margrietje Van der 

Schuere, y. d., b. N. York, married July 3, both 1. here 1731 

Willemse, Wouter, wid'r of Diwer Janse Van Blerkum, 1. Acquigge- 

nonck, and Magdaleeutie Hertie, wid. of Johannes Vervelen, 1. 

Bergen Co 1710 

Wiune, Maerten, y. m. , b. Albany, and Margrita Symese Van Wiuckel, 

y. d., b. Asemes 1697 

Woedt, Joseph, y. m.,.b. L. Island, 1. Rympoogh, and Jacomyntje Van 

Seyl, y. d., b. Peremis, 1. there, ent. at Peremis .... . Married 1735 

Woertendyck, Rachel, and Jan Lesly 1713 

Wyndor, Margritia, and Abram Suyer 1718 



May 


25 


June 


5 


May 


20 


Dec. 


1 


Oct, 


5 


Nov. 


10 


May 


7 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


7 


Aug. 


19 


Sept. 


15 


Oct. 


15 


Sept. 


28 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


G 


Nov. 


3 


May 


13 


Aug. 


4 


June 


16 


June 


12 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


30 


Nov. 


6 


April 


3 


Sept. 


19 



Zabborwisco, Heudrick, y. m., and Geertru Hendrickse Hoppe, y. d., 

both b. and 1. Ackinsack 1719 May 1 6 

Zaborischo, Christiaen, y. m., aud Lea Hendrikse Hoppe, y. d. , both 

b and 1. Ackinsack 1715 May 28 

34 



April 


2 


Sept. 


20 


April 


22 


Dec. 


G 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


30 



514 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Zaborischo, Hendrikie, and Antouie Losier . . 1720 

Zabonscko, Jan, y. m., b. Ackiusack, and Elysabetk Ronieyn, y. d., 

b. Gravesant. 1706 

Zaborisco, Jacob, y. in., b. Pemnierpogb, and Antie Terhuyneu, y. d., 

b. on the Bay 1699 

Zaboriscoo, Jan, wid'r of Elisabeth Rornein, and Margrita DeRie, y. d., 

b. Ackiusack, both 1. here 1712 

Zaboriskoo, Joost, y. m., b. Ackiusack, and Cristina Meby, y. d., b. 

New York, both 1. at Ackiusack 1712 

Zaboriskwy, Rachel, and Joaunes Akkerman 1738 

Zaboriskwy, Steven, y. in., and Catrientjen Hoppe, y. d., both b. and 

1. Perernus, married Feb. 13 1742 Jan. 30 

Zaborisky, Albert, y. m., aud Auuaet jen Kip, y. d., both b. aud 1. Ack- 

insack, married Nov. 8 1 734 Oct. 5 

Zaborisky, Albert, y. m , b. Peremis, and Maritjeu Hoppe, y. d , b. 

Hockhakens, 1. Hackinsack, married May 25 1739 April 28 

Zaborisky, Albert, y. in., and Tjelletje Akkerman, y. d., both b. Ack- 
iusack, aud 1. Peremi*, married June 15, 1739, ent. at Peremis. 
Zaborisky, Jau, y. m., and Anuaetjen Akkermau, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Hackensack, married June 15 1739 May 12 

Zaborowesky, Albert, and Aaltje Ackerman, y. d., both b. aud 1. Pere- 
mis Married 1739 

Zabriscoo, Feytie, and Petrus Lozier 1723 

Zabriski, Jacob, y. in., and Elisabeth Hoppe, y. d., both 1. 

Peremus Married 1792 

Zabriskie, Albert, and RacheL Demarest 1799 

Zabriskie, Baletie, and Harmen Lutkeus 1801 

Zabriskwv, Machtel, aud Albert Bogart 1737 

Zabrisky, Jacob, y. in., aud Sara Yarick, y. d., both b. aud 1. Ackiu- 
sack Maniedl743 Nov. 11 

Zabrisky, Peter, y. m., and Martyntje Yarick, y. d., both 1. in Bergen 

county Married 1717 Oct. 25 

Zabrowisky, Hendrik, y. in., b. aud 1. Peremus, and Lea Hoppe, y. d., 

b. Goghakeus, 1. Peremus, married Nov. 28 1716 Oct. 1 8 

Zabrowisky, Jacob, y. m., and Aaltjen Ter Heun, y. d., both 1. Pere- 
mus Married 1748 April 8 

Zabrowisky, Jacob, y. m., aud Lena Akkerman, y. d., both b. and 1. 

Peremis Married 1747 Aug. 7 

Zabrowisky, Joost, y. m., aud Auuaetje Ter Heuu, y. d., both b. and 

1. Hackensack, married Nov. 5 1749 

Zabrowisky, Rachel, and Domineer J. Hendrikus Goetschius 1750 

Ziggelensin, Heudrik, wid'r, b. and 1. Bergen, aud Sara Akkermans, 

wid., b. and 1. Hackinsack, married Dec. 26 1733 

Zika, Annaetje, and Jacobus Alje 1752 



Oct. 


'26 


Mar. 


2 


Aug. 


11 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


21 



Oct. 


14 


Aug. 


26 


Dec. 


8 


May 


18 



Sctiraalentargh Reformed (Dutch) Church 

Marriage Records, 1724-1801. 



The Reformed Dutch Church at Schraaleuhurgh, iu Bergen County, was organ- 
ized in 1721. Until 1731 it was under the same pastorate as the Hackensack Church. 
It united with Parainus iu calling the Kev. Georgius 'Wilhelinus Maucius, December 
23, 1730. On August 13, 174S, Schraalenburgh was reunited with Hackensack in 
calling the Rev. John Henricus Goetschius, as colleague with the Rev. Antonius Cur- 
tenius, who had been in the latter church since 1730. Iu August, 1755, owing to a 
serious dissension in the denomination between the Coetus and the Conference par- 
ties, the two congregations split, part adhering to Dominie Goetschius, while another 
part} 7 called the Rev. Johannes Schuyler, whose formal call is dated May 17, 1756. 
He resigued in 1759, and for nine years Dom. Goetschius was the only regular minis- 
ter in the two villages. The Rev. Cornelius Blauw ministered to the other party, 
1763-1771, and the Rev. Warmoldus Kuypers, from 1771 until his death, Sept. 10, 
1797. Dom. Goetschius died about November 14, 1774. The Rev. Theodorick 
Romeyn succeeded Dom. Goetschius, 1774-1784, and was followed by the Rev. Solo- 
mon Froeligh, 1736-1826. The Rev. Mr. Kuypers was succeeded by the Rev. James 
V. C. Romeyn, 1799-1833. 

Because of the complicated relations of the Hackensack and Schraalenburgh con- 
gregations, the records of each supplement the other. 

The Schraalenburgh Church records have been well preserved, as is the rule with 
the early Dutch churches. They include 

Consistories— 1731, 1748, 1753-1765, 1784-1799. 

Members— 1733-1772, 1732-1801. 

Marriages— 1724-176S, 1784-1802. 

Baptisms— 1724-1801. 

All the records of the Schraalenburgh Church, carefully translated from the 
Dutch, were printed in 1891 by the Holland Society of New York, as Part II., Volume 
I., of the Collections of that Society. The marriage records herewith given are re- 
printed, by permission, from that volume For convenience of refereuce, however, 
they are here arranged in alphabetical order, males and females under the same 
alphabet. The full entry is given iu the case of the males; in the case of the females, 
only the names of the parties and the dates are given. 

For other information, the reader is referred to the introductory note to the Hack- 
ensack Church Marriage Records, on p. 467. 



5 1 6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

As to the meaning of Schraalenburgh (pronounced Skrawlenburg). In the Hol- 
land language, schraal means slender, thin, lean, poor, dry, hungry, empty, weak, 
feeble, scanty, sharp, hoarse, scarce, niggardly, etc. The name Schraalenburgh ap- 
parently signifies that the first settlers found it a difficult place in which to make a 
liviug, either from the poverty of the soil, or other adverse circumstances. It is not 
unlikely, however, that the name is simply a translation of an earlier Indian appella- 
tion, which may have been given from a single unhappy experience. A free render- 
ing would be " Hardscrabble, " a name often given to new settlements in New Jersey, 
and elsewhere in America. 

A list of unusual place-names found in the Hackensack Church records is given on 
page 468, with explanations. 

Here are some additional names of places, found in the Schraalenburgh records : 

Kakiat, Kakkiat, Kekeat, Kekkejet— now West New Hempstead, and Clarkstown, 
N. Y., just north of the Bergen County line. 

Kindekemek, Kenderjemak — Kinderkemak, near the northern line of Bergen 
County. 

Kil, de Groote — the Great Kill, or River. Hudson's, or perhaps the Hackensack, 
River. 

Klooster — Closter (cloister). 

Langheyland — Long Island. 

New Bridge — on the Hackensack River, about three miles above the village of 
Hackensack. 

Remebok — Ramapo. 

Teniefly — Tenafly; from the Dutch, t'eene vallei, or vlij; "at a meadow." A set- 
tlement between Hackensack and Euglewood. 

Totuwa — Totowa; the Indian name of a neighborhood partly in the northwestern 
part of the city of Paterson. and the adjacent Borough of Totowa. 

Vestsester — Westchester, 

Wesel — a neighborhood on the west side of the Passaic river, southeast of 
Paterson. 

Abbreviations. — y. m., jonge man, young man, bachelor; y. d., jonge dodder, 
young daughter, girl, spinster; b., born; 1., living; res., residence; a., announce- 
ment of the bauns; m., married; ent., entered, or recorded; w., widow or widower. 

A 

Aarjansen, Annetjen, and Reinier Carnsnenga, Sept. 2 M. 1738 Oct. 12 

Ackerman, Rachel, and John A. Westervelt 1784 Mar. 27 

Adrianse, Gozen, w., res. at Staten Island, and Cornelia Bauta, w. , 

residence at Hakkensak M. with license 1743 June 16 

Aeenmebs, Catryutje, and John Post 1753 July 11 

Akkerman, Aaltje, and Audries Hoppe 1790 April 24 

Akkerman, Aaltje, and Cornelius Van Hooru. 1790 Aug. 12 

Akkerman, Abraham, y. m., and Lydia De Moree, y. d 1753 April 29 

Akkerman, Abram J., y. m., b. and 1. at Peremis, and Hester De 

Marest, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. July 31 A. 1746 June 14 

Akkerman, Aunaetje, and David Caininel. 1760 May 26 



SC1IRAALENBURG1I CI II RCH MARRtAGE RECORDS. 5 I 7 

Akkerman, Oaty, and David Bogert 1793 

Akkerman, Cornelius, y. m., and Lena Voorhees y. d 1753 

Akkerinnn, Cornelius, and Caty Berdan 1799 

Akkerman, David y. in., 1>. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Jannetjen Van 

Orden, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, in. May 10 1734 

Akkerman, David, y. m., and Nieltje Rykiunn, y. d 1763 

Akkerman, David, and Alida Kuyper 1795 

Akkerman, Galiu, y. m., and Aunaetje Westervelt, y. d., both b. and 

1. at Hakkensak, m. Oct. 20. A. 1744 

Akkerman, Jacobus, and Sarah Berdan 1798 

Akkerman, Jannatje, and Egbert Vanzaan 1791 

Akkerman, Jantjie, and Peter Rithau 1766 

Akkerman, Johannes, y. m., and Aeltjin Kuyper, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Schralenburgh, m. Oct. 18 A. 1715 

Akkerinau, Johannes G , and Maria Haring 1791 

Akkerman, John, and Cathryntje Vanvoorheese 1791 

Akkerman, Louwrens, Jr., b. at Hakkensak, and Annaatje Peek, y. d., 

b. and 1. at Schralenburgh 1763 

Akkerman, Maria, and Albert Kuyper 1791 

Akkerman, Marytjin, and Cornells De Maree M. 1742 

Akkerman, Niclaes, y. m., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Maria DeMar- 

est, y. d , b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Nov. 25 A. 1747 

Akkerman, Peter, and Jenny Goetschius . ... 1801 

Akkerman, Rachel, and Hans Van Der Hoeve 1756 

Akkerman, 1 Sally, and Evert, Rykman 1763 

Aljee, Sarah, and Joseph Rome 1796 

Allmeu, John, y. in., and Maria Veltman, y. d 1766 

Alye, Hannis, y. in., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Aunaetje Bissit, y. d., 

b. at Staten Island, res. Hakkensak, m. Mar. 13 A. 1746 Feb 

Auderson, David, y. m., of Schralenburgh, and Geertje Nagel, y. d. , 

of Tappau 1792 

Anderson, Elizabeth, and Audries Zabriskie 1793 

Anderson, John, and Maria Bogert 1792 

Anneli, Pegge, and Egbert Van der Hoeve 1756 

Applebee, James, y. m., and Martje Van Blerkom, y. d 1753 

Ariaase, Daniel, y. in., and Christina Kool, both of Clooster 1788 

B 

Bank, James, w. , and Mary Edsel, w 1 753 

Banta, Albert, y. m., and Leentje Voorhees, y. d 1756 

Banta, Altje, and Dirk Wanemaeker 1765 

Banta, Auaatje, and Simon Demorest 1787 

Banta, Aunaetje, and Hendrik Heering 1763 

Banta, Antje, and Cornelius Bogart 1765 

i Sally Stillewill, wid. of Hannis Akkerman. See p. 470. 



Dec. 


15 


May 


6 


Jan. 


3 


April 


13 


April 


5 


Sept. 


20 


Sept. 


1 


May 


27 


Oct. 


1 


Sept. 


8 


Sept, 


21 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


2 


May 


28 


Feb. 


23 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


17 


June 


6 


July 


4 


Jan. 


9 


Aug. 


28 


Mar. 


16 



Sept. 


21 


July 


21 


Sept. 


20 


Jan. 


27 


May 


19 


July 


12 


Aug. 


14 


Nov. 


28 


April 


19 


Dec. 


8 


July 


10 


July 


14 



5 1 8 new Jersey colonial documents. 

Banta, Antje, and Wouterus Van Ordeu , 1753 

Banta, Antjen, and Jan Bogert M. 17-16 

Banta, Catrina, and Johannes Camcba 1751 

Banta, Cornelia, and Gozeu Adrianse M. 1743 

Banta. Cornelia, aud Willem Yerbnrg 1758 

Banta, Cornelius, and Lydia Vanzaan M. 1791 

Banta, Daniel, y. m., aud Maria Yoorbees, y. d. , both b. and 1. at 

Hackensack, m. Mar. — 1781 

Banta, David, aud Bachel Yau Giesen 1799 

Banta, Dirick, y. in., and Maria Demorest, y. d., both of Schralen- 

burgh, in. June 5 . 1791 

Banta, Ef je, and Hendrick Lutkens 1791 

Banta, Elisabeth, aud Isac Stagg 1763 

Banta, Heleua, aud John Christie 1791 

Banta, Helena, and David Westervelt 1791 

Bauta. Hendrick, y. m,, b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, and Rachel 

Brouwer, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Aug. 12. A. 1738 

Bauta, Hendrik, y. in., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Sara Heerdiu, 

y. d., b. Raritans, res Hakkensak, m. Aug. 8 A. 1716 

Banta, Hendrik, y. m., and Johaua Edsel, y. d 1766 

Bauta, Hester, and Niclaes Pryer 1769 

Banta, Hester, aud Joseph Prim 1750 

Bauta, Jacob, y. m , aud Claasje Yau Winkelen, y. d 1751 

Bauta, Jacob, y. m., aud Lena Christeen, y. d 1756 

Banta, Jan, y. m., b. at Peremis, res. Hakkensak, and Margrietje 

Durje, y. d., b. aud 1. at Schralenburgh, tn. Dec. 18 A. 1717 

Banta, Jan, y. m., aud Trientje De Marest, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, m. Dec. 10 A. 1747 

Bauta, Jau, y. m., and Sara Demurest, y. d., both b. aud 1. at Schral- 
enburgh, m. Sept. 26 1740 

Bauta, Jau, y. m., and Autje De Moree, y. d 1759 

Bauta, Janet je, aud Koeleph Bogart 1766 

Banta, Jannatje, aud Albert Demorest 1791 

Bauta, Jannetje, and Jan Van Ripen 1756 

Banta, Jany, and Jac >b Jphanessen Westerveld 1768 

Bauta, Johaunes, and Tryutje Duryee 1790 

Banta, John, and Sophia Westervelt 1802 

Banta, Lena, and Frerik Webbers M. 1736 

Bauta, Maretjen, and Petrus De Baau M. 1743 

Banta, Margreta, aud Douwe R. Westervelt 1802 

Banta, Margrietje, and Niclaes Toers M. 1748 

Banta, Maria, and Gredeon Verveeleu 1768 

Banta, Mary, and Jacob Vreelaut 1760 

Banta, Man t je, aud Jan Berdan 1758 

Bauta, Marytje, and Guiljaein Bjogert 1725 

Banta, Peter D., and Sarah D. Froeligh 1796 



Dec. 16 
April 12 
July 22 
June 16 
April 9 
Oct. 1 

Feb. 21 
April 27 

May 7 

Dec. 14 

Sept. 28 

Jau. 28 

June 22 

July 15 



Juue 


11 


June 


15 


Jan. 


8 


Aug. 


10 


Sept. 


29 


July 


8 


Nov. 


14 


Nov. 


7 


Aug. 


23 


May 


27 


July 


24 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


20 


Oct. 


15 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


21 


Oct. 


29 


Aug. 


5 


June 


12 


July 


24 


May 


5 


Nov. 


6 


April 


9 


Mar. 


28 


May 


16 



SCIIRAALEN1U R<;il CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



5'9 



Bamn, Rachel, and Peter Bogart. 1759 

jjanta, [Rachel |, ' ana Theod. WiHemsen 1767 

Bantu, Rachel, and Petrua Demarest 1795 

Bantu, Samuel, y. in., and Evaetje Berdan, y. d 1758 

Banta, Samuel, and L 1a Demarest 1795 

Banta, Smtje, and Abraham Vander Beck 1755 

Banta, Sibe, and Rachel L >ots 1763 

Banta, Svbe, y. in., and Grietjin De Marest, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, m. Nov. 11 A. 1735 

Banta, Thomas, y. 111., born at llak'k, and Anna Stillevil, y. d 1761 

Banta, Totna-s, y. m., and Geertruy ter Hune, y. d 1766 

Banta, Tryntje, and Henry Day 17'J1 

Banta, Wiert, and Elizabeth Ekker M. 1790 

Banta, Willemtje, and Samuel De Morest 1767 

Banta, Zybe, y. m., and Lea Lizier, y. d., both 1. at Hakkensak, 

m. Sept. 10 A. 1745 

Bartolf, Henry, and Maria Brinkerhoff 1800 

Bartolf, John, aud Lydia Leydekker M. 1787 

Beardsley, Henry, and Charlotte Coldon. 1796 

Beck, Sarah, and Jacobus Demarest, Jr 1704 

Beem, Jacobus, and Adriaua Hoppe. . . M. 1 790 

Beer, Hester, and M*rte ter Huyne 1759 

Beer, Maria, and Jacob Bogart 1759 

B^gon, Johanna, and Jacob Van Saan ... 1754 

Belb, Johannes, y. in. , and Margarith Remsen, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Tappau, in Orange County 1761 

Bell, Margrietje, and Abraham Conclin 1750 

Bell, Sarah, and Jacob Wilse. 1802 

Bense, Johaunis, of Harlem, N. Y., y. m. , and Elisabet Leydekker, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Hackensack 1724 

Bensen, C itlina, aud Jacobus Brinkerhoff M. 1792 

Benson, John J., y. m., and Maria Westervelt, y. d., both b. aud 1. at 

Schraalenburgb, m. May 15 1784 

Bensse, Catlyntje, and Isac La Meter 1756 

Bensse, Gerret, y. m., and Eva Berdan, y. d . . 1754 

Bentse, Rebecca, and Mathias Vreedeuburg ... ... 1765 

Benzaken, Symmey, aud Charles Fullwood (not married) 1791 

Berdau, Caty, and Cornelius Akkermau 1799 

Berdan, Eva, and Gerret Bensse 1754 

Berdan, Evaetje, and Samuel Banta. . 1758 

Berdan, Geertje, aud Peter Van Vorheese 1794 

Berdau, Geesje, and Cornelius Van Saan 1761 

Berdan, Jan, y. m., and Marytje Banta, y. d 1758 

Berdau, Jau, y. m., b. at Hakkensak, aud Henk3 r e Van Dien 1760 



Mar. 


22 


June 


22 


Mar. 


14 


May 


4 


Feb. 


28 


Mar. 


31 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


7 


May 


7 


Jan. 


23 


July 


28 


Sept. 


7 


April 


12 


Sept. 


12 


Juue 


14 


April 


28 


Oct. 


16 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


27 


April 


3 


Aug. 


15 


Aug. 


18 


Oct. 


27 


May 


3 


Aug. 


25 


April 


24 


Jan. 


11 


Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


9 


Jan. 


28 


Jau. 


3 


Feb. 


:i 


May 


4 


Feb. 


2 


July 


2 


April 


9 


Juue 


10 



l Blank in the record; supplied from the Banta Genealogy. 



Sept. 


14 


May 


27 


Sept. 


11 


Nov. 


18 


April 


15 


July 


13 


J uly 


27 


Mar. 


5 


Mar. 


13 


Dec. 


14 


Sept. 


12 


Oct. 


10 


Oct. 


9 


Oct. 


9 


June 


7 


May 


23 


Oct. 


19 


Aug. 


23 



520 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Berdan, Margrieije, and Jacob van der Beeck 1768 

Berdan, Sarah, and Jacobus Akkermau 1798 

Berdeu, Sara, and Poulns Van Der Beek 17G0 

Berry, Hanna, and Thomas Viel 1716 

Berry, Philip, w., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Catharin Van Wiukel, 

y. d., 1. at Wesel 1761 

Berlolf, Markyie, and Yuliaara ter Huin 1760 

Bertholf, Martyntje, and Jacob Houtwater 1728 

Bevaf, Samiwel Gearves, and Auuatje Salle, at her home 1760 

Bissit, Annaetje, and Hannis Alye M. 1746 

Blanchard, Polly, and William Campbell 1793 

Blanchard, Susanna, and Isaac P. Vanderbeek. 1799 

Blauvelt, Abraham, y. m., of Tappan, and Martyntje Demarest, y. d., 

b. and 1. at Hakkensak 1724 

Blauvelt, Isaac, and Debora Fowler 1800 

Blauvelt, Johannes Abrahamze, y. m., b. aud 1. at Tappan, aud Rachel 

Davidze Demarest, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak 1725 

Blauvelt, Margrietje. and Theunis Helling 1728 

Blauwveld, Daniel, y. m., born at Tappan, and Elisabeth Demarest, b. 

and 1. at Schralenburgh 1762 

Blauwvelt, Elizabeth, and Barent Kool 1793 

Blauwvelt, Maria, and Cornelius Heniom 1750 

Blinkerhof, Dirk, y. m., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, aud Sara Van der 

Linde, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh 17G4 Aug. 28 

Blinkerhof, Joris, y. m., and Neeltjin Leydekker, j. d., both b. and 1. 

at Hakkensak, m. Mar. 26 1742 Feb. 27 

Blinkerhof, Margrietje, and Samuel De Marest M. 1747 Nov. 19 

Bodett, Sara, and Benjamin Westerveld 1768 Oct. 29 

Bogart, Albert, y. m., and Sara De Marest, y. d , both b. and 1. at 

Hakkensak, m. Feb. 17 1743 Jan. 22 

Bogart, Cornelius, y. m , aud Neeltje Lydekker, y. d 1761 Nov. 27 

Bogart, Cornelius, y. m., and Antje Banta, y. d 1765 July 14 

Bogart, Elisabeth, and Daniel Korsen 1 757 Feb. 1 8 

Bogart, Isaak, y. m., b. aud 1. at Hakkensak, and Lea De Marest, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. June 4 .1742 May 1 

Bogart, Jacob Ch., y. m., and Sara Voorhees, y. d 1756 Nov. 28 

Bogart, Jan, y. in., aud Margrietje De Marest, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Hakkensak, m. May 1 A. 1742 Mar. 28 

Bogart, Peter, y. in., aud Rachel Banta, y. d 1759 Mar. 22 

Bogert, Aaltje, and Thomas Brickel 1800 Nov. 28 

Bogert, Albert, y. in., and Sophia Westervelt, y. d., both of Schralen- 
burgh 1787 Aug. 9 

Bogert, Anuaatje, and Mathens Demorest 1794 June 22 

Bogert, Antje, and Stephen Westervelt 1798 Nov. 25 

Bogert, Cornells, y. m., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Elizabeth Zabor- 

isky, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Sept. 26 A. 1739 Aug. 26 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



521 



Bogert, David, and Caty Akkerman . 1793 Dec. 1 5 

Bogert, Dirioa, and Cornelius 1). Westervelt 1802 Sept. 4 

Bogert, Isaac, y. m., and Margreta Duryee, both of Schralenburgh. . .1788 May 31 
Bogert, Jacob, y. m., b. and 1. at Peremis, and Maria Beer, y. d., b. at 

Hackensack 1759 Nov. 27 

Bogert, Jau, y. in., and Antjen Banta, y. d., both b. and 1. at Hakkeu- 

sak, m. April 12 A. 1746 Mar. 15 

Bogert, John, y. m., aud Maria Kool, y. d.. of Schralenburgh 1793 May 4 

Bogert, Margreta, and Cornelius Leydekker M. 1787 Jan. 

Bogert, Margreta, and William Campbell M. 1788 July 1 

Bogert, Margreta, and Petrus Brower 1791 May 21 

Bogert, Maria, and Stephen Ter Huyn 1744 Nov. 4 

Bogert, Maria, and John Auderson 1792 Sept. 20 

Bogert, Maria, and Michael Selyer 1798 June 14 

Bogert, Matheus, y. m., b. at Clooster, and Maria Demarest, y. d., b. 

and 1. at New Bridge M. 1786 Nov. 24 

Bogert, Neeltje, aud Ds. Peter D. Froeligh 1802 Oct. 28 

Bogert, Peter, and Maria Simonson 1800 Oct. 12 

Bogert, Petrus, and Caty Vank, w. of Abraham Brouwer 1790 Nov. 4 

Bogart, Roeleph, y. in., and Janetje Banta, y. d 1766 July 24 

Bogert, Sophia, and Peter Simonse Demarest 1762 May 3 

Bogert, Sophia, and Jacobus Demarest 1799 May 11 

Bogert, Stephanas, and Beeletje Westervelt . ....... 1800 April 14 

Bogert, Willem, and Elizabeth Demarest 1796 Mar. 28 

Boogert, Guiljaem, y. m., and Marytje Banta, v. d. , b. aud 1. at Hak- 

kensak 1725 Mar. 28 

Boogert, Heudrik, and Margreta Westervelt 1786 Nov. 20 

Boogert, John, y. m., aud Elizabeth Brinkerhoff, y. d., both of the 

Schralenburgh Congregation 1730 Aug. 6 

Boogert, Maritje, and Abraham Stek 1732 June 23 

Boogert, Martyntje, and Abraham Hiring 1725 Mar. 28 

Bordet, Cathariua, aud Edward Boylstoon , 1763 May 2 

Boskerk, David, y. m., and Rachel Van Hoorn, y. d., both I. at Hak- 

kensak, a. by the Lutherens M. 1745 Sept. 27 

Boskerk, Laurenes, and Catharinea Terhune M. 1790 Jan. 30 

Boss, Abraham, and Klaasje Hagewoudt 1802 June 7 

Boss, Willemtje, aud Henry Erel 1759 Dec. 28 

Bosskerken, Maria, and Samuel Quakkenbos 1757 April 11 

Boylstoon, Edward, and Catharina Bordet 1763 May 2 

Brain, John, y. m., and Lena Erwerseu, y. d 1760 Mar. 16 

Brasher, Sarah, 1 and Samuel Kool , M. 1792 Sept. 17 

Bratt, Vrouwtje, and Robert Eerhart 1760 June 30 

Bremer, Hauua, and John Welkerwan 1762 Jan. 1 1 

Brevoort, Catharina, and Dr. James S. Cannon 1796 Oct. 6 

1 Blank in the record. In the baptismal records of the Hackensack and Schraalenburgh 

churches the name is given as Sarah Brijdtshijt. Brysey, Brvtsv. 
35 



522 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Brevoort, Margreta, and Albert Kogh 1798 

Brevoort, Marin, and Jacob C. Zabriskie 1797 

Brickel, Thomas, and Aaltje Bogert. . . 1800 

Brigs, Rachel, and Casparus Mabee 1784 

Briukerhof, Alida, and Ds.'- Charles Hardenbergh 1802 

Briukerhof, Jacob, y. m., and Antje Voorhees, y. d 1719 

Brinkerhof, Jacobus, y. m., and Catryntje Van Voorhesen, y. d. ... 1767 

Briukerhoff, Albert, and Geestje Van Voorhesen 179G 

Briukerhoff, Beeletje, and Nicasie Van Voorhesen 1797 

Briukerhoff, Caty, aud Cornelius Leydekker 1790 

Briukerhoff, Elizabeth, aud John Boogert 1790 

Briukerhoff, Jacobus, aud Catlina Bensen, w. of De la Meter. .... M. 1792 

Brinkerhoff, Maria, and Heury Bartolf 1800 

Briukerhoff, Niclaes, y. m., aud Styutie Van Voorhees, y. d 1762 

Briukerhoff, Siba, y. in., of Hackeusack, aud Anuaatje Vau Voorheese, 

y. d., of Schraleuburgh, Nov. 26 M. 1791 

Broadet, Catriua, aud Lewis De Boi 1758 

Brouwer, Abraham, y. m., aud Caty Vouk, y. d 1763 

Brouwer, Abraham, aud Maria Hofman 1795 

Brouwer, David, and Sophia Demorest 1793 

Brouwer, Derica, and Peter Christopher. . . .... 1793 

Brouwer, Hester, aud Cornelius Vauzaau. . 1791 

Brouwer, Jacob, y. in., aud Jauuetje Vander Beek, y. d 1753 

Brouwer, Jan, y. m., and Rachel Van Brakelen, y. d 1754 

Brouwer, Jau, and Marretje Hoppe, Aug. 29 M. 1790 

Brouwer, Johannes, y. m., 1. at Bergen, aud Francyutje Post, y. d., 1. 

at Euglish Neighborhood 1790 

Brouwer, Johu, and Phoebe Godwin . . . M. 1792 

Brouwer, Lea, and David Vauzaau 1791 

Brouwer, Lea, and James Stagg 1765 

Brouwer, Lea, aud David Edward M. 1739 

Brouwer, Maria Petrus, and Cornelius Taalmau M. 1743 

Brouwer, Marytjiu, and Gerrid Westervelt . . M. 1743 

Brouwer, Petrus, y. in., aud Dina DeGroot, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Hakkensack 1724 

Brouwer, Rachel, and Hendrick Bauta . . M. 1738 

Brouwer, Samuel, y. m., b. aud 1. here, aud Marytje Hartje, y. d., b. 

aud 1. at Naejek (Nyack) 1728 

Brouwer, Susaua, aud Samuel De Moree 1768 

Brower, Abraham, aud Elizabeth Devoe M. 1788 

Brower, Abraham, and Elizabeth Hoppe 1798 

Brower, Bregge, and Guliaam De Morest M. 1784 

Brower, Hester, and Joseph Pierce 1797 

Brower, Jenuy, and Cornelius Vau Hoorn M. 1789 

2 Dominus - pastor or teacher- 



Feb. 


25 


Dec. 


20 


Nov. 


28 


July 


31 


Oct. 


28 


April 


21 


Aug. 


28 


May 


29 


May 


fc9 


Oct. 


23 


Aug. 


6 


Aug. 


25 


April 


12 


July 


31 


Dec. 


17 


Nov. 


2 


April 


3 


Feb. 


1 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


3 


May 


28 


April 


21 


April 


15 


Sept. 


25 


June 


5 


Mar. 


4 


.Mar. 


5 


Oct. 


13 


Dec. 


13 


April 


1 


Sept. 


11 


May 


30 


Aug. 


12 


Nov. 


9 


Dee. 


1 


Feb. 


16 


Jan. 


11 


April 


12 


Nov. 


20 


Dec. 


31 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 523 

Brower, Nelly, and John Mercereau 1705 July 12 

Brower, Petrus, y. m., and Margreta Bogert, both of the Hackensack 

Church, May 21. M. 1791 June 21 

Browu, Hendrik, of Ramapogh, y. 111., and Marin Nos, y. d., also of 

Ramapogh, Oct. 19 M. 1792 Nov. 29 

C 

Cadinns, Catrina, and Cornelius Vreelant 1756 Dec. 8 

Carabel, James, y. m , 1. in Queens Co., N. Y., and Sara Demarest, 

y. d. , 1. at Schralenburgh M. with a license 1745 

Camcha, Johannes, w., and Catrina Bant a, w 1751 

Caincha, Lena, and John Ekker 1759 

Cammel, Christian, y. in., and Dirkje Verveelen, y. d 1766 

Canimel, David, y. m., and Auaetje Akkerman, }'. d ... 1760 

Cauinienga, Reinier, y. m., b. at New Utrecht, L I., and 1. at Schral- 
enburgh, aud Aunetjeu Aarjanseu, b. on York Island and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, in. Oct. 12 1738 

Cammel, Sam., y. m., and Cornelia PeMore, y. d 1767 

Cammel, Thomas, y. in. , and Maria Watson, y. d 1765 

Campbell, David, y. in., aud Elisabeth Lazhier, y. d., both of Schral- 
enburgh M. 1787 

Campbell, Elizabeth, and Jacob Woertendyck M. 1792 

Campbell, Elizabeth, and Rynier Earl M. 1789 

Campbell, Peter, and Maria Westervelt 1801 

Campbell, Simon, and Alida Lashier 1800 

Campbell, Thomas, and Catharine Spier, w. of — Swartwoud. ..M. 1793 

Campbell, William, and Margreta Bogert M. 1788 

Campbell, William, and Polly Blanchard 1793 

Cannon, Dr. James S., aud Catharina Brevoort 1796 

Canselje, John Dolf, and Elizabeth Devoe 1796 

Carlock, Coenraad, and Peggy Helm M. 1791 

Carlock, Hendrik, aud Peggy Miller 1795 

Carnwel, Jany, and David De Maree 1758 

Cassarje, M., aud Abraham Hardenberg 1752 

Christi, Antje, and David Danielse Demarest 1730 

Christi, Antje, and Coruelis Stegge M. 1734 

Christi, Grietje, and Daniel Westervelt 1766 

Christi, Laa, and Jacobus Van Orden M. 1733 

Christi, Lena, aud Jacob Quakeuboss 1755 

Christie, Antje, and John Meyer 1799 

Christie, Dirica, and Abraham Demarest 1797 

Christie, John, y. in., aud Helena Bauta, y. d., both of the Schralen- 
burgh Church, Jan. 28 M. 1791 

Christie, Margreta, and Aary Westervelt 1802 

Christie, Nietje, and John Folk 1802 

Christie, Sarah, and John Demorest M. 1788 



Dec. 


26 


July 


22 


May 


26 


Aug. 


25 


May 


26 


Sept. 


2 


May 


22 


Dec. 


24 


Sept. 


27 


Dec. 


7 


July 


3 


May 


24 


July 


5 


Feb. 


2 


July 


1 


Dec. 


14 


Oct. 


6 


April 


30 


Nov. 


19 


Mar. 


27 


Mar. 


27 


June 


1 


Sept. 


12 


Mar. 


7 


May 


25 


Aug. 


9 


Nov. 


10 


Nov. 


30 


Sept. 


9 


Feb. 


17 


Feb. 


19 


July 


3 


May 


13 



524 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Christie, William, and Catalina Westervelt 1797 

Christie, William J., and Sarah Durie 1796 

Christie, William J., aud Tyne Durie 1802 

Christeen, Lena, and Jacob Bauta 1756 

Christeen, Sara, and Abraham Mattanje 1754 

Christen, Maria, and Philip Marein M. 1737 

Christopher, Peter, and Derica Brouwer .... 1793 

Christy, Elizabeth, and Pieter Reydoud M. 1742 

Christy, Joannes, y. m., and Beeletje De Maree, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Schralenburg, m. Sept. 14 A. 1733 

Codden, Willem, y. in., b. at Philipsburg, and Maria De Morest, b. 

and 1. at Hakkensak 1731 

Coldon, Charlotte, and Henry Beardsley 1796 

Cole, Sarah, aud David Van Hoorn 1800 

Collins, Abraham, and Caty Hooglaud 1795 

Conckliu, David, aud Femmetje Conckliu M. 1792 

Conckliu, Femmetje, and David Conckliu M. 1792 

Conckliu, John, and Sophia Pearsels 1797 

Conclin, Abraham, y. m., and Margrietje Bell, y. d. . . 1750 

Couklin, Charles, aud Elizabeth King M. 1793 

Conklin, Jacob, and Mary Quidon 1794 

Couklin, Mary, aud Hendrik Shuwert. . . 1756 

Cool, Abraham, y. m., and Mary Westervelt, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburg • • 1731 

Cool, Barent, y. m., b. aud 1. at Tappau, aud Christina Doolhagen, 

y. d., b. New York and 1. at Tappau ... 1725 

Cool, Bareut, y. in., both b. aud 1. at Schraleuburgh, and Sarah Deda- 

rier, y. d., b. and 1. at Hackiusack, July 15 M. 1784 

Cooper, Hanna, and Richard Cooper M. 1787 

Cooper, Richard, aud Hanna Cooper, both of Schraleuburgh M. 1787 

Cornel, Albert, y. m., aud Sarah Groot, y. d., b. Kiudergemek 1763 

Cornell, Rachel, and Jacob Kool 1751 

Coulbag, Cathariu, aud George Grotius 1763 

Couweuhoveu, Jacob, aud Alida Westervelt 1796 

Couwenhoven, Rachel, and Jacobus Westervelt M. 1792 

Cristy, Daniel, y. m., and Feitje De Maree, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schraalenburgh, m. July 26 A. 1745 

Cristy, David, y. m., and Weybrig Van Orden, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Schraleuburgh, m. April 23 A. 1741 

Cristy, Rachel, and David Edward M. 1745 

Crom, Flores, y. m. , and Maria Kool, y. d 1749 

Cryst}', Willem, y. m., and Catalyntjen De Maree, y. d., botb b. aud 1. 

at Schraleuburgh, m. Sept. 20 A. 1743 

Cuyper, Cornelius, y. in., b. at Schralenburgh, aud Nelly Stoutenburg, 

y. d., b. N. Y., and 1. at Schraleuburgh, April 10 M. 1784 



Nov. 18 

Oct. 15 

Nov. 27 

July 8 

June 28 

Sept. 23 

Nov. 3 

May 6 

Aug. 18 



Dec. 


11 


June 


14 


Feb. 


15 


Feb. 


1 


Dec. 


2 


Dec. 


2 


Mar. 


4 


Aug. 


18 


Jan. 


27 


Feb. 


2 


May 


24 



Oct. 29 

May 1 

July 31 

May 13 

May 13 

Jan. 25 

Feb. 7 

May 7 

May 17 

Mar. 23 

June 22 

Mar. 28 

July 14 

Dec. 29 

Aug. 20 

May 9 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 525 

Cuyper, Klaes, y. m., b. and 1. at Neejek (Nyack), and Elena Wester- 

velt, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak 1725 Nov. 27 

D 

Davenport, Isaac, and Efje Pool . 1799 April 22 

Davenport, Jacobus, y. m., and Rachel Hardenberg, y. d ........... . 1759 Nov. 8 

David, Maria, and Jacobus Lssier 1732 Oct. 26 

Day, Ansetje, and John VVestervelt 1766 Mar. 2 

Day, David, y. m , and Sara Moor, y. d 1767 Nov. ' 12 

Day, Henry, y. m., and Tryntje Banta, y. d., both of the Schralen- 

burgh Church, May 7 M. 1791 June 5 

Day, John, y. in., and Jane Lee, y. d 1761 Aug. 13 

Day, Lisabeth, and Sam'l Day 1759 Jan. 4 

Day, Maria, and Jacobus Quick 1759 April 3 

Day, Maria, and Jacobus Leydekker M. 1790 Sept. 25 

Day, Nathaniel, y. m., and Maria Van Wagenen, of Schralenburgh M 1792 Dec. 1 

Day, Samuel, and SantjeSisko, w. of John Ree, of Schralenburgh M. 1791 Sept. 4 

Day, Sam'l, y. in., and Lisabeth Day, y. d 1759 Jan. 4 

Day, Willetn, y. m., and Margrietje De Groot, y. d 1753 Jan. 18 

Day, Willem, y. m., and Lisabeth Houser, y. d 1759 Jan. 4 

Day, Willem, y. m., and Autje Mash, y. d 1762 May 31 

De Baan, Christina, and Hillebrant Lesier 1728 June 29 

Debaan, Christeyaan, y. m., b. at Schralenburgh, and Rachel Helm, 

y. d. , b. at Peremis 1761 Nov. 7 

De Baan, Petrus, y. in., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, and Maretjen 

Bauta, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Aug. 5 . . . . A. 1743 July 9 

Debaan, Petrus, and Lena Van Voorhesen 1794 Sept. 13 

De Baeu, Margrietje, and Theodoras Remsen M. 1738 June 23 

De Boi, Lewis, y. in., and Catrina Broadet, y. d 1758 Nov. 2 

Dedarier, Sarah, and Barent Cool 1784 July 31 

Dee, Jauetje, Aethiopes, l and Jacobus De Groot 1768 Mar. 17 

Dee, Santje, Athiopes, 1 and Sem Sisko 1764 Oct. 20 

DeGrauw, Heukje, and Johaunes Luttlet. ... 1766 July 21 

DeGroot, Dina, and Petrus Brouwer 1724 May 30 

De Groot, Diua, and Benjamin Lezier M. 1734 Feb. 8 

Degroot, Jacob, and Rachel Rafter 1799 July 1 

De Groot, Jacobus, y. m. , and Jauetje Dee, y. d., Aethiopes 1768 Mar. 17 

De Groot, Margrietje, and Willem Day 1753 Jan. 18 

De Groot, Marytje, and Sam' Moor 1760 Feb. 10 

Degroot, Nicolaes, and Gertruy Vausys 1794 Jan. 25 

De Groot, Rachel, and Marmeduk Erel 1753 Mar. 8 

De Klark, Daniel, y. in., and Sara Nagel, y. d 1766 Sept. 26 

De La Meter, John, y. m., and Sytje Maibie, y. d. . . . 1750 Aug. 15 

DeMare, Guliam, y. m., and Feitjen Van Der Liude, y. d., both b. 

and 1. at Hakkensak, in. Sept. 29 1737 Sept. 3 

1 Negro. 



Sept. 


3 


Sept. 


14 


Sept. 


20 


Aug. 


21 


July 


26 


Sept. 


29 


May 


15 


Sept. 


9 


Oct. 


16 


Sept. 


16 


April 


12 


Sept. 


28 


Oct. 


12 


Nov. 


26 



526 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

DeMare, Pieter, y. m., b. and 1. at Schralen burgh, and Jannetjen Van 

Der Linde, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Sept. 29 1737 

De Maree, Beeletje, and Joannes Christy M. 1733 

De Maree, Catalyntjen, and Willem Crysty M. 1743 

De Maree, Gornelis, y. m., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, and Marytjin 

Akkermau, y. d., b. and res. at Peremus, ru. Sept. 29 1742 

De Maree, Feitje, and Daniel Cristy M. 1745 

De Maree, Lea, and Samuel De Maree M. 1742 

De Maree, Samuel, y. m., and Lea De Miree, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, m. Sept. 29 1742 

Demarest, Abraham, and Dirica Christie 1797 

Demarest, Albert, and Catharina Vanvoorhese 1802 

De Marest, Annaetjen, and lloelof Van Der Linde M. 1743 

De Marest, Anuetje, and Niclaes Pietersen M. 1748 

Demarest, Beeletje, and Pieter Houtwater 1728 

De Marest, Billetjiu, and Niclaes Roinein M. 1739 

Demarest, Daniel, and Hellena Van Voorheesen, w. of John Hoppe. . . 1790 
Demarest, Daniel, y. m., and Jantje Van Boskerk, y. d., both b. and 

1. at Schralenburgh 1761 Mar. 13 

Demarest, Daniel, y. m. , b. at Schralenburgh, and Sophia Westerveld, 

y. d., b. at Kendergemak 1762 Aug. 26 

Demarest, David, w. of Marytje Lesier, and Cathrina Van Houten, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Tappan 1729 Jan. 8 

De Marest, David, y. m., and Maritjen De Marest, y. d. , both b. and 

1. at Schralenburgh, m. Oct. 29 A. 1736 Sept. 26 

De Marest, David, y. in., and Catherine Seckor, y. d., both 1. at Hak- 
kensak M. with license 1748 July 10 

Demarest, David, w., b. and 1. at Schraalenburgh, and Anaatje ter 

Hum 1759 Aug. 7 

Demarest, David, y. m., b. and 1. at Schralenburg, and Jantje Zebriske, 

y. d., b. audi, at Peremis 1761 Mar. 13 

Demarest, David, y. m., b. at Schralenburgh, and Maria Ter Huin, 

y. d., b. at Peremis 1766 June 17 

Demarest, David B., and Ester Vauzaan 1798 Dec. 31 

Demarest, David Danielse, y. in., and Antje Christi, y. d., both b. and 

1. here 1730 Sept. 12 

Demarest, David D., y. m. , and Maria Van Orden, y. d., both of 

Schralenburgh 1789 

De Marest, Elizabeth, and Willem Kempbeel M. 1736 

Demarest, Elisabeth, and Daniel Blauweld 1762 

De Marest, Elizabeth, and Jan Endersen M. 1736 

Demarest, Elizabeth, and James Westervelt 1789 

Demarest, Elizabeth, and Willem Bogert 1796 

De Marest, Elsjin, and Niclaes De Marest M. 1748 

De Marest, Feytjen, and Jacobus De Marest M. 1743 



June 


19 


Aug. 


19 


May 


23 


Jan. 


■211 


Aug. 


2 


Mar. 


28 


July 


10 


Sept. 


16 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



527 



Demarest, Gilliam, y. in., and Lea Goetscbius, both of the Schraleu- 
burgh Church 1791 May 21 

De Marest, Grietjiu, and Sybe Bauta M. 1735 Nov. 14 

De Marest, Hester, aud Abram J. Akkerman M. 1746 July 31 

Demarest, Jacobus, aud Sophia Bogert 179'.) May 1 1 

Deuiarest, Jacobus, aud Helena Deruorest. 1791 April 20 

Demarest, Jacobus, y. tu., aud Maria Westervelt, y. d. , both of Schral- 
euburgh 1 787 May 29 

De Marest, Jacobus, y. in., b. aud 1. at Schraleuburgh, and Feytjen 

De Marest, y. d., b. aud 1. at Hakkeusak, m. Sept. 16 A. 1743 Aug. 20 

Demarest, Jacobus, Jr., y. m., b. at Hakkeusak, and Sarah Beck. b. 

at Scbralenburgh 1764 April 18 

Demarest, Jenuy, aud Cornelius Meyer 179-3 May 30 

Demarest, John, aud Hauuah Lasbier 1800 Dec. 3 1 

Demarest, Juliaam, y. m., b. at Schraleuburgh, aud Susanna Rethau, 

y. d., b. at Peremis 1761 Mar. 13 

Demarest, Lea, and Roelof Westervelt ... 1731 May 15 

Demarest, Lea, aud Samuel Davidz. Demarest 1732 Sept. 16 

De Marest, Lea, and Isaak Bogart M. 1742 June 4 

Demarest, Lea, and Jacobus Quackenbos . 

Demarest, Lea, and Samuel Bauta. 1795 Feb. 28 

De Marest, Lidia, and Roelof Romein . . M. 1715 Aug. 16 

Demarest, Margaret, and Cornelius Vaudieu 1792 July 21 

Demarest, Margreta, and Johu Toers ... 1792 June 15 

Demarest, Margreta, and James Forrester . . 1798 Dec. 1 

De Marest, Margrietje, and Jan Bogart M. 1742 May 1 

Demarest, Maria, and Abraham Hariug. 1731 Nov. 23 

De Marest, Maria, and Kornelis Van Hoorn M. 1737 Oct. 21 

De Marest, Maria, and Isaek Van Saan M. 1739 Sept. 20 

De Marest, Maria, aud Niclaes Akkerman M. 1747 Nov. 25 

Demarest, Maria, and Matheus Bogert M. 1786 Nov. 24 

Demarest, Maria, and Jacobus Demorest 1793 Feb. 28 

Demarest, Maria, and Willem Eli 1793 May 20 

De Marest, Maritjen, aud David De Marest M. 1736 Oct. 29 

Demarest, Martyntje, aud Abrabam Blauvelt ... 1724 Oct. 10 

DeMarest, Niclaes, y. m., and Elsjin De Marest, y. d , both 1. at 

Schraleuburgh M. with license 1748 July 10 

Demarest, Peter B., and Auuaatje Folk 1802 Sept. 4 

Demarest, Peter Peterse, y. m., b. and 1. at Schraleuburgh, and Lydia 

Hoppe, y. d., b. and 1. at Peremis . . 1762 May 3 

Demarest, Peter Simonse, y. m., b. and 1. at Schraleuburgb, and 

Sophia Bogert, y. d., b. and 1. at Tappau 1762 May 3 

Demarest, Petrus, aud Rachel Banta . . , 1795 Mar. 14 

Demarest, Rachel, and Paulus Marteuse 1730 Nov. 7 

De Marest, Rachel, and Klaes Zaboriski M. 1735 Nov. 14 

De Marest, Rachel, and Cornells De Remis M 1744 Dec. 17 



528 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Demarest, Rachel, ami David Terhune 1800 

Demarest, Rachel Davidze, and Johauues Abrahamze Blauvelt 1725 

Demarest, Rebekka, and John Enderzen 1766 

De Marest, Samuel, y. m., 1. at Tappan, and Margrietje Blinkerhof, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Nov. 19 A. 1747 

Demarest, Samuel, and Metje Van Voorhesen 1795 

Demarest, Samuel Davids, w. of Autje Lesier, and Laa Demarest, y. d. , 

b. and 1. at Hakkensak 1732 

De Marest, Sara, and Cornelis Van Houten M. 1739 

Demarest, Sara, aud Jan Bauta M. 1740 

De Marest, Sara, and Albert Bogart M. 1743 

Demarest, Sara, and James Cambel M. 1745 

De Marest, Susanna, and Hannis Peek M. 1739 

Demarest, Susanna, and Benjamin Van Boskerk 1725 

De Marest, Trientje, and Jan Bauta M. 1747 

De More, Cornelia, and Sam. Cammel 1767 

De More, Elisabeth, and Cornelius Van Saan 1765 

De More, Jacob, y. in., and Maretje Smith, y. d 1758 

De Moree, , 1 aud Albert Ter Huune 1 751 

De Moree, Afje, and Abraham Kool 1757 

De Moree, Autje, and Jan Bauta 1759 

De Moree, Beujamin, y. in., and Catryntje Van Ordeu. y. d 1768 

De Moree, Cornelius, y. m., aud Maatje Ekkersen, y. d 1751 

De Moree, David, y. m., and Jauy Carnwel, y. d 1758 

De Moree, Haus, y. m., and Nelly Rykman, w 1768 

De Moree, Jacob, y. in., aud Lisabeth Steenbrander. y. d 1768 

De Moree, Jacob, y. m., aud Rachel Siaker, y. d. . . . 1749 

De Moree, Lydia, and Abraham Akkerman 1753 

De Moree, Maria, aud Jacobus Westervelt ... 1751 

De Moree, Maritje, and Richard Eaton 1755 

De Moree, Samuel, y. m. , and Susana Brouwer, y. d . . 1768 

De Moree, Sara, aud Jacob Kool. 1753 

De Moree, Sara, and Benjamin Sloot 1759 

See also More aud Moree. 

De Moore, Salome, and Dr. Hendrikus Schoonmaeker ... 1765 

Demorest, Albert, y. m., and Jaunatje Banta, y. d 1791 

Demorest, Auuatje, and Coenradus Vanderbeek M. 1789 

Demorest, Beeletje, and Jan Duryee 1790 

Demorest, Beeletje, and John Van Voorhesen 1794 

De Morest, Daniel, y. m., aud Cornelia Lydekker, y. d 1752 

De Morest, David, w., and Lena Voorhees, w 1760 

De Morest, Guliaam, y. in., aud Bregge Brower, y. d. , both b. and 1. 

near the New Bridge, m. April 12 1784 

Demorest, Helena, and Jacobus Demarest M. 1791 

i Blank in the record; probably Maria. 



Feb. 


1 


Oct. 


9 


Jan. 


27 


Sept. 


26 


Dec. 


31 


Sept. 


16 


Dec. 


13 


Sept. 


26 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


26 


Sept. 


21 


Mir. 


21 


Dec. 


10 


May 


22 


June 


13 


Feb. 


26 


Nov. 


18 


April 


11 


May 


27 


Dec. 


24 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


27 


Oct. 


15 


Aug. 


27 


Jau. 


12 


April 


29 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


1 


April 


24 


April 


17 


June 


23 


Jan. 


8 


Sept. 


5 


April 


30 


April 


12 


Juue 


9 


Dec. 


6 


Mar. 


20 


April 


20 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 529 

Demorest, Jacob, y. m., and Catharina Miller, y. d., of Sohral- • 

enburgh : 1792 

Demorest, Jacobus, and Elizabeth Eli M. 1 7 . t j 

Demorest, Jacobus, and Maria Demarest 1793 

Demorest, Johu, and Sarah Christie, pr. license M. 1788 

Demorest, Lucas, y. m , of Cannawage, Pennsylvania, and Maria 

Demorest, y. d., of Schralenburgh, m. Aug. 26 1789 

Demorest, Margreta, aud Albert Van Voorheese _ M. 1791 

Demorest, Margreta, aud Christiaau Shute 1791 

Demorest, Maria, and Dirick B.iuta 1791 

Demorest, Maria, aud Benjamiu Westervelt 1792 

Demorest, Maria, aud Lucas Demorest 1789 

Demorest, Matheus, aud Aunaatje Bogert 1794 

De Morest, Moria, aud Willem Codden 1731 

De Morest, Moria, aud Thomas Ekkese 1732 

De Morest, Rebekka, and Staes Remse 17.53 

De Morest, Samuel, y. m., aud Willemtje Bauta, y. d 1767 

Demorest, Simon, y. m., and Anaatje Bauta, y. d., both of Schralen- 
burgh M. 1787 

Demorest, Sophia, aud David Brouwer 1793 

De Morest, Vrouwtje, and Samuel Wood . . 1781 

De Remis, Cornelis, y. m., b. and 1. at Preeknis, and Rachel De Mar- 

est, b. and 1. at Hakkeusak, m. Dec. 17 1744 

Devoe, Abraham, and Sarah Huyler 1799 

Devoe, Elizabeth, aud Abraham Brower 1788 

Devoe, Elizabeth, aud John Dolf Causelje 1796 

Devoe, Johu, aud Helena Godwin ... 1791 

Dietzort, Eva, aud Barent Van Hoorn 1761 

Dirje, Agenitje, aud Barent Nagel 1763 

Dirje, Gerret, y. m., aud Catlyntje Kuyper, y. d 1767 

Dirje, Marty utje, and Casparus Westervelt 1755 

Dobbs, Mary, and Simon Romine 1793 

Doolhageu, Christina, and Barent Cool 172 t 

Dorgee, Peter, y. m., b. in Duitschland (Germany), aud Elisabeth 

Poulse, y. d., b. at Peremis 17r,i; 

Dubois, Thomas, and Sarah Vervelen 1799 

Durie, Jan, w., born at Hakk., res. Schralenburgh, aud Januetje 

Peek, w , b. aud res. at Schralenburgh, m. Jan. 1, 1741 1740 

Durie, Rebekka, and John Meyer 1 793 

Durie, Sarah, and William J. Christie 1796 

Durie, Tyne, and William J. Christie. 1802 

Duriee, Rachel, and Albert Westervelt 1791 

Durje, Jan, y. m., b. and 1. at Schralenburg, aud Weiutje Leydekker, 

y. d., b. aud 1. at Hakkeusak, in. Oct. 19 1744 

Durje, Jannitjeu, aud Reiuier Woertendyk. M. 1746 

Durje, Margrietje, and Jan Banta M 1747 

36 



Oct. 


6 


June 


27 


Feb. 


28 


May 


13 


Aug. 


16 


Nov. 


6 


Mar. 


19 


May 


7 


Jan. 


4 


Aug. 


16 


June 


22 


Dec. 


11 


April 


6 


June 


1 


July 


28 


Dec. 


8 


Jan. 


24 


May 


15 


Dec. 


13 


Jan. 


7 


Feb. 


16 


April 


30 


Jan. 


26 


Oct. 


2 


Dec. 


15 


Sept. 


25 


Nov. 


29 


April 


1 


May 


1 


J une 


17 


April 


4 


Dec. 


31 


Oct. 


27 


Oct, 


15 


Nov. 


27 


Nov. 


24 


S >pt. 


19 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


18 



530 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Durje, Marytje, and Jan Westervelt M. 1747 

Durje, Kachel, aud Rem Remse 1739 

Durje, Sara, and Fredericus Woertendyk M. 1748 

Daryee, Greet je, and Jacob Kool, Jr. 1787 

Duryee, Jan, y. rn. , and Bielet je Demorest, y. d. , both 1. at Schralen- 

burgh 1790 

Duryee, Margreta, and Isaac B )gert 1788 

Durye, S«a, and Benjamin Westervelt 1784 

Daryee, Tryntje, and Johannes Banta 1790 

Dye, Hester, and Henrik Libach 1754 

Dye, Janty, and John Varik 1749 

Dye, Lisabet, and Claes Emmanuel. 1758 



Dec. 18 



April 


3 


Jan. 


2 


April 


30 


May 


31 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


10 


Aug. 


22 


June 


15 


June 


25 



Earl, Natbanael, y. m., and Polly Williams, y. d., both born at Hak- 

kensak 1757 

Earl, Bynier, and Elizabeth Campbell. 1789 

Eirle, Albert, and Jauuatje Terhune 1799 

Eaton, Elizabeth, and Uzal Meeker 1794 

Eaton, Margreta, and William Williams 1790 

Eitou, Richard, y. in , and M iritje De Moree, y. d 1755 

Edsel, Ann, and Abel Smith 17G3 

E Isel, O itriua, and Cbarles Wiggins 1762 

Edsel, Jobaua. and Hendrik B inta 1766 

Edsel, Lisabeth, and Autelbee Erel ... 1753 

Edsel, Mary, and James Bank 1753 

Edward, David, y. m , b. at Hogelant (Highland), living at Hakken- 
sak, and Lea Brouwer, y. d. , b. and 1. at Scbralenburgb, 

m. Dec. 13 1739 

Edward, David, w. , 1. at Scbralenburgb, and Rachel Cristy, w. , b. and 

1. at Scbralenburgb, m July 14 1745 

Eerhart, Robert, y. m., and Vrouwtje Bratt, y. d ■ 17(i0 

Eideustein, Rachel, and Simon Vreelaut . . 1756 

Ekkese, Thomas, y. m., b. N. Y. and 1. at Tappan; and Moria De 

. Morest, y. d., b. aud 1. at Hakkensak 1732 

Ekker, Auuaat je, and Abraham Lozier 1790 

Ekker, Elizabeth, and Wiert Banta 1790 

Ekker, Jobn, y. m., and Lena Camcha, y. d . . . . 1759 

Ekkerse, Angemetje, and Thomas Toers 1789 

Ekkersen, Maatje, and Cornelius De Moree 1751 

Eli, Alida, aud John Poulesse 1794 

Eli, Elizabeth, aud Jacobus Demorest. ... ... 1791 

Eli, Willem, and Maria Demarest 1793 

Ellen, Abraham, y. m., aud Maria d. Moree, y. d 1764 

Eltiuge, Ds. W., aud Jane Huysman 1801 

Emmanuel, Claes, y. m., aud Lisabet Dye, y. d 1758 



Feb. 


10 


June 


11 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


16 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


29 


Oct. 


24 


May 


31 


June 


15 


Aug. 


5 


Aug. 


14 



Oct. 27 



Juue 


22 


June 


30 


Dec. 


19 


April 


6 


Oct. 


30 


Jan. 


23 


May 


26 


July 


11 


Aug. 


9 


April 


20 


June 


27 


May 


20 


Juue 


26 


Oct. 


12 


June 


25 



Jau. 


27 


Aug. 


5 


Dec. 


28 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


8 


Mar. 


16 


Nov. 


3 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 53 I 

Endersen, Jau, y. m., b. iu Scotland, and Elizabeth De Marest, y. d., 

b. and 1. at Hakkensak, Jan. 23 1736 Jau. 3 

Eodersen, Maiya, and Christiaen Vau Hooru 1768 Mar. 18 

Enderson, Niclaas, y. m., 1>. in New York, and Elisabeth Laawse, y. d., 

b. in Hogeduitsland (Germany) 1766 Oct. 14 

Enderzen, John, y. in., b. at Hakkensak and 1. at Schralenburgh, and 

Rebi kka Demarest, y. d., I>. ami 1. ou the Flats 1766 

Ere], Antelbee, y, m., and Lisabeth Edscl, y. d 1753 

Erel, Heury, y. in., aud Willemtje Boss, y. d 1759 

Erel, Lorense, y. m., aud Auny Moor, y. d 1762 

Erel, Manned uk, y. m., aud Rachel De Groot, y. d. . . 1753 

Erwersen, Leua, and John Brain 1760 

Evertse, Johu, aud Sarah Kelly 1798 

F 

Ferdon, Jacob, y. ru., 1. at Schralenburgh, aud Helleua Vau Blerkuin, 

y. d., 1. at Hakkensak Married with license 1748 

Ferdon, Maria, and Thomas Moore M. 1748 

Fesuir, Peter, y. m., b. at Tappau, and Maria Logier, y. d., b. at 

Schralenburg 1760 

■Folk, Abraham, aud Henrica Westervelt 1796 

Folk, Aerjaautje, and Johanues Meyer 1792 

Folk, Anuaatje, aud Peter B. Demarest 1802 

Folk, Oathrina, aud Martin Poulesse 1801 

Folk, John, aud Nietje Christie 1802 

Folk, Maria, aud Abraham Kool 1797 

Folk, Sarah, aud Albert Remsey 1794 

Forrester, James, aud Margreta Demarest 1798 

Fowler, Debora, and Isaac Blauvelt 1800 

Froeligh, Anuaatje, aud Nathaniel Nicol M. 1791 

Froeligh, Auuaatje, aud Ds. Roeleff Westervelt 1801 

Froeligh, Ds. Peter D., aud Neeltje Bogerfc 1802 

Froeligh, Sarah D. , and Peter D. Bauta 1796 

Fullwood, Charles, y. m., aud Symuiey Benzaken, y. d., both 1 at 

Schralenburgh (Not married.) 1791 Jan. 28 



Gerritse, Heuderik, w. , b. aud 1. at Wesel, aud Jaue Post, y. d., 

b. ibidem 1761 Mar. 11 

Gilbert, Garret, and Maria Varick 1794 Mar. 25 

Godwin, David, and Caty Waldron M. 1 79 1 Mar. 1 8 

Godwin, Helena, and John Devoe M. 1791 Jau. 26 

Godwin, Phoebe, and Johu Brouwer M. 1792 Mar. 4 

Goelett, Jaue, aud John Zabriske, Jr 1764 Nov. 21 

Goetsckius, Elisabeth, and Heudrik Sabriske 17b7 Aug. 27 

Goetschiu«, Hester, aud Jacob Vau Saan 1760 Dec. 14 



May 


5 


May 


5 


Feb. 


10 


May 


17 


Jan. 


21 


Sept. 


4 


May 


24 


July 


3 


Dec. 


23 


Mar. 


29 


Dec. 


1 


Oct. 


9 


May 


26 


Oct, 


17 


Oct. 


28 


May 


16 



Juue 


6 


June 


21 


Mar. 


8 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


24 


Aug. 


13 


Nov. 


14 


May 


21 


Jan. 


25 


April 


4 


May 


7 


July 


7 


Dec. 


27 



Aug. 


13 


June 


7 


Nov. 


30 


June 


1 


Nov. 


8 


Oct. 


28 



532 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Goetsckius, Jenny, and Peter Akkerman ... 1801 

Goetsckius, Lea, and Gilliam Demarest M. 1791 

Goetsckius, Magdalena, and Cornelius Heering 1751 

Goetsckius, Maria, and Jan Kuyper. 1756 

Goetsckius, Mauritzius, y. rn. , aud Elsje m'Connel, y. d 1750 

Goetsckius, Rackel, and Isaac Pearsals 1799 

Goetsckius, Sarah, and Jacob Haring 1795 

Golden, Maria, and Ckarles Titus 1793 

Groot, Sarak, and Albert Cornel 1763 

Grootvelt, Jokannes, y. m., and Lizabetb Yolli, y. d 1756 

Grotius, George, and Catkarin Coulbag, 1. in New York 1763 

Guion, Fredrik, aud Ester Ross 1 799 

Gurtrick, Sarak, aud Hillebrand Logier 1761 

H 

Haering, Cornelius, y. m., b. and 1. at Tappan, and Margrietje Roelef- 

seu, y. d., b. aud 1. at Hakkensak, in. Sept. 16 A. 1748 

Hagewoudt, Klaasje, aud Abrakatn Boss 1802 

Hallenbeeck, Maria, and Loreus Yau Hoorn 1750 

Hardenberg, Abrakam, w., and M. Cassarje, w 1752 

Hardeuberg, Rachel, and Jacobus Davenport . . 1759 

Hardenbergk, Ds. Ckarles, aud Alida Brinkerkof 1802 

Haring, Abraham, y. m., of Tappan, and Maria Demarest, b. and 1. at 

Sckralenburgk 1731 Nov. 23 

Haring, Abrakam, of Tappan, y. m., and Martyutje Boogert, y. d., b. 

and 1. at Hakkensak 1725 

Haring, David, and Lea Zabriskie 1800 

Haring, Jacob, and Sarak Goetsckius 1795 

Haring, Jannetje, and Jan Westervelt • . M. 1745 

Haring, Maria, and Jokannes G. Akkerman M. 1791 

Hariug, Tyue, and Hendrik Vanderbeek 1799 

Hartje, Marytje, aud Samuel Brouwer 1728 

Hartjin, Lea, and Alberto Westervelt M. 1742 

Heering, Cornelius, y. m., and Magdalena Goetsckius, y. d. 1751 

Heering, Hendrik, y. m., and Aunaetje Banta, y. d. ... 1763 

Heering, Margrietje, and Casparus Kogk 1789 

Heerdin, Sara, and Hendrik Banta M. 1746 

Helling, Ckristian, y. in., and Cornelia Huiler, y. d 1758 

Helling, Susanna, aud Abrakam Ouklenboscb 1729 

Helling, Tkeuuis, y. m., b. audi, at Hakkensak, and Margrietje Blau- 

velt, y. d., b. and 1. at Tappan 1728 

Helm, Margreta, aud Abrakam Maurissen 1760 

Helm, Peggy, and Coenraad Carlock M. 1791 

Helm, Rackel, and Ckristeyaau Debaan 1761 

Helm, Samuel, y. m , b. and 1. at Kindekemek, and Francynge Van 

Hoorn, y. d. , b. aud 1. at Sckralenburg 1731 Dec. 



Mar. 


28 


June 


21 


Nov. 


14 


Mar. 


13 


Nov. 


18 


Oct. 


29 


Nov. 


9 


June 


18 


Mar. 


8 


July 


10 


July 


11 


Aug 


8 


May 


26 


Mar. 


29 


June 


7 


April 


7 


Nov. 


19 


Nov. 


7 



SCHRAALENBt RGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 533 

Beniom, Cornelius, y. m., and Maria Blauwvelt, y. d 1750 Aug. 23 

Heymer, Regina, and Benjamin Van Norden 1795 May 24 

Hicks, John, and Rachel Wannamaker M. 1789 Sept. 24 

Hitskoop, David, y. m. , and Rachel Napp, y. d 1754 Oct. 7 

Hof man, Maria, and Abraham 1 Srouwer 1795 Feb. 1 

Hoogelaut, [William], 1 y. 111., ami j Sarah]' Moor, y. d 1762 Sept. 12 

Hooglaud, City, and John Zabriskie M. 1792 Oct. 13 

Eoogland, Caty, and Abraham Collins , 1795 Feb. 1 

Hooglaud, Elizabeth, and Jacob Vanderbeek 1798 Nov. 28 

Hoppe, Adriana, and Jacobus Beem M. 1790 Oct. 1(3 

Hoppe, Albert, \v., and Rachel Vreelant, w 1765 Feb. 3 

Hoppe, Andries, y. in., and Aaltje Akkerniau, y. d., b. 1. at Peremus. 

April 24 M. 1790 June 5 

Hoppe, Elizabeth, and Abraham Brower. 1798 Jan. 1 1 

Hoppe, John, and Maria Terhune 1799 Mar. 2 1 

Hoppe, John, y. in., of Paramus, and Polly Westervelt, of Teniefly, 

y. d. , Jan. 16 M. 1790 Feb. 18 

Hoppe, John, y. m., and Maria Van liype, y. d., of Paramus, 1792, 

Oct. 19 M. 1793 Jan. 16 

Hoppe, Lydia, and Peter Peterse Demarest 1762 

Hoppe, Marretje, and Jan Brouwer, Aug. 29 M. 1790. Sept. 25 

Hoppe, Paulus, y, in., and Marya Huys, y. d 1749 Dec. 18 

Hopper, Andrew, and Caty Westervelt 1795 Mar. 28 

Hopper, Andries, and Antje Van Voorhesen 1797 July 23 

Houser, Lisabeth, and Willem Day 1759 Jan. 4 

Houtwater, Jacob, y. m., b. at Bergen and 1. at Hakkensak, and Mar- 

tyntje Bertholf, y. d., b. and 1. here 1728 July 27 

Houtwater, Pieter, y. m., and Beeletje Demarest, y. d., both b. and 1. 

at Hackensack 1728 Sept. 28 

Huiler, Cornelia, and Christian Helling 1758 May 26 

Huiler, Eva, and Conrad Pulisvelt 1757 April 8 

Huisman, Marya, and Cornelius Tallman 1760 April 13 

Huyler, Abraham, and .Helena Westervelt 1797 Feb. 11 

Huyler, John, and Hannah Whitney M. 1791 Nov. 6 

Huyler, Jones, y. in , and Marytje Symessen, y. d 1768 April 14 

Huyler, Sarah, and John Vansaau 1799 May 4 

Huyler, Sarah, and Abraham Devoe 1799 Jan. 7 

Huys, Marya, aud Paulus Hoppe . 1749 Dec. 18 

Huysmau, Agues, and Heudrik Van Giesen 1768 May 23 

Huysman, Jane, and Ds. W. Eltinge 1801 Oct. 12 

Hysermau, Joseph, aud Polly Meyer 1793 April 9 

J 

Jansen, Hester, and Isac Vreer 1759 Nov. 11 

Jarolderniau, Maria, and George Wilson M. 1792 Dec. 6 

l Blank in the record. Supplied from The, Hoogeland Family hi America, p. i;u. 



534 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Jaycocks, Ethiel, aud Margreta Pearsels 1794 Aug. 10 

K 

Kearns, Cornelia, and Laurence Van Hooru M. 1791 April 20 

Kelly, Sarah, and John Evertse 1798 Nov. 3 

Kempbeel, Willem, y. m., b. in Ireland, 1. at Schralenburgh, and 

Elizabeth De Marest, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, 

in. Aug. 19 1736 July 31 

King, Charita, and Peter Waldron 1798 Oct. 2 

King, Elizabeth, and Charles Conklin 1793 Jan. 27 

Kiughslaud, Edmund, y. m., and Selly Wilkin, y. d., 1. here 1763 Feb. 5 

Kip, John, w. , and Elisabeth Vuorhees, y. d 1764 Dec. 2 

Kogh, Albert, and Margreta Brevoort 1798 Feb. 25 

Kogh, Casparus, y. in., of Paramus, and Margrietje Heering, y. d., of 

' Schralenburgh, a. July 11 .M. 1789 Aug. 7 

Kogh, Catharina, and David Terhune 1798 Feb. 25 

Koning, Marya, and Stephen Van Orden 1760 May 31 

Kool, Abraham, y. m., and Afje De Moree, y. d 1757 April 11 

Kool, Abraham, and Maria Folk 1797 Dec. 23 

Kool, Barent, and Elizabeth Blauwvelt 1793 Oct. 19 

Kool, Barent, w., and Marja D. More, w 1767 Aug. 14 

Kool, Christina, and Daniel Ariaase M. 1788 Aug. 8 

Kool, Jacob, y. m , and Rachel Cornell, y. d 1751 Feb. 7 

Kool, Jacob, y. m. , and Sara De Moree, y. d 1753 April 24 

Kool, Jacob, Jr., and Greetje Duryee M. 1767- Jan. 2 

Kool, Jan, w., b. at Tappan and 1. at Hakkensak, and Sara Maree, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Aug. 10 1733 July 21 

Kool, Maria, and Flores Crom 1749 Dec. 29 

Kool, Maria, and Daniel Westervelt. . 1801 Jan. 31 

Kool, Maria, and John Bogert 1793 May 4 

Kool, Samuel, aud — - Brasher M. 1792 Sept. 17 

Kool, Sarah, and Jacob Vauzaau 1791 Feb. 9 

Kool, Trintjen, and Isaek Mares M. 1733 Sept. 21 

Kuyper, Aeltjin, and Johannes Akkerman M. 1715 Oct. 18 

Kuyper, Albert, and Maria Akkerman 1791 Feb. 23 

Kuyper, Alida, aud David Akkerman 1795 Sept. 20 

Kuyper, Catlyutje, aud Gerret Dirje 1767 Sept. 25 

Kuyper, Catlyutje. aud Lucas Kuyper M. 1787 May 13 

Kuyper, Elisabeth, aud Lamert Smit 1761 Jan. 26 

Kuyper, Jan, y. in., and Maria Goetschius, yd 1756 Jan. 25 

Kuyper, Lucas, y. in., and Catlyutje Kuyper, y. d., both b. aud 1. at 

Schralenburgh M. 1787 May 13 

Kuyper, Peter, y. m., and Lisabeth Zabriskie, w 1759 Aug. 11 

Kuyper, Peter, and Maria Van Horn 1800 Dec. 27 

Korseu, Daniel, y. m. , aud Elisabeth Bogart, y. d 1757 Feb. 18 



SCHRAALENBURGII CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



535 



L 

Laawse, Elisabeth, and Niclaas Euderson 17GG 

Labagh, Catharina, and Adam Williams 1793 

Labbacb, Henrik, y. m., and Hester Dye, y. d 1754 

La Meter, Isic, y. in., and Catlyutje Beusse, y. d L756 

La U >e, Wyberig, and Hendrik Voorhees 1755 

Lashier, Alida, and Simon Onuipbell 18U0 

Lazhier, Elizabeth, and David Campbell M. 1787 

Lashier, Hannah, and John Demarest 1800 

Lazbier, Hillebrand, and City Smith 1795 

Lashier, Jenny, and Johu Vanhoorn 1794 

Lashier, John, and Alida Van Hoorn 179G 

Lee, James, y. m. , and Moor, w t 1761 

Lee, Jane, and John Day 176 L 

Leek, Court, y. m., and Salome Vauzaau, y. d M. 1789 

Le Febre, , y. m., and Vernay, y. d . 1752 

Lesier, Hillebrant, y. m., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Christina De 

Baan, y. d. , b. and 1. at Hakkensak 1728 

Lesier, Jacobus, y. m., and Maria David, both b. audi, at Hakkensak. 1732 

Leydekker, Cornelius, and Margreta Bogert M. 1787 

Leydekker, Cornelius, and Caty Brinkerhoff M. 1790 

Leydekker, Elisabet, and Johannis Bense 1724 

Leydekker, Elizabeth, and Albert Westervelt M. 1793 

Leydekker, Jacobus, y. m., of Schralenburgh, and Maria Day, y. d. , of 

English Neighborhood, a. Aug. 21. M. 1790 

Leydekker, Lydia, and John Bartolf M. 1787 

Leydekker, Neeltjiu, and Joris Bliukerhof M. 1742 

Leydekker, Weintje, and Jan Dnrje M. 1744 

Lezier, Benjamin, y. rn., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Diua De Groot, 

w. of Petrus Brouwer, b. aud 1. at Schralenburgh, Jan. 13. . . M. 1734 

Lishier, Cornelia, and Ferdinand Van Sikkelen 1768 

Lishier, Peter, y. m., and Elisabeth Nagel, y. d 1764 

Lishier, Tiyutje, and Abraham Quakkenbos 1763 

Livesey, Marytje, and John Persel 1755 

Lizier, Jacob, y. rn., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, aud Feitjin Zaborisky, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, May 19 M. 1739 

Lizier, Lea, and Zybe Banta M. 1745 

Logier, Hillebrand, w., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, and Sarah Gurt- 

rich, b. at Hakkensak 1761 

Logier, Maria, and Peter Fesuir . . 1760 

Loots, Paulas, y. m., and Rachel Van Orden, y. d., b. and 1. at 

Hakkensak 1724 

Loots, Rachel, and Sibe Banta. . . 1763 

Lozier, Abraham, of Warwick, y. m., and Annaatje Ekker, y. d., of 

Kakeat M. 1790 



Oct. 


14 


May 


23 


Aug. 


22 


Jan. 


11 


Nov. 


21 


July 


5 


Sept. 


27 


Dec. 


31 


Oct. 


18 


Nov. 


9 


Nov. 


12 


Sept, 


24 


Aug. 


13 


Aug. 


5 


May 


29 


June 


29 


Oct. 


26 


Jan. 




Oct. 


23 


May 


3 


Mar. 


9 


Sept. 


25 


Sept. 


12 


Mar. 


26 


Oct. 


19 


Feb. 


8 


Dec. 


17 


June 


26 


Aug. 


6 


April 


14 


y 




June 


6 


Sept. 


10 


Dec. 


27 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


15 


Oct. 


30 



Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


2 


July 


•21 


Jau. 


1 


June 


9 


July 


7 


Nov. 


27 



Aug. 


22 


Feb. 


2 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


3 



536 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ludke, Peter, y. iu., l>. aud 1. at Now Hamburgh, near Hakkensak, 

and Januatje Van Blerkum, y. d., b. at Wykof 1761 Nov. 25 

Lutkens, Hendrick, y. m., of Paramus, and Efje Kant 1, of Saddle 

River M. 1791 

Lutkins, Ant jo. and Albert Terhune . . 1794 

Luttlet, Johanes, y. m., and Iloukje De Grauw 1 766 

Lydi kker, Antje, and Hendrik Oblenns 1757 

Lydekker, Cornelia, and Daniel De Morest 1752 

Lydekker, Lizabeth, and Johannes Nagel ! 756 

Lydekker, Neeltje, and Cornelius Bogart 1761 

M 

M'Connel, Elsje, and Mauritzius Goetschius.- 1750 Fob. 21 

Mabee. Casparus, y. m., b. at the Now Bridge, and Rachel Brigs, y. d., 

b. aud 1. at Tappan, a. July 31 17S4 

Mabie, Abraham, y. m., and Polle Yau Orland, y. d 1756 

Maibe, Sytje, and John De La Meter 1750 

Maudego, Leua, and Abraham Pettersen 1764 

Marein, Fhilip, y. iu., b. in England, and Maria Christen, y. d , b. 

and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Sept. 23 1737 Sept. 

Mares, Isaek, y. m., b. aud 1. at Schralenburgh, and Trintjen Kool, 

w.. 1). at Tappan, 1. at Sehraleuburgb, m. Sept. 21 1733 

Mares. Sara, and Jau Kool M. 1 733 

Marteuse. Paulus, y. in., b. audi. Hackensack, and Rachel Demarest, 

y. d., b. aud 1. at Schralenburg. 1730 

Marthagen, Margreta, aud Johu Pearsal 1799 

Martin, Dauiel, y. in., aud Debora Ryke, y. d 1719 

Mattanje, Abraham, y. m., aud Sara Christeen, y. d 1754 

Maurissen, Abraham, w. , an 1 Margreta Helm, y. d . 1760 

Mayor Johannes, y. m., b. at Tappan, with Evah Vredenburgh, b. in 

N. Y. aud 1. at New Hempstead M. L784 

Meeker, Uzal, aud Elizabeth Eaton 1794 

Mejer, Jacob, y. m., and Abigel Persel, y. d L766 

Mejer, Jauetje, and Isac Post 1764 

Mercereau, John, and Nelly Brower 1795 

Meyer, Andries, w.. b. atTappan, and Frena Morris, b. at Schralen- 
burgh M. with lioonse 1741 

Meyer, Cornelius, aud Jenny Demarest 1 795 

Mi 3 or, Geertje, and Thomas Meyer 1794 

M yer, Johannes, w.. audi, at Schralenburgh, and Aerjaantje Folk, 

w. of Cornelius Meyer, and 1. at Paramus, -'am 21 M. 1792 

Meyer. John, and Antje Christie. 1799 

Meyer, Johu, aud Rebekka Durie. 1793 

Meyer, Marte, y. m., of Paramus, and Marytje Styger, y. d , of Ram- 

apogh M, L792 

Meyer, Polly, aud Joseph Isermau M. 1793 



Sept. 


1 


Aug. 


10 


Nov. 


7 


Mar. 


10 


May 


3 


June 


23 


April 


7 


April 


19 


Jan. 


10 


Feb. 


22 


Oct, 


18 


July 


12 


Jau. 


10 


May 


30 


Jan. 


25 


Feb. 


18 


Nov. 


30 


Oct. 


27 


Jan. 


21 


April 


9 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 537 

Meyer, Thomas, and Geertje Meyer 1794 

Miller, Catharina, and Jacob Dernorest M. 1792 

Miller, Peggy, and Hendrik Carlock 1795 

Moor, [Sarah], and [William] Hoogelant 1762 

Moor, , and James Lee . 1761 

Moor, Aimy, and Loreuse Erel 1762 

Moor, Maria, and Michael Vreeland M. 1791 

MoorJ Mary, and Isajes Vallue 1761 

Moor, Sara, and David Day 1767 

Moor, Sam', y. in., and Marytje De Groot, y. d 1760 

Moore, Thomas, y. m , 1. at Hakkensak, and Maria Ferdon, y. d., 1. at 

Schralenburgh M. with license 1748 

More, i Morja D., and Barent Kool 1767 

Moree, ' Maria D., and Abraham Ellen 1764 

Moree, 1 Niclaes, y. m., and Sara Vallue, y. d 1761 

Morris, Freua, and Andries Meyer With license 1741 

N 

Nagel, Barent, y. m. , and Aguitje Dirje, y. d 1763 

Nagel, Elisabeth, and Peter Lishier 1764 

Nagel, Geertje, and David Anderson M. 1792 

Nagel, Johannes, y. in., and Lizabeth Lydekker, y. d 1756 

Nagel, Sara, and Daniel De Klark 1766 

Napp, Rachel, and David Hitskoop 1754 

Nicoll, Fanny, and Albert Zabriskie M. 1789 

Nicoll, Nathaniel, and Annaatje Froeligh M. 1791 

Nos, Maria, and Hendrik Brown M. 1792 

o 

Oblenus, Hendrik, y. m., and Antje Lydekker, y. d 1757 

Onderdonk, Hendrik, y. m., and Rachel Sprinksteen, y. d 1748 

Ostrander, Petrus, w., and Christina Rank, y. d 1759 

Oudenberg, Peter, y. m., and Antje Riddenaar, y. d , 1762 

Outwater, Maria, and Hendrik Valk ... 17C6 

P 
Panghorn, Peter, and Maria Westervelt, both of English Neighbor- 
hood M. 1787 

Pearsel, John, and Margreta Marthagen 1799 

Pearsals, Isaac, and Rachel Goetschius 1799 

Pearsels, Margreta, and Ethiel Jaycocks 1794 

Pearsels, Sophia, and John Coucklin .' . . 1797 

Peek, Annatje, and Louwrens Akkermau, Jr 1763 

Peek, Daniel, y. m., b. at Schralenburgh, and Gesina Van der Lindo, 

y. d., b. at Hakkensak 1764 Oct. 26 

1 De Moree 
37 



Jan. 


25 


Oct. 


6 


Mar. 


27 


Sept. 


12 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


14 


Dec. 


18 


April 


9 


Nov. 


12 


Feb. 


10 


May 


5 


Aug. 


14 


Sept. 


26 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


10 


Dec. 


15 


June 


26 


Oct. 


14 


July 


7 


Sept. 


26 


Oct. 


7 


April 


30 


May 


26 


Nov. 


29 


Jan. 


1 


Nov. 


17 


Nov. 


8 


Sept. 


19 


Nov. 


9 



May 


28 


Mar. 


10 


Aug. 


13 


Aug. 


10 


Mar. 


4 


May 


28 



538 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Peek, Elizabeth, and Theunis Smidt M. 1744 

Peek, Hum is, y. in., b. at Hakk. and 1. at Schralenburgh, and 

Susanna De Marest, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, 

m. Sept. 21 1739 

Peek, Jannetje, and Jan Dime . . M. 1741 

Peessel, Walteus, y. m., b. on Langbeylaud and 1. here, and Feytje 

Reddenaar, y. d., b. at Bergen and 1. here 1728 

Perdon, Aunaatje, and Joseph Perry 1800 

Perry, Joseph, and Annaatje Perdon 1800 

Persel, Abigel, and Jacob Mejer 1766 

Persel, John, y. ni , and Marytje Livesey, y. d 1755 

Persel, Maria, and Niclaes Smith 1763 

Pessel, Catryntje, and Freederyk Verveelen 1752 

Pettersorj, Abraham, y. m., and Lena Mandego, y. d 17G4 

Petterson, George, y. m., b. in Ireland, and Emetje Reutsfort, y. d., 

b. in New England and 1. at Peremis 1 762 

Pierce, Joseph, and Hester Brower 1797 

Pietersen, Niclaes, w., res. at Tappan, and Annetje De Marest, y. d., 

res. at Paskack, m. April 12 A. 1748 

Pool, Ef je, and Isaac Davenport 1799 

Post, Elizabeth, and John Woertendyk M. 1792 

Post, Francyntje, and Johannes Brouwer M. 1790 

Post, Isac, y. in., and Jannetje Mejer, y. d 1 764 

Post, Jane, and Heuderik Gerritse 1761 

Post, John, y. m., and Catryntje Aeeumebs, y. d 1753 

Post, John, y. m., b. at Wesel, and Catharin Van Houten, b. at 

Totuwa 1762 

Post, Neeltje, and Jacob Westervelt 1798 

Post. Sarah, and Barent Wever M. 1791 

Poulse, Elisabeth, and Peter Dorgee 1766 

Poulse, Lea, and Nicasi ter Hum 1762 

Poulesse, John, and Alida Eli 1794 

Poulesse, Martin, and Cathrina Folk 180 1 

Prim, Joseph, y. m., and Hester Bauta, y. d 1750 

Pryer, Niclaes, y. m., and Hester Banta, y. d 1761 

Pulis\elt, Conrad, y. m., and Eva Huiler, y. d 1757 

o 

Quackenbos, Jacobus, y. m., b. at Tappan, res. N. York, and Lea 

Demarest, y. d., b. and 1. Schralenburgl 

Qnackenboss, Beeletje, and Willem Westervelt M 1790 

Quackenboss, Jacob, y. in., and Lena Christi, y. d 1755 

Quackenboss, John, y. m., of Schralenburgh, and Sara Smith, of 

Tappan, May 29 M. 1790 

Quakkenbos, Abraham, y. m., and Tryntje Lishier, y. d. 1763 

i No date is given. It precedes an entry of Feb. :.'i. 1784. 



June 15 



Aug. 25 
Jan. 1 

Aug. 17 

Aug. 20 

Aug. 20 

Feb. 22 

April 14 

July !) 

July 31 

Dec. 3 

Mar. 5 

Nov. 20 

Mar. 25 

April 22 

Dec. 15 

June 5 

Oct. 18 

Mar. 11 

July 11 

May 20 
Oct. 27 
Sept. 13 
June 17 
Dec. 15 
April 20 
May 24 
Aug. 10 
Jan. 8 
April 8 



Aug. 29 

Nov. 10 

June 24 

Aug. 6 



July 


1 


April 


24 


Nov. 


8 


April 


27 


Any. 


17 


June 


1 


Aug. 


15 


June 


3 


Mar. 


29 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 539 

Quakkenbos, Cornelis, y. ua., b. and 1. in New York, and Annactjen 

Van li torn, y. d., b. and 1. atHakkensak, m. Sept. 23 1743 Aug. 20 

Quakkenbos, Samuel, y. m. , and Maria Bosskerken, y. d 1757 April 11 

Quick, Jacobus, y. m., and Maria Day, y. d 1759 April 3 

Quidon, Mary, and Jacob Conklin 1791 Feb. 2 

Quklenboscb. Abraham, y. in., b. N. Y., 1. at Tappan, and Susanna 

Helling, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralinburgh 1729 Mar. 29 

R 

Rafter, Rachel, aud Jacob Degroot 1799 

Randolf, Hanah, and Daniel Vervelen . . . . , 1796 

Rank, Christina, and Petrus Ostrander 1759 

Ratau, Susanna, and Abraham Vanderbeek. M. 1790 

Reddenaar, Feytje, and Waltens Peessel 1728 

Remse, Rem, y. m., b. L. I. aud 1. at Haverstro, and Rachel Durje, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh 17391 

Remse, Staes, y. m., and Rebekka De Morest, y. d. 1753 

Remseu, Maragrith, aud Johannes Belb 1761 

Remsen, Theodoras, y. m., b. on Long Island and 1. at Haverstro, aud 
Margrietje De Baen, y. d., b. at Hakkensak and 1. at Schralen- 
burgh, m. June 23 1738 

Remsey, Albert, and Sarah Folk 1794 

Rethan, Susanna, aud Juliaam Demarest 1761 

Reutsfort, Emetje, and George Petterson 1762 Mar. 

Reydoud, Pieter, y. m. , b. Rhode Island, res. Hakkensak, and Eliza- 
beth Christy, y. d., b. and res. at Schralenburgh, m. May 6 . . . 1742 

Riddenaar, Antje, and Peter Oadenberg 1762 

Riddenoors, Johannes, y. m., b. at Bergen aud 1. at Hakkensak, and 

Moreitje Van Allen, y. d., b. Hakkensak and 1. at Remebok. . .1732 

Rigby, Letta, and Peter Wester veld M. 1784 

Rithau, Peter, y. m. , b. at Schralenburgh, and Jautjie Akkennun, 

y. d., b. at Peremis 17G6 

Roelefsen, Margrietje, aud Cornelous Haeriug M. 1748 

Rome, Joseph, and Sarah Aljee 1796 

Romein, Cristientje, and Jonathan Ross M. 1745 

Romein, Nielaes, y. m., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, and Billetjiu DeMar- 

est, y. d., b. aud 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Oct. 12 . 1739 Sept. 15 

Romein, Roelof, y. m , b. and 1. at Hakkensak, aud Lydia De Marest, 

y. d., b. aud 1. at Schralenburg, m. Aug. 16 1745 

Romine, Simon, and Mary Dobbs M. 1793 

Romyn, Elisabeth, and David Simons 1761 

Roos, Jonathan, y. in., b. Long Island, res. Kekkejet, and Christientje 

Romein, y. d., b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Aug. 16 1745 

Roos, Tyne, and Peter Van Orden 1795 

1 The preceding entry is dated May 19, 1739; the entry succeeding is dated Aug. 11, 1739. 



April 


1 


Sept. 


19 


June 


29 


April 


23 


Sept. 


8 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


28 


Aug. 


16 



July 


20 


April 


1 


Sept. 


17 


July 


20 


Feb. 


14 



540 New jersey colonial documents. 

Boss, Ester, and Fredrik Guion 1799 

Ryder, Phebe, and Stephen Voorhees 1767 

Ryerson, Maria, and Dirick Terkune 1797 

Ryke, Debora, and Daniel Martin 1749 

Rykman, Evert, y. m., and Sally Akkerman, w 1763 

Rykman, Nelly, and Hans De Moree 1768 

Rykman, Nieltje, and David Akkerman 1763 

s 

Sabriske, Elisabeth, and Edinond Zeaman 1768 

Sabriske, Hendrik, y. m., and Elisabeth Goetschius 1767 

Salle, Annatje, and Samiwel Gearves Bevaf 1760 

Sckoomnaeker, Dr. Hendrikus, y. m., and Salome De Moore, w 1765 

Schoonmaker, Catryntje, and Jochem Schoonmaker 1758 

Schoonmaker, Jochem, y. m., aud Catryntje Schoonmaker, y. d 1758 

Seckor, Catherine, and David Demarest 1748 

Selyer, Michael, and Maria Bogert 1798 

Sharp, Morris, and Elizabeth Stag, both of Paramus, m. Jan. 1, 1790. A. 1789 
Shnte, Christiaan, y. m., and Margreta Demorest, a. Mar. 19. . . . M. 1791 

Shuwert, Hendrik, y. m., and Mary Conklin, y. d 1756 

Siaker, Rachel, and Jacob De Moree 1749 

Sikles, Rachel, and Luke Westervelt 1802 

Simons, David, y. m., and Elisabeth Romyn, y. d 1761 

Simonson, Anne, aud John Vanderbeek, Nov. 5 M. 1790 

Simonson, Maria, and Peter Bogert 1800 

Sisko, Santje, and Samuel Day M. 1 791 

Sisko, Sem, y. m., and Santje Dee, Atkiopest 1764 

Skudder, Benjamin, aud Sarah Wade 1793 

Sloot, Benjamin, y. m. , and Sara De Moree, y. d 1759 

Smidt, Theunis, y. m., b. and 1. at Tappan, aud Elizabeth Peek, y. d., 

b. and 1. at Schralenburg, m. June 15 A. 1744 

Smit, Lamert, and Elisabeth Kuyper, w 1761 

Smith, Abel, y. in., and Anua Edsel, y. d 1763 

Smith, Caty, and Hillebrand Lizier 1795 

Smith, Johannes, y. m., aud Autje Woerdendyck, y. d 1750 

Smith, Maretje, and Jacob De Moree 1758 

Smith, Niclaes, y. m., and Maria Persel, y. d 1763 

Smith, Sarah, and John Quackenboss. M. 1790 

Snyden, Geertje, and Peter Van Ordeu 1751 

Spier, Albertas, y. in., b. and 1. at Pemmerpog, aud Osseltjeu Wester- 
velt, y. d.,b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. June 15 A. 1744 

Spier, Annatje, and Hiskia Spriuger 1791 

Spier, Catharine, and Thomas Campbell M. 1793 

Spier, Catlyutje, and Cornelius Swartwout 1763 

i Negro. 



July 


7 


May 


31 


Oct. 


15 


May 


3 


Jan. 


9 


Oct. 


15 


April 


5 


Dec. 


25 


Aug. 


27 


Mar. 


5 


June 


23 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


2 


July 


10 


June 


14 


Nov. 


25 


April 


13 


May 


24 


Jan. 


12 


Dec. 


18 


Sept. 


17 


Dec. 


5 


Oct. 


12 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


20 


Sept. 


22 


April 


17 


May 


22 


Jan. 


26 


Oct. 


24 


Oct. 


18 


May 


18 


Feb. 


26 


July 


9 


June 


24 


Mar. 


7 


May 


13 


April 


10 


Feb. 


2 


June 


9 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



S4t 



Springer, Hiskia, and Annaatje Spier 1791 

Sprinksteen, Rachel, and Hendrik Onderdonk 1748 

Stag, Elizabeth, and Morris Sharp A. 1789 

Stagg, Isac, y. m., and Elisabeth Banta, w 1763 

Stags, James, y. m. , and Lea Brouwer, y. d 1765 

Steenbrander, Lisabeth, and Jacob De Moree 1768 

Stegge, Cornelis, w., b. and 1. at New Barbadoes, and Antje Christi, 

w., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, rn. Mar. 7 1734 

Stek, Abraham, y. m., and Maritje Boogert, both b. and 1. at Ilak- 

kensak 1 732 

Stephens, Nancy, and Dennis Sweeny 1 761 

Stillevil, Anna, aud Thomas Banta 1761 

Stoutenburg, Nelly, and Cornelius Cuyper .... M. 1784 

Styger, Marytje, and Marte Meyer M. 1792 

Swartwout, Cornelius, y. m., and Catlyntje Spier, y. d 1763 

Sweeny, Dennis, b. in Ireland, y. in., and Nancy Stephens, y. d., b. 

and 1. in her home 1761 

Symessen, Marytje, and Jones Huyler 1768 

T 

Taalman, Cornelius, y. m., b. and 1. at Tappan, and Maria Petrus 

Brouwer, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. April 1 1743 

Taalman, Marrice, and Daniel Voorhees 1762 

Tallman, Cornelius, w., and Marya Huisman, w 1760 

Tenyk, Jacob, y. in., and Neeltje Van Orden, y. d., both of Schraleu- 

burgh, a. July 25 M. 1789 

ter Huin, Anaatje, and David Demarest 1759 

ter Huin, Maria, and David Demarest 1766 

ter Huin, Nicasi, y. in., and Lea Poulse, y. d., both b. at Hakkensak 1762 
ter Huin, Yuliaam, y. m., b. at Hakkensak, and Markyie Bertolf, y. d.. 

b. and 1. at Pomtuu 1760 

Terhune, Albert, aud Antje Lutkins 1794 

Terhune, Catharinea, and Laurenes Boskerk M. 1790 

Terhune, David, and Catharina Kogh 1798 

Terhune, David, and Rachel Demarest 1800 

Terhune, Dirick, and Maria Ryerson 1797 

ter Hune, Geertmy, and Tomas Banta 1766 

Terhune, Hendrik, y. m*, of Peremus, and Tyny Vanimburgh, y. d., 

of Peremus, a. Mar. 13 1790 

Terhune, Jannatje, and Albert Earle 1799 

Terhune, Maria, and John Hoppe 1799 

Ter Huune. Albert, y. in., and Maria De Moree, y. d 1751 

ter Huyne, Marte, and Hester Beer, both b. and 1. at Hackeusack. . . 1759 
Ter Huyn, Stephen, w., res. at Peremus, and Maria Bogert, w., res. at 

Hakkensak .M. with a license 1744 

Tetterer, Christian, y. m., and Elizabeth Viel, y. d 1760 



April 


10 


Nov. 


17 


Nov. 


25 


Sept. 


i:8 


Oct. 


13 


Aug. 


27 



Feb. 16 

June 23 

Mar. 24 

Mar. 11 

May 9 

Jan. 21 

June 6 

Mar. 24 

April 14 



Feb. 26 
Aug. 1 
April 13 

Aug. 5 

Aug. 7 

June 17 

Dec. 15 

July 13 

Feb. 2 

Jan. 30 

Feb. 25 

Feb. 1 

Oct. 15 

Sept. 7 

April 24 

Dec. 25 

Mar. 24 

Nov. 18 

Nov. 2 

Nov. 4 
Nov. 18 



542 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Tice, Henry, ami Maria Winter 1798 

Titus, Charles, and Maria Golden 1793 

Toers, John, and Margreta Dernaresfc M. 1792 

Toers, Niclaes, y. m., b. and 1. at Akkwegnonk, and Margrietje Banta, 

y. d. , b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. July 24 A. 1 71S 

Toers, Thomas, y. in., of Paramus, and Angenietje Ekkerse, of 

Kekeat, a. July 11 M. 1789 

V 

Valentyn, Jacob, y. m., and Margrietje Banta, y. d 1760 

Valk, Hendrik, y. m., and Maria Outwater, y. d 1766 

Vallue, Isajes, y. m., and Mary Moor, y. d 1761 

Vallue, Sara, and Niclaes D. Moree 1761 

Van Allen, Moreitje, and Johannes Riddenoors 1732 

Van Blarcorn, Abraham, and Beeletje Westervelt 1796 

Van Blerkom, Martje, and James Applebee 1753 

Van Blerkum, Aunatje, and Peter Ludke 1761 

Van Blerkum, Hellena, and Jacob Ferdon 1718 

Van Bjskerk, Benjamin, y. m., aud Susanna Dernarest, y. d., b. and 1. 

at Hakkensak 1725 

Van Boskerk, Jantje, and Daniel Deinarest 1761 

Van Bosskerken, Theodosia, and Theodorus Van Winkelen 1760 

Van Brakelen, Rachel, and Jan Brouwer 1754 

Vander Beck, Abraham, y. m., and Santje Banta, y. d 1755 

van eler Beeck, Jacob, y. m., and Margrietje Berdau, y. d 1768 

Vanderbeek, Abraham, aud Susanna Ratan, w. of Gilliam Dem- 

orest M. 1790 

Vanderbek, Coeuradus, and Auaatje Demorest M. 1789 

Vanderbeek, Hendrik, aud Tyne Haring. . . 1799 

Vanderbeek, Isaac P., and Susanna Blauchard 1799 

Vanderbeek, Jacob, and Elizabeth Hoogland 1798 

Vander Beek, Januetje, and Jacob Brouwer 1752 

Vanderbeek, John, y. in., and Anne Simonson, of Hackensack, 

a. Nov. 5 M. 1790 

Van Der Beek, Poulus, y. m., and Sara Berdan, y. d 1760 

Van der Hoeve, Egbert, y. m., aud Peggy Anueli, y. d 1756 

Van Der Hoeve, Hans, w., and Rachel Akkerman, y. d 1756 

Van Der Liude, Feitjen, and Guliam De Mare 1737 

Van der Liude, aud Daniel Peek 1761 

Van Der Linde, Jamietjen, and Pieter De Mare M. 1737 

Van Der Liude, Roelof, y. m., aud Annaetjen De Marest, b. aud 1. at 

Hakkensak, m. Sept. 16 A. 1748 

Van der Linde, Sara, and Dirk Blinkerhof 1764 

Vaudien, Cornelius, aud Margaret Demarest, w. of David Akker- 
man M. 1792 

Van Dieu, Henkye, and Jan Berdan 1760 



June 


16 


May 


21 


June 


15 


July 


2 


Sept. 


5 


May 


1 


Nov. 


7 


April 


9 


Sept. 


27 


June 


29 


June 


5 


May 


19 


Nov. 


2:. 


May 


5 


Mar. 


21 


Mar. 


13 


June 


30 


April 


15 


Mar. 


31 


Sept. 


14 


April 


27 


Sept. 


r> 


Oct. 


29 


Sept. 


12 


Nov. 


28 


April 


21 


Dec. 


5 


Sept. 


11 


Jan. 


27 


July 


4 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


26 


Sept. 


29 


Aug. 


20 


Aug. 


28 


July 


21 


June 


10 



April 


3 


April 


27 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


12 


Sept. 


23 


Oct. 


2 


Sept. 


6 


Mar. 


18 



SCIlRAALENr.URC.il CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 543 

Van Giesen, Hendrik, y. m., and Agnes Huysman, y. d 17*38 May 23 

Van Giesen, Mossales, y. m., and Caty Van Rypen, y. d., Achqueg- 

kenoy 17G8 

Van Giesen, Rachel, and David Banta 1799 

Van Giesen, Reynier, w., 1. at Hakkensak, and Annatje Van Wiukel, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Wesel 1760 

Van Hoorn, Alida, and John Lashier. 1796 

Van Hoorn, Annaetjen, and Cornells Qwakkenbos M. 1743 

Van Hoorn, Barent, w., b. at Bergen, and Eva Dietzort, y. d., b. at 

Hakkensak 1761 

Van Hoorn, Christian, y. m., and Altje Westervelt, y. d 1764 

Van Hoorn, Cbristiaen, w., and Marya Eudersen, y. d. . 1768 

Van Hoorn, Cornells, y. m., and Elisabet Van Ordfin, y. d., botb b. 

and 1. at Schralenburg, m. May 13 1737 April 16 

Van Hoorn, Cornelius, y. m., of Schralenburgb, and Jenny Brower, 

y. d. , of Hackensack, Nov. 21 M. 1789 

Van Hoorn, Cornelius, and Aaltje Akkerrnan M. 1790 

Van Hoorn, David, and Sarah Cole 1800 

Van Hoorn, Francynge, and Samuel Helm 1731 

Van Hoorn, Johannes, and Rebekka Waldron 1794 

Vanhoorn, John, and Jenny Lashier 1794 

Van Hoorn, Kornelis, y. m. , and Maria De Marest, y. d. , b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgb, m. Oct. 21 1737 

Van Hoorn, Laurence, and Cornelia Reams M. 1791 

Van Hoorn, Lorens, y. m., and Maria Hallenbeeck, y. d 1750 

Van Hoorn, Rachel, and David Boskerk M. 1745 

Van Hoorn, Zietske, and Michael Van Winkel M. 1743 

Van Horn, Maria, and Peter Kuyper. 1800 

Van Houten, Cathrina, and David Demarest ... 1729 

Van Houten, Catharin, and John Post . . 1762 

Van Houten, Cornelis, y. m., b. at Wesel, and 1. at Panne and Sura 

De Marest, y. d. , b. and 1. at Hakkensak, m. Dec. 13 1739 

Van Imburg, Jantji, and John Wandel . . .1761 

Vanimburgh, Tyny, and Hendrik Terbune 1790 

Van Iveren, Borger, y. m. , b. in New York and 1. at Hakkensak, and 

Femmetjen Westervelt, y. d., b. on Long Island, and 1. at 

Schraalenburgh, m. June 30 17:!s 

Vank, Caty, and Petrus Bogert M. 1790 

Van Nordeu, Benjamin, and Regina Heymer 1795 

Van Ordeu, Catryntje, and Benjamin De Moree 1768 

Van Orden, Elizabet, and Cornelis Vau Hooru . . . M. 1737 

Van Orden, Jacobus, y. in., and Lea Christi, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, m. Aug. 9 1733 

Van Orden, Jauuetjen, and David Akkerrnan. . . M. 1734 

Van Ordeu, Maria, and David D. Demarest 1789 

Vau Ordeu, Neeltje, and Jacob Tenyk. 1789 



Dec. 


31 


Aug. 


12 


Feb. 


15 


Dec. 


4 


Jan. 


22 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


1 


April 


20 


Nov. 


30 


Sept. 


27 


Sept. 


23 


Dec. 


•27 


Jan. 


8 


May 


20 


Oct. 


20 


Oct. 


17 


Mar. 


13 


June 


3 


Nov. 


t 


May 


24 


Dec. 


24 


May 


13 


June 


30 


May 


10 


June 


19 


July 


25 



544 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Orden, Peter, and Tyne Roos 1795 

Van Orden, Pieter, y. m., and Geertje Snyden,! y, d 1751 

Van Orden, Rachel, and Paulns Loots 1724 

Van Orden, Stephen, y. m.", and Marya Koning, y. d 1760 

Van Orden, Weybrig, and David Cristy M. 1741 

Van Orden, Wouterus, y. m., and Autje Banta, y. d 1753 

Van Orland, Polle, and Abraham Mabie 1756 

Van Ripen, Jan, w., and Jaunetje Banta, y. d 1756 

Van Rype, Maria, and John Hoppe 1792 

Van Rypen, Caty, and Mossales Van Giesen 1768 

Van Saau, Cornelius, y. in., and Geesje Berdan, y. d 1761 

Van Saan Cornelius, w., and Elisabeth De More, y. d 1765 

Vansaau, Hendrik, and Maria Zabriskie 1799 

Van Saan, Isaek,-y. rn,, b. and 1. ai Hakkensak, and Maria De Marest, 

y. d , b. and 1. at Schralenburgh, m. Sept. 20 ... 1739 

Van Saan, Jacob, y. in., and Johanna Begon, y. d. . 1754 

Van Saan, Jacob, y. m., and Hester Goetschius, y. d 1760 

Vansaan, John, and Sarah Huyler 1799 

Van Saan, Samuel, y. m., and Lea Zabriska, y. d 1765 

Van Schyven, Debora, and Jacob Westervelt M. 1733 

Van Seysen, Cornells, y. in., and Maria Veder, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schonegtade 1759 

Van Sikkelen, Ferdinand, y. m., and Cornelia Lishier, y. d. . 1768 

Vansys, Gertruy, and Nicolaes Degroot 1 794 

Van Voorhees, Styutie, and Niclaes Brinkerhoff 1762 

Van Voorheese, Albert, y. rn., and Margreta Demorest, y. d 1791 

Van Voorheese, Annaatje, and Siba Briukerhoff 1791 

Vauvoorhese, Catharina, and Albert Deinarest 1802 

Vauvoorheese, Cathryntje, and John Akkerman 1791 

Van Voorheesen, Hellena, and Daniel Deinarest M. 1790 

Van Voorheesen, Antje, and Andries Hopper 1797 

Van Voorhesen, Catryntje, and Jacobus Brinkerhof 1767 

Van Voorhesen, Geesje, and Albert Brinkerhoff , 1796 

Van Voorhesen, John, and Beeletje Demorest 1794 

Van Voorhesen, Lena, and Petrus Debaan 1794 

Van Voorhesen, Metje, and Samuel Demarest 1795 

Van Voorhesen, Nicasie, and Beeletje Brinkerhoff 1797 

Van Vorheese, Peter, and Gertje Berdan 1794 

Van Wagenen, Jacob, y. in., and Antje Vreelant, y. d 1756 

Van Wagenen, Johannes, y. m., and Nieltje Van Wagenen, y. d 1750 

Van Wagenen, Maria, and Nathaniel Day M. 1792 

Van Wagenen, Nieltje, and Johannes Van Wagenen 1750 

Van Winkel, Anuatje, and Reynier Van Giesen 1760 

Van Winkel, Catharin, and Philip Berry 1761 

i in ther rds of the baptisms of their children this name is uniformly written Snyft i 



Feb. 


14 


Mar. 


7 


Oct. 


30 


May 


31 


April 


23 


Dec. 


16 


Feb. 


2 


Nov. 


20 


Oct. 


19 


April 


3 


July 


2 


June 


13 


Nov. 


2 


Aug. 


11 


April 


3 


Dec. 


14 


May 


4 


July 


25 


Dec. 


28 


Oct. 


20 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


25 


July 


31 


Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


26 


Oct. 


16 


Nov. 


2 


Nov. 


26 


July 


23 


Aug. 


28 


May 


29 


April 


12 


Sept. 


13 


Dec. 


31 


Oct. 


8 


Feb. 


2 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


8 


Dec. 


1 


Nov. 


8 


Oct. 


31 


April 


15 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 545 

Van Winkel, Michael, y. in., b. and 1. at Akkwegkenunk, and Sietske 
Van Ilooru, y. d., b. and 1. at Eakkensak, a. at Akkwegke- 
nunk M. 1743 

Van Winkelen, Claasje, and Jacob Banta 1754 

Van Winkelen, Theodoras, w. , and Theodosia Van Bosskerken, w. . . 17G0 

Vanzaan, Cornelius, and Hester Brouwer M. 1791 

Vanzaan, David, and Lea Brouwer M. 1791 

Vanzaan, Egbert, and Jannatje Akkerman M. 1791 

Vanzaan, Ester, and David B. Demarest 1798 

Vanzaan, Jacob, and Sara Kool ] 794 

Vanzaan, Lydia, and Cornelius Banta M. 1791 

Vanzaan, Salome, and Court Leek M. 1789 

Varick, Maria, and Garret Gilbert 1794 

Varik, John, y. in., and Janty Dye, y. d 1749 

Veder, Maria, and Cornelis Van Seysen 1759 

Veltuian, Maria, and John Alhnen 1766 

Verbnrg, Willem, y. m., and Cornelia Banta, y. d 1758 

Veruay, , and Le Febre , 1752 

Verveeleu, Freederyk, y. m., and Catryntje Pessel, y. d ... 1752 

Verveelen, Gedeon, y. rn., and Maria Banta, y. d 1768 

Vervelen, Daniel, and Hanah Randolf 1796 

Vervelen, Sarah, and Thomas Dubois 1799 

Viel, Elisabeth, and Christian Tetterer 1760 

Viel, Thomas, y. in., and Hanna Berry, y. d 1760 

Viele, Sara, and Joris Vischer 1762 

Vischer, Joris, y. m., b. in Duitschland (Germany), and Sara Viele, 

y. d., b. in Vestsester and 1. at Hamburg 1772 

Voorhesen, Annaatje, and John Zabriskie 1796 

Voorhees, Antje, and Jacob Briukerhof 1749 

Vonk, Caty, and Abraham Brouwer 1763 

Voorhees, Daniel, y. m., and Marrice Taalman, y. d 1762 

Voorhees, Elisabeth, and John Kip 1764 

Voorhees, Hendrick, y. ni., and Wyberig La Roe, y. d 1755 

Voorhees, Leentje, and Albert Banta 1 756 

Voorhees, Lena, and Christian Zaberoweski 1753 

Voorhees, Lena, and Cornelius Akkerman 1753 

Voorhees, Lena, and David De Morest ; 1760 

Voorhees, Maria, and Daniel Banta 1784 

Voorhees, Sara, and Jacob Ch. Bogart 1756 

Voorhees, Stephen, y. m., and Phebe Ryder, y. d 1767 

Vredenbnrgh, Evah, and Johannes Mayer M. 1784 April 19 

Vreedenburg, Mathias, y. in., and Rebecca Bentse, y. d 1765 Oct. 9 

Vreeland, Michael, y. m., and Maria Moor, y. d., 1. at English Neigh- 
borhood, m. Dec. 18 1791 Nov. 26 

Vreelaut, Antje, and Jacob Van Wagenen. 1756 Dec. 8 

Vreelaut, Cornelius, y. rn., and Catrina Cadmus, y. d 1756 Dec. 8 

38 



Sept. 


23 


Sept. 


29 


June 


30 


May 


28 


Mar. 


5 


Oct. 


1 


Dec. 


31 


Feb. 


9 


Oct. 


2 


Aug. 


5 


Mar. 


25 


June 


15 


Oct. 


20 


Mar. 


16 


April 


9 


May 


29 


July 


31 


May 


5 


April 


24 


April 


4 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


18 


Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


6 


June 


11 


April 


21 


April 


3 


Aug. 


1 


Dec. 


2 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


28 


Feb. 


18 


May 


6 


Dec. 


6 


Feb. 


21 


Nov. 


28 


May 


31 



546 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vreelaut, Jacob, y. m., and Mary Banta, y. d 1760 Nov. 6 

Vreelaut, Rachel, and Albert Hoppe ... 1765 Feb. 3 

Vreelaut, Simon, y. m., and Rachel Eidensteia, y. d 1756 Dec. 19 

Vreer, Isac, y. m., and Hester Jansen, y. d 1759 Nov. 11 

w 

Wade, Sarah, and Benjamin Skudder 1793 

Waldron, City, and David Godwin M. 1791 

Waldron, Peter, and Charita King 1798 

Waldron, Rebekka, and Johannes Van Hoorn ... .... 1791 

Wandel, John, y. m., b. at Barbados Neck, and Jantji Van Imbnrg, 

y. d. , etc 1761 

Wanemaeker, Dirk, y. m., and Autje Banta, y. d. 1765 

Wannamaker, Rachel, and John Hicks M. 17S9 

Watson, Maria, and Thomas Cammel 176 5 

Webbers, Frerik, y. in., b. at Hakkensak and 1. at de Grote kil (the 

Great Kill), and Lena Banta, y. d., b. and 1. at Schralenburgb, 

m. Oct. 29 1736 

Welkerwan, John, y. in, and Hauna Brerner, y. d 1762 

Westervelt, Benjamin, y. m., and Sara Bodett, y. d 1768 

Westerveld, Jacob Johanesseu, w., and Jany Banta, y. d 1768 

Westervekl, Peter, y. in., b. at Schralenbnrgh, and Letta Rigby, y. d., 

b. N. Y. and 1. at Schralenburgb, April 4 M. 1784 

Westerveld, Sophia, and Daniel Demarest 1762 

Westervelt, Aary, and Vrouwtje Westervelt 1799 

Westervelt, Aary, and Margreta Christie, w. of Daniel Westervelt. . . .1802 

Westervelt, Albert, and Rachel Duriee M. 1791 

Westervelt, Albert, and Elizabeth Lydekker M. 1793 

Westervelt, Alberto, w., b. at Hakkensak, audi, at Schralenburgh, and 

Lea Hartjin, y. d., b. at Rahway and 1. at Schralenburgb, 

m. June 18 1742 

Westervelt, Alida, and Jacob Couwenhoven 1796 

Westervelt, Altje, and Christian Van Hoorn 1764 

Westervelt, Aunaetje, and Galin Akkerman . . . .M. 1744 

Westervelt, Beeletje, and Abraham Van Blarcum 1796 

Westervelt, Beeletje, and Stephanus Bogert ... 1800 

Westervelt, Benjamin, y. in., and Sara Durye, y. d., both b. and 1. at 

Schralenburgh, Sept. 4 M. 1784 

Westervelt, Benjamin, y. in., and Maria Demorest, y. d., both of 

Schralenburgh, Jan. 4 M. 1 792 

Westervelt, Casparus, y. in., and Martyntje Dirje, y. d 1755 

Westervelt, Casparus, w. , and Rachel Zabriskie , 1763 

Westervelt, Cataliua, and William Christie 1797 

Westervelt, Catliua, and Pieter Westervelt M. 1793 

Westervelt, Caty, and Andrew Hopper 1795 

Westervelt, Cornelius D., and Dirica Bogert 1802 



Sept. 


22 


Mar. 


18 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


22 


Oct, 


17 


April 


19 


Sept. 


24 


Dec. 


24 


Sept. 


25 


Jan. 


11 


Oct. 


29 


Oct. 


15 


April 


23 


Aug. 


26 


Feb. 


9 


Feb. 


19 


Nov. 


24 


Mar. 


9 


May 


15 


May 


11 


Sept. 


6 


Oct. 


26 


June 


5 


April 


14 


Sept. 


— 


Feb. 


25 


Nov. 


29 


May 


15 


Nov. 


18 


May 


17 


Mar. 


28 


Sept. 


4 



SCHRAALENBURGH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



547 



Westervelt, Dauiel, aud Maria Cool. . . 1801 Jan. 31 

Westervelt, Daniel, y. m., and Grietje Christie, y. d 17GG May 25 

WeBtervelt, David, and Helena Banta M. 1791 June 22 

Westervelt, Douwe R , and Margreta Banta, w. of Tenuis Kuyper 18U2 June 12 

Westervelt, Elena, and Klaes Cuyper 1725 Nov. 27 

Westervelt, Femmetjeu, and Borger Van Ivereu M. 1738 June 30 

Westervelt, Gerriil, y. m., and Mary tj in Brouwer, y. d., both b. and 

1. at Schralenburyh, ni. Sept. 11 1713 Aug. 18 

Westervelt, Hary, y. m., and Greetje Zabriskie 17G2 Dec. 11 

Westervelt, Helena, and Abraham Huyler 1797 Feb. 1 1 

Westervelt, Henrica, and Abraham Folk 179G May 17 

Westervelt, Jacob, and Neeltje Post 1798 Oct. 27 

Westervelt, Jacobus, y. m., b. at Sckralenburgb, and 1. at Klooster, 

aud Debora Van Schyven, y. d., b. and 1. at Schraleuburgh, 

in. Dec. 28 1733 Dec. 1 

Westervelt, Jacobus, y. in., and Maria De Moree, y. d 1751 Nov. 5 

Westervelt, Jacobus, y. m., of Scbraleuburgb, and Rachel Couwen- 

hoven, y. d., of Euglisb Neighborhood, m. Mar. 23 1792 Feb. 25 

Westervelt, James, y. in., and Elizabeth Demorest, y. d., both of 

Schraleuburgh, m. Sept. 4 1789 Aug. 2 

Westervelt, Jau, y. m., b. aud 1. at Hakkensak, and Jaunetje Haring, 

y. d., b. and 1. at Schraleuburgh, in. Mar. 13 1715 Feb. 2 

Westervelt, Jan, y. m., b. at Peremis, res. Hakkensak, and Marytje 

Durje, y. d., b. and 1. at Scbraleuburgb, m. Dec. 18 1747 Nov. 14 

Westervelt, John, y. m., and Ansetje Day, 1 y. d 17G6 Mar. 2 

Westervelt, Johu A., y. m., b. aud 1. at Schraleuburg, aud Rachel Ack- 

ermau, y. d., b. and 1. at Paremes, m. , by Do: Vau de 

Liude 1784 Mar. 27 

Westervelt, Luke, and Racbel Sickles 1802 Dec. 18 

Westervelt, Margreta, aud Hendrik Boogert M. 1786 Nov. 20 

Westervelt, Maria, aud Jacobus Demorest M. 1787 May 29 

Westervelt, Maria, and John J. Beusou 1748 April 24 

Westervelt, Maria, and Peter Paughorn M. 1787 May 28 

Westervelt, Maria, aud Peter Campbell 1801 May 24 

Westervelt, Osseltjen, aud Albertas Spier M. 1744 June 15 

Westervelt, Pieter, and Catlina Westervelt M. 1793 May 17 

Westervelt, Polly, and John Hoppe M. 1790 Jan. 16 

Westervelt, Rachel, and Abraham Cool 1731 Oct, 29 

Westervelt, Roelof, w. of Oeceltje Styvesy, b. aud 1. at Schralenburgh, 

and Lea Demarest, w. of Abraham Brouwer, b. aud 1. here .... 1731 May 15 

Westervelt, Sopbia, aud Albert Bogert M. 1787 Aug. 9 

Westervelt, Sophia, and Jobn Banta 1802 Aug. 21 

Westervelt, Stephen, and Antje Bogert 1798 Nov. 25 

Westervelt, Vrouwtje, and Aary Westervelt 1799 Feb. 9 



i Subsequently given in the record as Annaatjc Dye or Dey. 



548 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Westervelt, Willem, y. m., aud Beeletje Quackenboss, y. d., both of 

the Schraleuburgh Congregation, m. Aug. 29 1790 Aug. 7 

Wever, Barent, and Sarah Post M. 1791 Sept. 13 

Wiggins, Charles, y. in., and Catrina Edsel, y. d 1762 May 31 

Wilkin, Selly, aud Edmund Kinghsland 1763 Feb. 5 

Willemsen, Theod., y. ru., and [Maria] Banta, y. d 1767 June 22 

Williams, Adam, y. m., and Catkariua Labagh, y. d., of Scralen- 

bnrgb, m. May 30 1793 May 23 

Williams, Polly, and Nathanael Earl 1757 Feb. 10 

William", William, and Margreta Eaton M. 1790 Jan. 1 

Wilse, Jacob, and Sarah Bell 1802 Oct. 27 

Wilson, George, and Maria Jarolderman M. 1792 Dec. 6 

Winter, Maria, and Henry Tice 1798 June 16 

Witney. Hannah, and John Huyler M. 1791 Nov. 6 

Woerdendyck, Antje, and Johannes Smith 1750 May 18 

Woertendyk, Fredericus, y. m., 1. at Tappan, and Sara Durje, y. d., 

b. and 1. at Hakkeusak, m. April 3 ... A. 1748 Mar. 5 

Woertendyk, Jacob, and Elizabeth Campbell, m. Dec. 7 1792 Nov. 2 

Woertendyk, John, and Elisabeth Post M. 1792 Dec. 15 

W r oertendyk, Reinier, y. m., 1. at Tappan, and Jannitjen Durje, y. d ., 

b. and 1. at Hakkeusak, in. Dec. 10 A. 1746 Nov. 15 

Wood, Samuel, y. m., b. at Kakkiat, and Vrouwtje De Morest, y. d., 

b. aud 1. at Schraleuburgh, m. May 31 1784 May 15 

Y 

Yolli, Lizabeth, and Johannes Grootvelt 1756 April 4 

z 

Zaberoweski, Christian, y. m., and Lena Voorhees, y. d. 1753 Feb. 18 

Zaboriski, Klaes, y. in., b. audi, at Hakkeusak, andBachel De Mar- 

est, y. d., b. and 1. at Schraleuburgh, m. Nov. 14 1735 Oct. 18 

Zaborisky, Elizabeth, and Cornells Bogert M. 1739 Sept. 26 

Zaborisky, Feitjen, and Jacob Lizier M. 1739 June 6 

Zaboriske, John, Jr., y. in., and Jane Goelett, y. d 1764 Nov. 21 

Zabriske, Lea, aud Samuel Van Saan 1765 July 25 

Zabriske, Rachel, and Casparus Westervelt 1763 May 15 

Zabriskie, Albert, and Fanny Nicoll M. 1789 April 30 

Zabriskie, Audries, and Elizabeth Anderson 1793 July 21 

Zabriskie, Greetje, aud Hary Westervelt 1762 Dec. ] 1 

Zabriskie, Jacob C, and Maria Brevoort 1797 Dec. 20 

Zabriskie, John, aud Auuaatje Voorhesen 1796 June 11 

Zabriskie,, Johu, aud Caty Hooglaud M. 1792 Oct, 13 

Zabriskie, Lea, and David Hariug 1800 June 21 

Zabriskie, Lisabeth, and Peter Kuyper 1759 Aug. 11 

Zabriskie, Maria, and Hendrik Vansaau 1799 Nov. 2 

Ze iman, Edniond, y. m., and Elizabeth Sabriske, y. d 1708 Dec. 25 

Zebriske, Jautje, aud David Demarest 1761 



PARAMUS REFORMED (DUTCH) CHURCH 

Marriage Records, 1799-1801. 



The Eeforined Dutch Church at Pa rani its was organized in 1 725, and was under 
the same pastorate as the Hackensack Church until 1728. From 1731 to 1748 the 
pulpit was supplied by the pastors of the Churches at Acquackanonk and Hackensack. 
Hence, the marriage records are usually found in the books of those churches. The 
Kev. Benjamin Vandelinde was pastor, 1748-1789; the Rev. Gerardus Arense Kuy- 
pers, 1788-1789; the Bev. Isaac Blauvelt, 1790-1791; the Rev. William Provoost 
Kuypers, 1793-1796. No marriage records of the church have been preserved until 
the time of the Rev. Wilhelnius Eltinge, pastor 1799-1850. The following are from 
the first volume of the Church records. It will be observed that merely names and 
dates are given. 

A 

Acker, Susannah, and Benjamin Demarest 1800 Dec. 14 

Ackerman, "William,! and Anna Hopper 1800 Aug. 9 

B 

Banta, Geertye, and John Westervelt 1801 April 2 

Banta, Jacomyntie, and Aurie Blauvelt 1799 Oct. 11 

Banta, Thomas T. , and Elizabeth Herring 1800 Sept. 6 

Blauvelt, Aurie, and Jacomyntie Banta 1799 Oct. 11 

Bogart, Eva, and Thomas Dobs « 1800 Sept, 13 

Bogert, Jaine, and Jacobus Clark 1799 Oct. 20 

C 

Cadmus, Sally, and Abraham Delamater. 1800 Sept. 6 

Campbell, William, and Jane Fersheur 1799 July 24 

Clark, Jacobus, and Jaine Bogert . . 1799 Oct. 20 

D 

Debaun, Andries A., and Maria Tolman 1800 Aug. 30 

Delamater, Abraham, and Sally Cadmus 1800 Sept. G 

Demarest, Baurent, and Lantye Storms 1801 Mar. 14 

i ■• Certin'tiif. I, Garret Ackerman, do hereby certify that my Son William Ackerman 
has my willing consent to be married to Miss Anna Hopper. — Wil ness Jacob Hi ipper.— Aug. 
9. A 1800— Ga nit Ackerman." 



550 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Demarest, Benjamin, and Susannah Acker 1800 Dec. 14 

Dey, Aurie, and Rachel Grey 1800 Nov. 15 

Dobs, Thomas, and Eva Bogart 1800 Sept. 13 

Durernus, John, and Altye Zabriskie 1800 Nov. 30 

E 

Echerson, John, and Geertie Haldrom. 1800 May 17 

Eckerson, Maria, and Tunis Quackenbnsh 1801 Dec. 19 

F 

Fersheur, Cornelius, and Maria Post 1800 May 17 

Forshur, Elizabeth, and John Post 1801 July 27 

Forsheur, Jane, and William Campbell 1799 July 24 

G 

Garbrance, Jacob, and Mary Humans 1801 June 14 

Garrise, Jacob, and Rachel Lutkins 1801 Jan. 25 

Grey, Rachel, and Aurie Dey 1800 Nov. 1 5 

H 

Haldrom, Geertie, and John Echerson 1800 May 17 

Halm, Susannah, and Abraham Zabriskie 1799 Oct. 12 

Haring, Jaunecbye, and Peter Post 1801 Aug. 29 

Herring, Elizabeth, and Thomas T. Banta 1800 Sept. 6 

Hopper, Anna, and William Ackerman 1800 Aug. 9 

Humans, Mary, and Jacob Garbrance 1801 June 14 

L 

Lutkins, Rachel, and Jacob Garrise 1801 Jan. 25 

M 

Mourisou, Susannah, and John Vanweert 1801 Dec. 16 

P 

Post, John, and Elizabeth Forshur 1801 July 27 

Post, Maria, and Cornelius Fersheur 1800 May 17 

Post, Peter, and Jannechye Haring 1801 Aug. 29 

o 

Quackenbush, Tunis, and Maria Eckerson 1801 Dec. 19 

s 

Saese and Susan, slaves of Henry Terhune and J. V. Romeyn 1801 June 14 

Sar and Tom, slaves of Benjamin and John Zabriskie 1801 Jan. 10 



PARAMUS CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 55 I 

Smith, Maria, and Ryer Vanblarcum 1801 Dec. 19 

Storm, Lautye, and Baurent Demarest 1801 Mar. 14 

Susau aud Saese, slav.es of Henry Terhune aud J. V. Romeyu 1801 Juue 14 

T 

Toluian, Maria, and Audries A. Debaun 1800 Aug. 30 

Tom and Sar, slaves of Benjamin and John Zabriskie 1801 Jau. 10 

V 

Vanblarcum, Annatie, and Cornelius Wortendyk 1801 Nov. 28 

Vanblarcum, Ryer, and Maria Smith 1801 Dec. 19 

Vanweert, John,' and Susannah Mourison 1801 Dec. 16 

W 

Westervelt, John, and Geerte Banta 1801 April 2 

Wortendyk, Cornelius, and Annatie Vanblarcum 1801 Nov. 28 



Zabriskie, Abraham, and Susannah Halm 1799 Oct. 12 

Zabriskie, Altye, and John Duremus 1800 Nov. 30 



Bergen County Clerk's Marriage Records, 



1795-180O. 



The following is a transcript from the Record of Returns of Marriages, 1795-1800, 
kept in the office of the Clerk of the County of Bergen, pursuant to Sec. VIII, of "An 
Act concerning marriages," passed the 4th of March, 1795. The records have been 
herewith arranged in alphabetical order. 

H— indicates that the ceremony was performed by the Rev. Jaanes V. Romeyn, of 
the Hackensack Church. 

P — that the Rev. Wilhelmus Eltiug, of Paramus, was the officiating clergyman. 

S— that the Rev. Solomon Frceligh, of Schraalenburgh, officiated. He made hi3 
return of such marriages, with one exception, on June 6, 1796. 

A 

Ackerman, William, and Anna Hopper P 1800 Aug. 9 

Alyee, Petertye, and Daniel Van Horn H 1800 Nov. H 

B 

Banta, Peter, and Sarah D. Frceligh . S 1796 May 16 

Banta, Gilbert, and Lea Bogert H 1S0O Feb. 1 

Bogert, Eva, and Thomas Dobbs P 1800 Sept. 13 

Bogardus, Evert, and Eleanor Dongon HI 800 Mar. 29 

Bogert, Lea, and Gilbert Banta H 1800 Feb. 1 

Bogert, William, and Elizabeth Demarest S 1796 Mar. 28 

Brinkerhoff, Albert, and Giestje Van Voorhiesen S 1796 May 29 

Brinkerhoff, Rulof, and Tina Knyper H 1800 Feb. 1 

Brinkerhoff, Seba, and Jane Durie H 1800 April 27 

C 

Cadmus, Sally, aud Abraham Delamater P 1800 Sept. 6 

Conselje, John, and Elizabeth PeVoe S 1796 April 30 

Cowenhoven, Jacob, and Alida Westervelt S 1796 May 17 

D 

DeBaun, Sally, and Daniel Perry. H 1799 Nov. 16 

DeVoe, Elizabeth, and John Conselje S 1796 April 30 

Delamater, Abraham, aud Sally Cadmus ....PI 800 Sept. 6 

Demarest, Elizabeth, and William Bogert S 1796 Mar. 28 

Demarest, Rachel, aud Albert Zabriskie II 1799 Dec. 21 

Demarest, Samuel, aud Metje Van Woorhasson S 1795 Dec. 31 

Dobbs, Thomas, and Eva Bogert P 1S00 Dec. 13 

Dongon, Eleanor, and Evert Bogardus H 1800 Mar. '29 

Durie, Jane, aud Seba Brinkerhoff H 1800 April 27 

39 



554 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

F 

Forshur, Cornelius, and Maria Post P 1800 May 17 

Frceligh, Sarah D., and Peter Banta S 1796 May 16 

G 

Goetscse, Sarah, and Jacob Haring S 1795 Nov. 14 

H 

Haring, Jacob, and Sarah Goetscse S 1795 Nov. 14 

Hopper, Anna, and William Ackerman P 1800 Aug. 9 

K 

Kuyper, Tina, and Rulef Briukerhoff H 1800 Feb. 1 

L 

Lutkins, Harmon, and Elizabeth Terhune H 1800 July 30 

P 

Perry, Daniel, and Sally De Baun H 1799 

Perry, Elizabeth, and Abrabam Post H 1800 

Post, Abraham, and Elizabeth Perry H 1800 

Post, Maria, and Cornelius Forshur P 1800 

Powelson, Catharina, and Wallon Van Winkle H 1800 

R 

Randolph, Hannah, and Daniel Ver Valen S 1796 

Roebuck, Jane, and Peter John Roebuck H 1800 

Roebuck, Peter John, and Jane Roebuck H 1800 

Romiue, Lydia, and Stepben Terhune, 1 H 1796 

T 

Terhune, Elizabeth, and Harman Lutkins H 1800 

Terbune, Stephen, and Lydia Romine H 1796 

V 

Van Blarcom, Abraham, and Baeltje Westervelt S 1796 

Van Horn, Daniel, and Petertye Alyee H 1800 

Ver Valen, Daniel, and Hannah Randolph S 1796 

Van Voorbasen, Annaatje, and Juhn Zabriskie S 1796 

Van Voorhiesen, Giestje, and Albert Briukerhoff S 1796 

Van Woorhassen, Metje, and Samuel Demarest S 1795 

Van Winkle, Wallon, and Catherina Powleson H 1800 

w 

Westervelt, Alicia, and Jacob S. Cowenhoven S 1796 

Westervelt, Baeltje, and Abraham Van Blarcom S 1796 

z 

Zabriskie, Albert, and Rachel Demarest H 1799 

Zabriskie, John, and Annaatje Van Voorbasen S 1796 



Nov. 


16 


Nov. 


2 -1 


Nov. 


22 


May 


17 


Nov. 


'2(1 


April 


24 


April 


3 


April 


3 


April 


13 


July 


30 


April 


13 


June 


5 


Nov. 


17 


April 


2 


June 


11 


May 


29 


Dec. 


:il 


Nov. 


20 


May 


17 


June 


5 


Dec. 


21 


June 


11 



i By the Rev. Warmoldus Kuypers, Hackensack, 



Bergen Reformed (Dutch) Church 

Marriage Records, 1664-1801. 



The Dutch settlers at Bergen (now known as Jersey City Heights, in Jersey City) 
worshiped for years in New Amsterdam. In 16G2 a village tax was levied for the 
purpose of erecting a church of their own, 417 guilders (a guilder being equivalent to 
forty cents) being raised for that purpose. It is probable that a log meeting house 
was put up in 1663, for a record exists of the collections taken up at the weekly serv- 
ices, beginning in that year, and continued ever since. In 1661 a register was begun 
of baptisms, marriages, burials and communicants, which has been kept up from that 
date to this, except from 1769 to 1793, when there is a break in the register of com- 
municants. 

Although the Bergen Church was the first established in New Jersey, of which we 
have definite data, it was not until September 10, 1757, that it had a pastor independ- 
ent of the New York Church. On the date mentioned the Kev. William Jackson was 
installed pastor of the Bergen and Staten Island Churches. He retired in 1789. 
The Rev. John Cornelison was on May 26, 1793, installed pastor of the churches at 
Bergen and English Neighborhood. He served Bergen alone from 1806 until his 
death, March 20, 1828. 

The Bergen Church received a charter from Governor William Franklin, Decem- 
ber 20, 1771. It was reincorporated in 1799 under the laws of the State of New Jer- 
sey. 

Before having a regular pastor the people were ministered unto by the preachers 
from New York and elsewhere. As this would have been an uncertain dependence, 
they relied more upon the Voorleezer, who acted as precentor, school-teacher, etc. 
Bergen was particularly fortunate in securing for its first Voorleezer, Reinier Van Gie- 
sen. He was engaged by the magistrates and the consistory of the Dutch Church of 
Flatbush, L I., June 6, 1660, to teach school, act as court messenger, ring the bell, 
keep the church in order, act as voorleezer, attend to the burial of the dead, etc., etc. 
He probably removed to Bergen in the summer of 1663, to assume the performance 
of similar duties. The records of the Bergen Church are in his handwriting— an ex- 
cellent one— from 1664 to 1707, a period of forty-three years. It will be observed 
that the particulars of the marriages are given with much greater fulness than iu the 
other churches whose records are printed in this volume. He died at Bergen, May 

15, 1707. 

His successors as Voorleezers and keepers of the church records were: 1707-1736, 
Adrian Ver Meulen; 1736-1761, Isaac P. Van Benthusen; 1761-1789, Abraham Sick- 
les; 1789-1809, John Collard. 



A 



556 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

In Winfield's Laud Titles of Hudson County, 1872, was given an alphabetical index 
to the Bergen Church registers. There are many errors and omissions in that index, 
which it is hoped are for the most part cured, as to the marriages, in the index here 
published. Moreover, the present index is a translation of the entire entries in the 
Marriage Records of the Bergen Church, 1064 to 1801, giving many most interesting 
and important details of the personal history of the wedded couples. In some instan- 
ces, notes have been added, principally from the New York Dutch Church Marriage 
Records. 

For this transcript and translation of the Bergen Church Marriage Records, the 
editor is indebted to Theodore M. Banta, Esq , Secretary of the Holland Society, 
which Society caused the records to be transcribed, some years ago. 

The date given in the right baud column in the following pages is that of the first 
proclamation of the banns, except where otherwise indicated. It will be noticed that 
it was customary for the young couple to take from the Bergen Church a certificate of 
the auuouucement of the banns, and go to New York to get married by a regularly or- 
dained minister of the Gospel. 

A 

Ackermau, Abraham, from Berlicum in the Meiery of Bois le due, 1 and 
Aaltje Yan Lter, from N. York, received certificate May 27 to 

Breuckeleu. , M. 1633 May 28 

Ackermau, Kobus, and Betje Belser 1782 Nov. 27 

Ackermau, Lourus, from Geffen iu the Meiery of 's Herfcogenbosch, 
aud Geertje Egbers, from N. Albany, m. Aug. 3 by Voorlezer 

R. Yan Giezeu, in presence of Couit 1 679 July 5 

Ager, Nicolis, aud Jan Criscel, were m. at Bergen by Justice Claes 

Areutse Toers 16S7 Feb. 13 

Alberts, Hans, from Bronswyck,- aud Annetje Gysbertse, from Bergen 

in New Jersey, received certificate Nov. 12 1683 Oct. 21 

Albertse, Aart, from X. York, and Catharina Vreeland, from Gemen- 

epa, m. June 26, by R. Yan Giesen 1692 

Aljee, Jaunetje, and Simon Jacob-en Yan Winkel 1710 

Anderson, Andrew, aud Jaunetie C xlnras, both of Bergen. 1801 

Andries, Franc\ntje, aud Roelof Swartwout 1091 

Andriese ? Maria, aud Pieter Makale ? 1730 

Andriesse, Fytje, and Abraham Yan Giesen 1691 

Audriesse, J , and Jan Slot 17(H) 

Andriesse, Rachel, aud Dirk Phillipse Couyu 1707 

Andriesseu, Sara, aud Casparus Preyer 1714 

Aray, William, and Mary Day, both of English Neighbourhood . ., . . 1799 
Arentse, Hendrickje, aud Piet C >rnelisse Van Steenwyck, m. July 31, 

before Court at Bergen 1670 July 10 

1 A manor in North Brabant, called iu French Bois le Due, and in Dutch s" Hertogen- 

2 Brunswick. New Brunswick. 



May 


29 


May 


27 


May 


23 


Nov. 


22 


Mar. 


18 


Oct. 


4 


Mar. 


10 


Sept. 


7 


Mar. 


13 


June 


30 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 557 

Arsele, Joseph, from London in O. England, and Elisabeth Waliughs, 

from Wickham in t). England, probably were not in 1078 May 26 

Aymar, Peter, of N. Y., and Anna Hunt, of Powles Hook 1757 Mar. 5 

B 

Baeldin, Annatje, and John Miet 1793 April 23 

Bandt, Johannes Jansen, and Willemyntje Philips, both from N. York, 

3 proclam. and no objections 1(197 June 27 

Baker, Margarrit, and Conrad Shindler 1793 Sept. 4 

Banta, Margrieta Dircks, and Dirck Hertmanse Vreelant 1702 Oct. 18 

Barents, Lourens, from Vlissingen, Zeeland, w. of Isabella Govi 

Zeemau, and Hester Van Blercom from Bergen, received certifi- 
cate Sept. 8 to New York 1707 Aug. 27 

Barentsen, Dirck, from Pemmerepoch, and Elisabeth Gerrits, from 

Bergen, m. at Bergen by Do. Dubois 1704 April 1 1 

Baten, Peter, and Helena Catherina Coops, both from Holland and 

now 1. at English Neighbourhood 1795 Dec. 27 

Bear, Maria, and Hagbergt de Wolff 1798 Sept. 3 

Bedell, John, and Mary Smith, both of Secaucus 1S00 Mar. 10 

Beekman, Catharina, and Pieter Post , 1710 Nov. 17 

Beekman, Christopher, of N. Y., and Maria Hunt, of Powles Hook. . . 1799 July G 

Belser, Betje, and Kobus Ackerman. . . 1782 Nov. 27 

Berreys, Francyntje, and Tammes Larens 1G85 Aug. 2 

Billau, Isaac, b. at sea, and Ida Sueberiugh, from Midwout, L. I., re- 
ceived certificate to Staten Island Nov. 25 1G84 Nov. 2 

Blinckerhof, Agie, and Abraham Sikels 1739 April 1 

Blinckerhoff, Hartman, and Claasie Van Houten 1744 Oct. 20 

Blinckerhoff, Margrita, and Mathys De Mot 1705 May 6 

Blinkerhoff, Cornells Hendricksen, b. at Midwout, Kings Co., and 
Aagjie Hartmans Vreelaud, b. at Gemceaepau, m. in presence 

of Justice Enoch Vreeland by Adrian Vermeule. . 1708 May 21 

Blinkerhoff, Hendrick, and Lea Van Wagenen 1779 June 19 

Bogert, Jane, and Garret Meyer 1779 Dec. 18 

Bongert, Geeshe, and Juriaen Van Westervelt 1G90 April 22 

Booaas, Maria, and Hendrick Jansz Van den Bos 1GS5 Sept. 27 

Borteu, Antje, and Bureud Bruyu , 1714 Mar. 27 

Borton, Jan, from London, O. England, and Hillegont Jacobs, from 

Midwout, both 1. at Pemmerepoch, received certificate Sept. 8. . 1 GOO Aug. 21 

Boyd, Thomas, and Eleanor Cotteu, both of Bergen 1796 Aug. 7 

Braambush, David, and Rachel van Home, both of Bergen Point 1795 Mar. 26 

Braeck, Claesje Dirckse, and Johannes Machielse Vreeland ... 1G82 May 14 

Braeck, Metje Dircks, and Cornells Machiels Vreelaud 1GS1 April 17 

Brinkerhoof, Hartman, of English Neighbourhood, and Elizabeth van 

Nnrden, of New Bridge 1797 Oct. 28 

Brinkerhoof, Catherine, and Jacob Vreelaud 1801 Jan. 24 

Brinkerhof, Martje, and Helmigh Van Wagenen 1735 Sept. 26 



Mar. 


28 


April 


10 


Oct, 


8 


Mar. 


27 


Dec. 


13 


Feb. 


12 


Feb. 


1 


Sept. 


30 


Oct, 


1 


Jan. 


12 


June 


1 


Nov. 


6 


Dec. 


20 



558 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bronckhorst, Susanna Hendricks, and Roelof Vauderlinde 1682 Oct. 

Brouwer, Jacob, b. at Bergen, and Lea Slot, b. at Ackinsack, both 1. 

at Bergen 1730 

Brower, Peter, and Catherine Post, both of English Neighbourhood. . . 1786 
Brouwer, Uldrik, b. and 1. at Bergen, and Marya Van der Vorst, b. at 

N. York, 1. at Bergen 1738 

Bruyn, Barend, and Autje Borten, both b. and 1. at Perarnerpoch 1714 

Burdett, Hannah, and Jonathan Dixon 1794 

Buskirk, Anna, and Barger van Home 1801 

Buskirk, Catherine, and Peter Garrabrance 1800 

Buys, Arien Pieterse, from Tiel,i and Treyntje Hendrickx Oosteroom, 

from N. Jersey, m. by the minister at Bergen 1672 

Buys, Hendrickje Janse, and Reynier Van Giesen 1699 

Buys, Neeltje, and Jan Straetmaker 1707 

Buys, Neeltje Janse, and Jan Hermens 1684 

Buys, Tryntje, and Dirck Straetmaker 1698 

Bryant, Annetje, and Nicasius Kip 1691 

c 

Cadmus, Andries Frederiksen, w. of Priscilla Hooms, and Geertje 
Claassen Kuyper, groom b. and 1. at Bergen, bride b. and 1. at 

Ahasymus 1725 Oct. 22 

Callerd, Anuatie, and Johannes Van Houte 1782 Dec. 19 

Callerd, Johannis, and Gertie Pryer .' 1782 Dec. 19 

Carlock, George, and Elizabeth Lozier, both of the Three Pigeons. . . . 1801 Aug. 8 

Carlock, Mathias, and Ruth Ludlow, both of the Three Pigeons 1797 Oct. 7 

Christophers, Esther Garretson, w., and Joshua Mesereau 1794 Aug. 3 

Clinedeny, Sally, and Cornelius van Home 1799 Nov. 14 

Claes, Lysbeth, and Hessel Pieterse 1699 June 8 

Claes, Merritje, and Gerbrant Claese 1674 Aug. 11 

Claes, Pietertje, and Jacobus Jausen 1096 Nov. 22 

Claesje, Tryntje, aud Teunis Roelofse 1677 Dec. 23 

Claes, Vrouwtje, and Gerret Steynmets M. 1684 Mar. 12 

Claese, Garbrant, from Amersfoort on Long Island, and Merritje 
Claes, from Gemenepa, received certificate Aug. 25, to Amers- 
foort, L. I 1674 Aug. 11 

Claesen, Andries, and Preyntje Machielse ... 1068 Mar. 25 

Claessen, Jan, from Hesymus, ! 1. there, and Tryntje Straetmaker, from 

Hobokeu, 1. there, m. Oct. 1 by Rev. Selyns at Bergen 1694 Sept. 23 

Claesz, Cornells, from N. York, and Aeltje Teunise, from Breuckelen, 

received certificate to Breuckelen on Dec. 10 M. 1681 Dec. 11 

Clerke, Charles, aud Susan Thorp, transient persons 1798 Nov. 6 

Cobus, Jannetje, and Anthony Swertwout 1693 April 30 

1 In Gelderland. 

1 Ahasimus, Harsimus— now in Jersey City. 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 559 

Cobus, Maeyke, and Frans Post 1690 

Cobnsseu, Maaike. and Arien Thoinasen 1686 

Codmu?, Jauuetie, aud Andrew Anderson 1801 

Coejemau, Heudrik, b. at 2ml lliv. and Martje Gerbrautse, b. and 1. at 

Gemoanepa 1738 

Coertson, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Maurison, both of Bergen 1797 

Collerd, Jacobus, y. m., and Aegyo Diedrieks, y. d 1789 

Colter, Eleanor, and Thomas Boyd. 1796 

Colter, Peggy, and Abrm Prine 1796 

Compton, Peggy Dezer, w., and Edward Corlo 1798 

Conyn, Dirk Phillipse, from Albany, and Rachel Audriesse, from N. 

York, 1. at Bergen, received certificate Oct. 21 to N. York 1707 

Coonzens, Anna Bagtmens, (?) w., and Patrick Grimes 1796 

Coops, (?) Helena Catharina, and Peter Baten . . 1795 

Cordeljou, Maria, and Wilhelm Hermensen Van Borckeloo 1697 

Cornells, Aunetje, and Jan Webber 1693 

Cornelis, Elisabetb, and Dirck Janse Van Oogsten 1672 

Cornelis, Eugeltje, aud Dauiel De Voor 1693 

Cornelis, Gerritje, and Jacob Lubi 1672 

Cornelis, Neeltje, and Heudrick Cornelisse 1669 

Cornelis, Sara, and Jacob Mattheeus 1707 

Cornelison, Abraham, and Catherine du Bais, both of Orange Co., 

N. Y 1795 

Cornelison, Johannis, and C^tberina Mesier 1795 

Cuyper, Sara, and Jobannes Juryansen 1710 

Cornelis, Weyutje, and Pieter Pierra 1687 

Cornelisse, Heudrick, and Neeltje Cornelis, came here with certificate 

and were m. by the court 1669 June 9 

Cornelisse, Mathys, from N. Harlem, 1. at Hackensack, and Tryutje 

Hendricks, b. and 1. at Bergeu, m. Nov. 13, 1692, by R. Van 

Giesen, Voorleezer, in presence of the Court at Bergen 1692 

Criscel, Jau, aud Nicolis Ager 1687 

Cubberlay, Sophia, and Michael van Tile 1797 

D 

Daamen, Martba Jause, and James Simese 1697 

Darna, Annetje, and Hermen Smeemen 1668 

Damen, Cornelia, and Pieter Josi 1686 

Daniels, Aaltje, and Jacob Jacobse Van Winckel 1675 

Day, Esther, aud James Hadley 1797 

Day, Jobanua, and Edward Earle 1800 

Day, John, aud Lucretia Westervelt, both of Euglish Neighborhood. .1798 

Day, Naomi, aud Henry van der Hoof 1797 

Day, Willem, born on Barbadus Isld, 1. near Hackensack, and Aunatje 
Jacobs, b. near David's plantation in Bergen Co., 1. "at Hasy- 
mns, m. April 14 at Bergen by Dr. Selyns 1691 April 5 



April 


22 


May 


30 


May 


23 


May 


5 


May 


6 


Nov. 


29 


Aug. 


7 


Dec. 


27 


April 


2 


Sept. 


7 


Feb. 


3 


Dec. 


27 


Mar. 


7 


Mar. 


5 


Jan. 


14 


Feb. 


28 


Sept. 


14 


June 


9 


April 


27 


Feb. 


3 


May 


12 


Dec. 


2 


Sept. 


20 



Nov. 


6 


Feb. 


13 


Dec. 


9 


Aug. 


15 


Nov. 


25 


April 


6 


Nov. 


14 


June 


21 


Feb. 


13 


Dec. 


15 


June 


3 



Sept. 


14 


June 


24 


Feb. 


7 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


21 


Feb. 


13 



Oct, 


30 


Oct. 


11 


Feb. 


28 


Sept. 


23 


Nov. 


12 



560 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Decker, Catherine, arid William Westervelt 1800 

Dedrix, Altie, aud Daniel van Kleff 1797 

Dedrix, Januetje, and Peter Post 1795 

de Gray, Sally, aud David Earl 1800 

Degroof, Peter, aud Eleanor Brower, w. of Jobn Mersereau, botb of 

the New Bridge 1801 

de Groot, Rachel aud Michael Vreeland 1796 

DeMot, Mathys, b. at Kingstown, 1. at Bergen, and Margrita Blincker- 

boff, 1. at Hackensack, ru. at Hackensack 1705 May 

De Moth, Claasje, and Cornelis Van Vorst • 1726? 

Deraoth, Hendrik, and Januetje Van Wageneu, both b. aud 1. at 

Bergen 1740 

Dernoth, Jacob, and Feytje Van Hjuten, both from Bargeu 1747 

De Voor, Dauiel, w., with letters from the French Church at Kiukacb- 

gemeck, in Bsrgen Co., and Eugeltje Cornelis > . . . . 1693 

de Wolff, Hagbregt, and Maria Bear, both of Hackensack 1798 

Dezer, Nathauael, and Clara Earl, both of Euglish Neighborhood 1799 

Didericks, Antje, aud Johanuis Johanuissen Vreeland. •. 1726 

Didericks, Johannes, b. and I. at Bergen, and Geertruy Van Winkel, 

b. aud 1. Ackqueknonk 1724 May 

Dideriks, Gerrit, and Jannitje Van Nieuwkerk, both b. and 1. at 

Bergen . 1733 

Diderix, Johauui*, aud Autie Van Wageneu, both b. and 1. at Bergen. 1768 

Diedericks, Aaltje, aud Johannis Wiuue 1758 

Diedericks, Antje, and Joseph Waldron 1757 

Diederickx, Wander, and Aaltje Geriits, both from Bargen, m. Nov. 

27, by R. Van Gieseu, iu presence of Court 1693 

Diedrick?, Aegya, aud Jacobus Collerd • 1789 

Diedriks, Jacob, from Bergen, aud Januetje Van Winkel, b. at Ber- 
gen, 1. at Pemmerpeg 1733 Nov. 26 

Diedriks, Johannes, w., b. audi, at Bergen, aud Hester Vreeland, b. 

aud 1. at Wesel 1739 

Diedrikx, Cornelis, and Antje Roos, botb b. and 1. at Bergen 1735 

Dirckx, Neeltje, aud Rutger Van Hooreu 1697 

Dixou, Jonathan, and Haunah Burdett, both of Engl. Neighborhood. .1794 
Doremu«, Coruelis Cornelisse, b. at Middelburg, Zeeland, 1. at Ach- 

queclmouk, and Rachel Pieterseu, b. and 1. at Bergen 1710 

Dorlant, Marritje, and Lucas Suberingh 1690 

Dorston, Johu, and Widow Jones, both of Uuion, Tioga Co., N. Y. . . .1794 

Douglas, Elliuor, and B irtel. Jacobs . . 1695 

Douwese, Herrneu, aud Gerritje Minues, m. by the minister at 

Bergenl 1686 June 21 

1 In the New York Church records the marriage is entered thus: 

Harmen Douvvcnszcn Taelman, j. in. V rd. en Grietie Minnens, j. d. Van N. Am- 

ersfoort.de Eer op Tappan en tweede op Ilaxstroo. [1686] den 21 [June] op 

• 'i. 
Translation: Harmen Douwenszen [Harmen. son of Douwe] Taelman, bachelor, from 



April 


■21 


Dec. 


17 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


3 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


29 



April 


14 


June 


7 


April 


25 


Dec. 


13 


Aug. 


12 


April 


6 


Aug. 


6 


.Mar. 


•21 



Nov. 


12 


Aug. 


24 


Oct. 


21 


Feb. 


13 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 56 1 

Douwesen, ? or Pouweseu,? Poulus, w. of Aeltje Jacobs, and Feytje 
Hendrickse, w. of Hendrick Van Reynne, received certificate to 

N. York May 3 . . . 1702 April 12 

du Bois, Catherine, aud Abrm Cornelison 1795 Feb. 3 

Duyts, Lourens, and G-rietje Jans 1666 Jan. 1 



Earl, Clara, and Natbanael Dezer 1799 

Earl, David, and Sally de Gray, both of the Three Pigeons 1800 

Earle, Daniel, aud Charlotte Nicolls, both of Wee-hawk 1800 

Earle, E Iward, and Johanna Day, both of English Neighbourhood. . . 1800 
Earle, Edward, and Peggy Dezer, w. of John Cornpton, both of Eng- 
lish Neighbourhood 1798 April 12 

Earle, Edward, from Maryland, 1. on Sicakis Isld, and Elsje Vreeland, 
from Gemonepa, 1. at Minkachgee, Feb. 13, 1688, Rev. Selyns, 

of New York, married them 1688 June 29 

Edsal, Johannis, 1. at Major David's plantation, and Charity Smit, 1. 

on Cap. Berry's plantation, both from N. York 1691 

Eduwaert, Catryua, aud Mathys Gerritse 16S8 

Eduwaerts, Hermeu, from East Frieslaud, aud Jannetje Hendriekx 

Oosteroom, from Amesfoort, certificate on Aug. 25 1678 

Eerlsie, Maria, and Johannis Van der Hoef 1738 

Evertse, Heleena, and Daniel Pryue 1791 

Egbers, Geertje, and Lourus Ackerman 1679 

Egberts, Dirckje, and Pieter Pieterse Haeswout 1683 

Eltiugh, Jan Roelofse, and Jacomyutje Slech, w. of Gerrit Fooken, 
both 1. at Esopus, received certificate to be m. at Esopus, Nov. 

24, 1672 1672 Nov. 10 

Epkese, Dirck, from Minnertschel in West Frieslaud, aud Hester 
Hanse, from Bergen in New Jersey, m. by the preacher at Ber- 
gen, the first in the church 16S I Oct. 3 

Epkese, Hendrick, from Miunerschel in W. Frieslaud, and Mareytje 
Lubberts, from Meppel in Drenthe, rn. Nov. 17, by the Voor- 

lezer R. Van Giesen, in presence of the Court of Bergen 1678 Oct. 27 

Epkese. Wiert, from Miunertschel in West Frieslaud, and Geertje Jelise 
[Mandeviel], m. by the preacher at Bergen, the first in the 

church, 1681, Oct, 3 1.681 Sept. 25 

Epkese, Sibe, from Esterbirum- in W. Frieslaud, aud Marytje Ariaense 
Sips, from X. York, m. Nov. 6, by Voorlezer R. Van Giesen, iu 

presence of Court . 1678 Oct. 13 

Evers, Johannis, and Seytje Spier 1744 Aug. 20 

Amsterdam, and Grietie Minnens, spinster, from New Amersfoort. the former Living at 
Tappan and the latter at Haverstraw. [Married] at Bergen. June 21, 1686. 

1 Minnert - 2 Oosterbierum, 

40 



May 


3 


Jan. 


8 


Aug. 


11 


April 


■2 -1 


July 


25 


July- 


5 


No v. 


4 



562 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Everse, Cathalyntie, and David Henuion 1782 Dec. 21 

Everse, Johannis, w., and Sally Griffens, w 1782 Dec. 21 

F 

Franse, Mirya, and Johannis Spier 1G79 July 27 

Fredericks, Christina, and Adriaan Verrneule 1708 July 1 

Fredericks, Marrytie, and Herman Juriaensen 17U9 June 20 

Fredricksen, Andries, from Bergen, and Priscilla Horns, from Manhat- 
tan Is]., m. at Bergen by Do. Dubois 1701 April 11 

Fredrikseu, Thomas, b. at Bergen, and Marytje Hartmansen Vreeland, 

b. and 1. at Gemceuepaul 1711 

Fuller, Thomas, and Lois Nolden, transient persons . . .1799 Jan. 10 

G 

Gabriels, Elisabeth, and Pieter Van Hooru 1708 May 9 

Garrabrauce, Mindert, and Agie van Hauten, both of Bergen 1800 Dec. 13 

Garrabrance, Peter, and Catherine Buskirk, both of Bergen 1800 Feb. 1 

Garrison, Catherine, and Joseph van Hauten 180 L Sept. 20 

Gerbrants, Claes, from Gamouepa, and Merritje Juriaens, from Ber- 
gen, m. at Bergen by Do. Dubois 1701 April 11 

Gerbrants, Herpert, from Gemceaepaen, and Hillegont Marcelis, from 

Bergen, received certificate May 29 to N. York 1707 May 4 

Gerbrants, Martje, and Hartmau Vrelaut 1739 Nov. 20 

Gerbrants, Neeltje, and Jan Juriaensen . 1702 April 7 

Gerbrants, Pieter, from Gemonepa, and Christyntje Juriaense, from 

Bergen, received certificate Aug. 7, to Hackeusack 1698 June 26 

Gerbrautse, Helena, and Johannis Vreeland . . .... 1778 June 20 

Gerbrantse, Martje, and Hendrik Coejemau 1738 May 5 

Gerrebraut, Meyudert, b. and 1. at Gemoeuepan, and Tryntje Jacobsen 

Van Wiukel, b. and 1. at Bergen 1715 May 7 

Gerrebrautse, Anuatje, and Machiel Vreelant 1789 Nov. 5 

Gerrebrantse, Metje, and Dirck Hehnigse Van Houte . . 1711 Sept. 9 

Gerrits, Aaltje, and Wander Diedrickx. 1G93 Nov. 5 

Gerrits, Aunetje, and Rutger Jansen 1699 April 12 

Gerrits, Catryua, and Adriaan Post 1677 Mar. 18 

Gerrits, C itryna. and Gerrit Steyumets 1691 July 12 

Gerrits, Elisabeth, and Dirck Bareutsen 1704. April 1 1 

Gerrits, Elisabeth, and Michiel Hartmansen Vreeland 1719 May 4 

Gerrits, Feytje, and Cornells Van Voorst 1685 Mar. 8 

Gerrits, Jr., Gerrit, from Wageuiugen in Gelderlaud, and Niesje 

Pieters, from Beest in Gelderlaud, received certificate to N. 

York, May 11 1681 April 24 

Gerrits, Herimuus, and Anna Walinghs, both from Bergen, she living 

at Aohquekuonk, in. Oct. 6 at Bergen 1690 Sept. 21 

1 M. at New York, April 27, 1711. 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



563 



Gerrits, Jaunetje, ami Christoffel Skeynmefcs 1684 

Gerrits, Lea, aud Jacob Gen itsen Van Wageningen 1719 

Gerritse, Geesje, and Jan Dirckse Straetmaker 1666 

Gerritse, Mathys, from Bergen, and Oatryna Eduwaert, from Boston 

in N. Engl., both 1. in Bergen, m. Feb. 5 by R. Van Giesen, in 

presence of Court . 1688 

Gerritse, Pieter, and Constantia Van der Swalme, w. of Reynier 

Josiasse Van Raeu, both 1. here, m. by Do. Tessemaker Juue 25, 

at Bergen 16S8 

Gerritsen, Cornelis, and Aaltje Van Winkel, both b. and 1. at Bergen. . 1728 
Gerritsen, Heudrick, aud Margrieta Straetmaker, both 1. at Bergen, m. 

April 3 by Do. Dubois 1701 

Gerritsen, Johannes, aud Cathalyutje Helmighs, both from Bergeu, 

m. by Do. Dubois 1703 

Greenleaf, Johu, and Rachel Sickels, both of Bergen Wood 1801 

Griffens, Sally, and Johannis Everse 1782 

Grimes, Patrick, and Anna Bagtmeus (?), w. of Mr. Coozens, both of 

Bergen 1796 

Gysbertse, Aunetje, and Hans Alberts 1683 

H 

Hadley, James, and Esther Day, both of Engl. N 1797 

Haeswout, Pieter Pieterse, from Dyckhuysen in Overysel, and Dirckje 
Egberts, from Midwont on Long Island, received certificate to 

Staten Island Nov. 18 - 1683 

Hanse, Hester, and Dirck Epkese. 1681 

Hmse, Maddaleentje, and Jan Aertseu Van de Bilt 1681 

Hansen, Aunetje, and Claes Hertmanse Vreelaud 1697 

Harrel, Edward, from Laster Charrel in Old England, and Elisabeth 
Marschal, both 1. at Captain Barry's plantation in Bergen Co., 

N. J., received certificate May 11 . . .1684 

Hartoch, Birbara, aud Jau Nickelis 1691 

Hellingh, Grietje Heudrickx, and Jacob Jacobsen Van Winkel 1695 

Heilingh, Hendrik Tunissen, w. of Grietje Simmels, andStyntje Jans, 
w. of Pieter Pera, groom 1. at Bergen, bride at Hackensack, re- 
ceived certificate June 30 from Bergen to Hackeusack to be m. 

there 1™° 

Helmighs, C ithalyntje, aud Johannes Gerritsen 1703 

Helmighs, Pieter, aud Claertje Post, both from Bergen, m. at Bergen, 

by Rev. Vreedeman, from Schoonechte 1703 

Helmigseu, Cornell-, from Bergen, and x\egtie Johannissen Vreelaud. . 1711 
Helmighsz, Roelof, aud Achtje Cornells Vreelaut, m. by Do. Dubois. .1701 

Helmigsen, Gerretje, and Ary Sip 1711 

Heudrickse, Feytje, and Poulus Pouwesen? or Douwesen? 1702 



Sept. 21 
May 2 
Jan. 14 



Jan. 8 



June 10 

June 29 

Mar. 1G 

Nov. 4 

Dec. 27 

Dec. 21 

Feb. 3 

Oct. 21 



June 24 



Nov. 4 
Oct. 3 
Nov. 13 
April 25 



April 25 
May 31 
Mar. 10 



Juue 16 
Nov. 4 

Mar. 21 
Mar. 24 
April 21 

April 12 



1 Query: Lancashire ? 



564 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Hendricks, Hans, from N. Jersey, and Tryntje Pieters, from Long 
Island, received certificate on July 31, m. at N. York by the 

preacher 1683 Aug. 

Hendricks, Thonis, from N. York, and Susanna Lerou, from Mann- 
heim in the Pals, received certificate June 11 1683 

Hendricks, Tryntje, and Mathys Coruelisse . 1692 

Hendricks, Wybrecht, and Jacob Leroy 1681 

Hendricksen, Marytje, and Casparus Stynmets 1727 

Hendrickx, Aeltje, and Bastiaen Van Giesen 1688 

Heudrickx, Cornelia, and Isaac Van Giesen 1690 

Heudrickx, Kathalyntje, and Barend Hendrickse Spier 1698 

Henniou, David, and Cathalyntie Everse 1782 

Henniou, Isaac, b. at Hackensack, and Helena Stynmets, b. and 1. at 

Ahasemes 1726? 

Hennyon, Feytje, and Jacob Nieuwkerk 1769 

Hermen, Reyckje, and Juriaen Tomassen 1667 

Hermens, Jan, from Gerder in Gelderlaud, and Neeltje Janse Buys, 
from Midwout, L. Isld., m. June 23 in presence of Court and 

congreg. of Bergen by R. Van Giesen. 1684 

Hermens, Neeltje, and Johannes Magielse 1670 

Hertmans, Claes, w. of Aunetje Hermans, and Elsje Pieters, received 

certificate Aug. 19 to Hackeusack 1699 

Hill, Eliza, and Thomas Amyas 1801 

Hoeper, Saertie, and Machiel Van Tnil 1766 

Horns, Priscilla, and Andries Fredricksen 1704 

Hoogland, Aaron, and Esther Van Houten, both of Pompton 1794 

Hoppe, Catharyna, and Fredrick Thomasse 1672 

Hoppe, Hendrick, from N. York, and Maria Jans, from Bergen, m. by 

the preacher at Bergen 1680 Mar. 14 

Hoppe, Mathys Adolphus, from N. York, and Anna Poulusse, from N. 

Albany, m. at N. York, by the preacher 1683 May 2 

Hunt, Anna, and Peter Aymar 1 797 Mar. 5 

Hunt, Maria, and Christopher Beekman 1799 July 6 

Huysman, Catrientje, and John Lisk 1767 June 20 

I 

Ido, Robert, b. at Westchester, and Annetje Roome, b. at N. York. . . . 1739 Sept. 24 

J 

Jacobs, Auuatje, and Willem Day 1691 April 5 

Jacobs, Bartel, from Midwout, L. I., and Ellinor Douglas, w. of Jan 
De Lenni, both 1. at Pemmerepoch, received certificate April 14, 

1695 1695 Mar. 31 

Jacobs, Geesje, and Hendrick Janse Oosteroom 1666 May 23 

Jacobs, Hillegond, and Evert Evertse Van Beukelaer 17*17 May 11 

Jacobs, Hillegont, and Jan Borton 1690 Aug. 24 



May 


20 


Nov. 


6 


Jan. 


2 


Aug. 


5 


June 


10 


July 


27 


July 


31 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


13 


May 


25 


June 


1 


June 


19 


Aug. 


6 


Sept. 


28 


Aug. 


24 


April 


11 


Oct. 


12 


Sept. 


21 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 565 

Jacobs, Treyntje, and Casper Steynmets 1671 Feb. 2G 

Jacobs, Treyntje, and Machiel Tades 1668 June 8 

Jncobse, Tryutje Hans, and Pieter Poulussen 1687 Sept. 18 

Jacobusse, Thomas, b. at Poinptorj, 1. at Newtown, and Saertie Toers, 

b. at Newark, 1. at Barbadoes 1771 Jan. 13 

Jans, Catrina, and Abel Reddenhars 1696 July 12 

Jans, Grietje, and Lourens Duyts .... 1666 Jan. 1 

Jans, Maria, and Heudrick Hoppe 1680 Mar. 14 

Jans, Metje, and Johaunes Jansz Van Blarcom 1693 July 16 

Jans, Styntje, and Hendrik Tunissen Hellingh 1700 June 16 

Jausen, Rutger, from N. York, 1. on Nassau Isl., Queens Co., and An- 

netje Gerrits, from Pemmerepocb, received certificate April 10. .1699 April 12 
Jansz, Johannes, from N. Utrecht, on L. Isld., and Anna Mary Van 
Giesen, from Midwout, on Long Isld., m. upon certificate at 

N. York March 21 1686 Mar. 7 

Jansz, Pieter, from Bergen, and Elisabeth Lymous, from Uythuyse, 

m. June 22 at Bergen by the minister 1685 May 24 

Jeems, Mary, and Jochem Anthony Robbert 1686 April 11 

Jeffereys, Edward, b. in O. England, and Mary, w. of Joseph Tam- 

sen, both 1. at Sikaakes 1720 

Jelise, [Mandeviel], Geertje, and Wiert Epkese 1681 Sept. 25 

Jones, Widow, and John Dorston .' 1794 Aug. 6 

Joons, Dieuwer, from Bergen, 1. there, and W outer Willemsz, from N. 

Y., 1. at Hoboken, m. at Bergen April 22 1689 Mar. 30 

Joris, Maria, and Michiel Vreelant 1691 Oct. 1 1 

Josi, Pieter, and Cornelia Damen, m. by the minister upon certificate 

from Breuckelen, Staten Isld 1686 April 6 

Juriaens, Gerrit, from Bergen, and Beelitje Dirckx Van Oogsten, from 
Hoboken, both 1. at Bergen, m. June 6, in the Church at Ber- 
gen, by Do. Selyns 1693 May i 4 

Juriaens, Merritje, and Claes Gerbrants 1704 April 1 1 

Juriaense, Christyntje, and Pieter Gerbrants 16P8 June 26 

Juriaense, Thomas, 1. at Bergen, and Jaunetje Straetmakers, 1. at Ho- 
boken, both from Bergen, m. June 2 by Do. Selyns at Bergen. 1691 May 17 
Juriaensen, Aalt, and Gerritje Matheuse, both from and 1. at Bergen, 
received certificate to and were m. at N. York July 7, by Do. 

Selyns 1695 June 16 

Juriaensen, Herman, and Marrytie Fredericks, both b. and 1. at Ber- 
gen, m. by Do. Dubois • 1709 June 20 

Juriaensen, Jan, from Bergen, 1. there, and Neeltje Gerbrants, from 

Gemonepa, 1. there, m. by Do. DuBois. 1702 April 7 

Jurriansen, Johannes, w., and Margrietje Van Winkel, both from Ber- 
gen 1740 Sept. 5 

Juryansen, Johannes, and Sarah Cuyper, b. at Ahasymus 1740 Dec. 2 



Dec. 


20 


Oct. 


12 


Sept. 


26 


Aug. 


10 


Oct. 


22 


Sept. 


5 



566 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

K 

Kip, Nicasius, and Annetje Bryant, with certificate from Hackensack 1691 

Kleyndini, Rutie, and Abraham Woed 1783 

Kuiper, Hillegont Klaasen, and Isaack Van Giesen 1708 

Kuyper, Elisabeth, and Willem Zikkels 1732 

Kuyper, Geertje Claasen, and Audries Fredericksen Cadmus 1725 

Kuypers, Catryntje, and Gerrit Mattheusen Van Nieuwkerk 1730 

L 

Lakomba, Magdalena, and Gysbert Jansen Van Blerkom 1706 June 16 

Larens, Tammes, from Southole, L. Isld., and Francyntje Berreys, w. 

of Michiel Smit 1685 

Lsrou, Sasauna, and Thonis Hendricks 1683 

Leroy, Jacob, from Mannheim in the Palz, and Wybrecht Hendricks, 

from Bergen, received certificate Jan. 25, 1681, to N. York 1681 

Lion, Ann, and Win. Scott 1799 

Lisk, Antie, and Jacobus Meckniel 1767 

Lisk, John, lives at Bergen point, and Catrientje Huysman, 1. on 

Stateu Isld , both b. on Staten Island 1767 

Lozier, Elizabeth, and George Carlock 1801 

Lubberts, Jr., Lubbert, and Hilletje Poulusse 1680 

Lubberts, Mareytje, and Heudrick Epkese 1678 

Lubi, Anna, and Matheus Coruelisse Van Nukerck 1670 

Lubi, Jacob, w. of Gsertruyt Lous,? and Gerritje Cornells, \v. of Roe- 

lof Cornells, m. by the miuister at N. York 1672 

Ludlow, Ruth, and Matthias Carlock 1797 

Lyinons, Elisabeth, and Pieter Jansz 1685 

M 

Macheleen, Charles, from Scotland, aud Catryna Thomas, from Bar- 

badoes, received certificate March 26, 1678 1678 Mar. 1 1 

Machielse, Catharyna, and Walingh Jacobse Van Winckel 1671 Feb. 26 

Machielse, Preyntje, and Audries Claesen 1668 Mar. 25 

Magiels, Tades, from N. York, and Anna Steynmets, from N. York, m. 

by the preacher at Bergen 1679 Sept. 21 

Magielse, Johannes, and Neeltje Hermens, received July 23, 1670, cer- 
tificate to ? 1670 June 19 

Makale, 1 Pieter, w. of Autje Vyle, b. ou Staten Island, and Maria An- 

driese? b. at Frankfort, Germ., both 1. at Pemmerpog 1730 

Marcelis, Hillegont, aud Herpert Gerbrants 1707 

Marcelisse, Ide, and Ariaantje Siph, both b. aud 1. at Bergen 1754 

Marsailles, Marsailles, and Gertrude Prior, both of Bergen 1800 

Marschal, Elisabeth, and Eduard Harrel 1681 

Marselis, Catryntje, and Reynier Van Giesen 1737 

1 Wintield yives ihis conjeeturally as Marselis or Merselis. 



Aug. 


2 


May 


20 


Jan. 


2 


April 


2 


May 


15 


June 


20 


Aug. 


8 


Mar. 


14 


Oct. 


27 


Nov. 


27 


Sept. 


4 


Oct. 


7 


May 


24 



Mar. 


18 


May 


4 


April 


11 


July 


26 


April 


25 


April 


17 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



567 



Mascker, Catherine, and Nathaniel Thompson 1798 

Matheus, Jacomyntje, and Jacob Syruousen Van Wiukel 1701 

Matheuse, Gerritje, and Aalt J uriacnsen 1695 

Matsker, Effy, and Abraham Post 1798 

Mattheeus, Jacob, from Bergen, and Sara Cornelis, from N. Haerlem, 

received certificate to Hackensack May 15 1707 

M uvrison, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Cjertsou 1797 

M aybee, Elizabeth, and Jacob Post 1797 

McKoy, Rhode, and John van der Hoof 179G 

Meckuiel, Jacobus, b. at Raritan, and Autie Lisk, b. on Staten Isld., 

both 1. at Bergen 1767 

M Tserean, Eleanor Brower, and Peter Degroot 1801 

Merserean, Joshua, and Esther Garretson, w. of Richard Christophers, 

both of Union, Tioga Co , N. Y 1794 

Merselis, Elisabeth, and Adriaen Post . 1701 

Mesier, Catherine, and Johannis Comelison 1795 

Mesier, Peter A., and Mary van Wyck. bath of N. Y 1800 

Meyer, Andries, and Vroutje Vande Voorst, were m. upon certificate 

at New York 1671 

Meyer, Garret, of English Neighbourhood, and Jane Bogert, of Hack- 
ensack 1799 

Meyer, Johauues, from N. York, and Annetje Van de Voorst, from 

Hasymus, received certificate June 12, to N. York 1677 

Meyers, Dirckje, and Enoch Machielse Vreelaud ... 1670 

Mmues, Gerritje, and Hermen Douwese 1636 

Miet, Johu, y. m , and Annatje Baeldin, y. d 1793 

Moore, Abraham, and Maria van Gelder, both of English Neighbour- 
hood 1791 

Moore, James, and Sally Moore, both of Engl. Neighbourhood 1796 

Moore, Sally, and James Moore 1796 



Dec. 


29 


April 


7 


June 


16 


Jan. 


27 


April 


27 


May 


6 


April 


5 


Nov. 


27 


May 


15 


Oct. 


24 


Aug. 


3 


Mar. 


30 


May 


12 


Nov. 


1 



Nov. 



Dec. 


18 


May 


27 


June 


5 


June 


21 


April 


28 


Jan. 


25 


Sept. 


17 


Sept. 


17 



N 

Natauiels, David, from N. York, 1. at Gemcenepa, and Annetje Straet- 
maecker, from Bergen, 1. at Hoboken, m. March 29, 1692, by 
Do. Selyns at Bergen 1692 Mar. 13 

Neefjes, Johannis, b. and 1. at Staten Islaud, and Autje Gerritsen Van 

Wageningen, b. and 1. at Pemmerpog, m. by Do. Dubois 1710 Oct. 9 

Newkerk, Aareut, y. m., and Jaunetje Vreelant, y, d 1793 Nov. 

Newkerk, Jauneken Vreelaud, and Joseph van Winkel 1798 May 

Nickelis, Jan, b. on Barbadus, and Barbara Hartoch, w. of Jan Ensels, 

both 1. on C apt. Berry's plantation 1691 May 

Nicolls, Charlotte, and Daniel Earle 1800 Oct. 

Nieuwkerk, Jacob, b. at Bergen, and Feytje Hennyon, b. at Hobo- 

keu, both 1. at Bergen 17G9 Feb. 

Nolden, Lois, and Thomas Fuller 1799 Jan. 



26 

31 
21 

13 

10 



568 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

O 

Oosteroom, Treyntje Hendricks, and Arien Pieterse Buys 1672 Sept. 30 

Oosteroom, Hendrick Janse, w., and Geesje Jacobs, w., in. at Bergen 1666 May 23 

Oosteroom, Jannetje Hendrickx, and Hermen Eduwaerts 1678 Aug. 11 

Outwater, Altie, and Michael Vreeland 1801 Nov. 29 

Outwater, Catherine, and Abrm. Sickels 1798 Dec. 8 

Outwater, Jacob, and Marretie van den Hoof, both of Bergen 1797 Sept. 30 

Outwater, John, and Eleanor Prior, both of Bergen 1800 Jan. 25 

Outwater, Tomas Fransen, w. of Tryntje Breestede, and Metje 
Pieters, groom 1. at Monachie, bride at Bergen, m. at Ach- 

quechnonk 1706 Sept. i9 

P 

Peeker, William, and Christiana Remey, both of N. Y 1800 Nov. 1 6 

Philips, Willemyntje, and Johannes Jansen Bandt 1697 June 27 

Pluvier, Rusje, and Jacob Van Giesen 1693 May 7 

Pierra, l Pieter, from Sedan, France, 1. at Hackensack, and Steyntje 
Cornells, w. of Paulas Jansen, 1. at Bergen, m. Oct. 19 by R. 

Van Gieseu iu presence of the Bergen Court at Bergen 1637 Sept. 20 

Pieters, Tryntje, and Hans Hendricks 1683 Aug. 1 

Pieters, Elsje, and Claes Hertmans 1699 Aug. 6 

Pieters, Jannetje, and Helmigh Roelofs 1676 Sept. 3 

Pieters, Jenueken, and B.irent Barentsen Van Hoorn 1712 Feb. 23 

Pieters, Marcelis, from Beest in Gelderlaud, and Pietertje Van de 

Voorst, from N. York, received certificate to N. York, May 11 . . 1681 April 21 

Pieters, Metje, and Tomas Fransen Outwater , 1706 Sept. 29 

Pieters, Niesje, and Gerrit Gerrits, Jr 1681 April 24 

Pieterse, Hessel, from Bergen, and Lysbeth Claes, from Hasymus, re- 
ceived certificate June 24, 1690, to N. York 1690 June 8 

Pietersen, Rachel, and Cornelis Cornelisse Doremus 1710 Aug. 12 

Preyer, Andries, and Geertruy Sickels 1749 Oct. 8 

Preyer, Andries, from Crevelt iu Meurs, and Johanna Steynmetz, 
from Bergen, both 1. at Ahasymus, were married after three 

proclamations of banns 1688 May 13 

Preyer,? Casparus, b. at Pemmerpoch, 1. at Ahasemus, aud Sara An- 

driessen, w. of H. Braes? .1714 Mar. 13 

Preyer, Johanuis, and Geertruy t Siggelse 1745 June 14 

Preyer, Pryntje, and Petrus Stuy vezand 1723 Oct. 27 

Preyer, Seleytje, and Ary Van Wouglim 1715 Mar. 25 

Pryer, Abraham, and Martje Sickels, m. in presence of Justices Michiel 

Vreeland and Pieter Marselis 1746 Dec. 18 

i In the Hackensack Dutch Church records we read that Peter Pira joined that church, 
Jan. 3, 1697, "with letters from the French church"— doubtless the one near Hackensack. 
Also that Sl.vntje Jans, wid. of Pieter Pira, married Hendrick Teunisse Helling, 
June 15, 1700. 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 569 

Ereyer, Arriaentje, and Adam Rap 1785 Nov. 19 

Prine, Abraham, and Peggy Colter, both of Bergeu 1796 Dec. 27 

Prior, Abbie, and John Post 1794 May 9 

Prior, Abraham, and Anna Waldr[orj], both of Bergen 179G Dec. 20 

Prior, Eleanor, and John Outwater 1800 Jan. 25 

Prior, Gertrude, and Marsailles Marsailles 1800 July 26 

Pryer, Arriaeut je, and Adam Rap 1785 Nov. 19 

Pryer, Gertie, and Johannis Callerd 1782 Dec. 19 

Pryne, Daniel, w , and Heleeua Evertse, y. d , 1791 July 25 

Post, Abraham, and Effy Matsker, both of Bergen Point ... - 1798 Jan. 27 

Post, Adriaan, from the Hague, Holland, and Catryna Gerrits, from 

Wageninge in Gelderland, m. April 17, 1G77, at Bergen by the 

minister 1677 Mar. 18 

Post, Adriaen, and Elisabeth Mersilis, m. April 21, 1701, by Do. 

Dubois. 1701 Mar. 30 

Post, Catherine, and Peter Brower 1796 April 10 

Post, Claertje, and Pieter Helmighs 1703 Mar. 21 

Post, Egbert, b. at Ackquegnonk, 1. at Gernceuepa, and Saertje Stuy- 

vesant, b. and 1. at Bergen, in. by Do. Jackson 1765 Nov. 30 

Post, Frans, and Maeyke Cobus, with certificate from Achquekuonk . .1690 April 22 
Post, Gerrit, and Lea Straet, received certificate Dec. 25, and were m. 

Dec. 27 at N. York 1701 Dec. 27 

Post, Johannis, and Elisabeth Helm. Van Houten, b. and 1. at Bergen. [1714 J 1 

Post, Jacob, and Elizabeth Maybee, both of Rockland -. 1797 April 5 

Post, John, and Abbie Prior, both of Bergeu 1794 May 9 

Post, Peter, and Jaunetje Dedrix, both of Bergen 1795 Feb. 7 

Post, Pieter, from Akkweguonk, 1. at Ahasemus, and Cathariua Beek- 

mau, w., 1. uear N. York 1710 Nov. 17 

Poulus, Catriua, and Matheus Cornelisse Vau Nieuwkerck 1686 July 5 

Poulus, Eegje, aud Jacob Jacobseu, Jr., Van Winkel 1703 Mar. 7 

Poulu^se, Anna, aud Mathys Adolphus Hoppe 16S3 May 2 

Poulusse, Hilletje, and Lubbert Lubberts, Jr 1680 Mar. 14 

Poulusseu, Dirck, b. at Bergen, 1. there, and Fytje Hertmaus Vree- 

laut, b. at Gemonepa, 1. there, received certificate Aug. 19 to 

Hackeusack 1699 July 30 

Poulusseu, Maerteu, from Bergeu, 1. there, aud Margrietje Westervelt, 

from Betvoort, L. I., 1. at Hackeusack, received certificate April 

8 to Hackeusack aud in. there at same date 1694 Mar. 25 

Poulusseu, Pieter, from X. York, and Tryntje Hans Jacobse, from 

Stuyvesant's Bowery, both 1. here, m. Oct. 3 at Bergen 1687 Sept. 18 

Pouweseu, ? or Douweseu,? Poulus, w. of Aeltje Jacobs, and Fey tie 

Hendrickse, w. of Hendrick Van Eeynne, received certificate to 

N. York May 3 1702 April 12 

1 M. at New York Oct. 8, 171 I. 
41 



570 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Q 

Quin, Elcbie Carlock, and John van Dalsou 1800 Not. 16 

R 

Raletnon, Jacobus Jausen, from N. Albany, and Pietertje Claes, from 

Ahasymus, received certificate to Hackensack Dec. 12, 1696... 1696 Nov. 22 

Rap, Adam, aud Arriaeut je Preyer 1785 Nov. 19 

Reddenhars, Abel, from Hackemock, Virg., and Catriua Jans, from 

Bergen, botb 1. at Bergen, m. July 26, at Bergen 1096 July 12 

Remey, Christiana, aud Wm, Peeker 1800 Nov. 16 

Robbert, Joebem Autbony, from N. York, and Mary Jeems, w. of 
Jaems Beuseu, in. April 28 by R. V. Gieseu iu tbe scbool, in 

presence of tbe Court 1686 April 11 

Roelofs, Cornelis, from Amersfoort on Long Island, and Ma Jdaleena 
Vau Gieseu, from N. York, received certificate Nov. 13, 1677, 

to New York 1677 Oct. 14 

Roelofs, Heluii«h, from Bergeu, aud Januetje Pieters, from Gelder- 

laud, m. Oct. 2, by tbe Preacher at Bergen 1676 Sept. 3 

Roelofse, Mecbtelje, aud Jau Hendrickse Vau Oosteroom M. 1683 Aug. 19 

Roelofse, Tenuis, from Amersfoort ou L)ng Island, aud Tryutje 
Claes, from Mauataus Isld. , received certificate Jau. 8, 1678, to 

New York 1G77 Dec. 23 

Roome, Anuetje, aud Robert Ido , 1739 Sept. 21 

Roome, Geertruy, and Jobauuis Spier 1739 April 29 

Roos, Autje, and Cornelis Diedrikx 1735 Juue 7 

s 

Scbepmoes, Aeltje, and Jobauuis Vau Giesen 1687 June 26 

Scott, William, and Anu Lion, botb of Hoebackeu 1799 April 2 

Seely, Jobu, aud Keziab vau Ziele, botb of Webake 1800 Juue 23 

Seggels, Catriua, aud Cornelis Vau Wageneu 1712 Oct, 17 

Shepbard, Peggy, and Cornelius Smith 1797 Oct. 2 1 

Shephard, Samuel, aud Aun Smith, both of Bergen 1793 Dec. 29 

Shiudel, Conrad, and Margerrit Biker, both transient persons, £0.17.6.1793 Sept. 4 

Sickels, Abraham, a id Catherine Outwater, botb of Bergen 1798 Dec. 8 

Sickels, Geertie, aud Machiel Vieeland 1781 Sept. 16 

Sickels, Gaertruy, and Audiies Preyer 1749 Oct. 8 

Sickels, Martje, aud Abraham Pryer 1746 Dec. 18 

Sickels, Peter, y. m, aud Eeva vau der Hoef, y. d 1791 Oct. 8 

Sickels, Rachel and John Greeuleaf 1801 Dec. 27 

Sickels, Zacharias, b. aud 1. at Bergeu, and Ariaautje Hartmause Vree- 

land, b. aud 1. at Gamceuepa. 1719 Nov. 7 

Siggelse, Geertruyt, aud Jobauuis Preyer 1745 Juue 14 

Sikels, Abraham, b. and 1. at Bergen, and Agie Blinckerhof, b. and 1. 

at Gemceaepan 1739 April 1 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 57 I 

Sjkkels, Feyt je, ami Roelof Helmigsen Vau Houtcn 1711 Dec. 15 

Sikkels, Hendrick, and Jeuneke Stuyvesant, both 1). and 1. at Bergen, 

m. by Do. \V. Jacksoii 1767 

Sikkels, Robbert, and Autje Wiuue 1749 

Simse, James, b. at Gravesend, 1. at Bergen, ami Martha Janse Daa- 
rnen, w. of Jau Remse, 1. at Midwout, L. I., received certifi- 
cate Sept. if), 1697 1697 

Sip, Autje, and Gerrit Harmanse Vau Wageuiugeu 1713 

Sip, Ary, aud Gerretje Helmigsen, both b. and 1. at Bergenl 1711 

Sip, Ide, w. of Ariaautje Coruelisseu Cadmus, aud Autje Vau Wagen- 

iugen, both b. aud I. at Bergen 1725 

Sip, Jeuueke, aud Cornelia Vreelaut 1788 

Sip, JeDneke, aud Corneelus Vreelaut 1789 

Sip, Peter, y. m., aud Elizabet Vreelaut 1789 

Siph, Ariaautje, aud lie Marcelisse 1754 

Sippe, Hillegoud, aud Johauuis Waliugs Vau Wiuckel 1710 

Sip?, Auuetie Ariaeuse, aud Symon Jacobse Van Wiuckel 1675 

Sips, Jan Ariaens, from Bergen iu New Jersey, aud Johanna Vau de 
Voorst, from Ahasymus, received certificate to N. York ou 

April 22 1684 

Sips, M u-ytje Ariaeuse, aud Sibe Epkese. . . 1678 

Smeemau, Heriuen, aud Auuetje Dame- 1668 

Smit, Charity, and Johauuis Ed-al 1691 

Smith, Cornelius, aud Peggy Shephard, both of Bergeu 1797 

Smith, Mary, aud John Bedell ] 800 

Smith, Polly Carl, aud Ezekiel Stillwell 1798 

Smith, Rebecca, aud Johu William? 1795 

Slech. Jacomyut je, aud Jau Roelofse Eltiugh 1(172 

Slot, Eva Jacobusseu, aud Heudrik Vau der Hoeven 1723 

Slot, Jau, from Bergeu, aud J Andriesse, from N. York, both 1. 

at B3rgeu, m. at Bergeu by Do. Da Bjis 1700 

Slot, Lea, aud Jacob Brouwer 1730 

Spear, William, aud Keziah Stag, both of Pasipeuie 1796 

Spier, Albertus, b. aud 1. at Pemmerpog, and Orseltje Westervelt, b. 

aud 1. at Hackeusack 1742 

Spier, Auuatje, and Areut Toers 1730 

Spier, B.ireud Heudrickse, aud Kathalyntje Hendtickx, both 1. at Pern- 

reerpoch, received certificate Aug. 26, to Auhqueguouck 1698 

Spiers, Heleua, aud Paulus Vau Nieuwkerke 17^8 

Spier, Johauuis, aud Geertruy lioome, w. of Heudrik Meyer 1739 

Spier, Johauuis, and Marya Fraus?, from Beest in Gelderlaud, re- 
ceived certificate to New York ou Aug. 12, 1679 1679 

Spier, Seytje, and Johauuis Evers 1714 

1 Married at New York April 19. 1711. 

2 Entered in the N. Y. Church records as Anneken Daniels. 



Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


8 


Aug. 


15 


Oct. 


30 


May 


23 


Oct. 


5 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


1 


April 


11 


Sept. 


30 


Nov. 


14 


April 





Oct. 


13 


Nov. 


25 


May 


3 


Oct. 


2L 


Mar. 


10 


Nov. 


18 


July 


20 


Nov. 


10 


May 


11 


Mar. 


10 


Mar. 


28 


June 


5 


June 


5 


July 


19 


July 


31 


June 


18 


April 


29 


July 


27 


Aug. 


20 



572 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Spier, Teunis Jansen, from N. York, and Catharyna Thocaasse, from 

BergeD, X .)., m. Oct. 6 by preacher at Bergen 1684 Sept. 14 

Stag, Keziab, and Wm. Spear 1 796 June 5 

, Abraham, of X. Y., and Rachel Toren, of Hoebucken 1800 Feb. 1 

Stynmets, Anna, and Tades Magiels 1679 Sept. 21 

Stynmets, Casper, \v., and Treyntje Jacob3, w., m. March 15 before 

Court at Bergen 1671 Feb. 26 

Steynmets, Christoffel, from N. York, and Jaunetje Gerrits, from 

Gemonepa, m. Oct. 6 by the minister at Bergen 1634 Sept. 21 

Steynmets, Christoffel, w. of Jannetje Gerrits, and Sara Van Xeste . . 1699 
Steynmei>, Gerrit, f rom N. York, ami Vrouwtje Claes, from Bergen 

Jurisdiction, received certificate to N. York March 11, and m. 

March 12 at N. York 1684 Mar. 12 

Steynmets, Gerrit, w. of Vrouwtje Claes, and Catryna Gerrits, w. of 

Adrian Post, 1. at Achquecknonk, received certificate July 31, 

1690 1691 July 12 

Steynmetz, Johanna, and Audries 1'rcyer 1688 May 13 

Steynmets, Johannes, from Manhatans, and Annetje Jacobse Van 

Wmk. 1, from X. York, received, Nov. 30, certificate to N. York. 1676 Oct. 29 
Stillwill, Ezekiel, of N. Y., and Polly Carl, w. of Job Smith, of 

Secaucns 1798 Nov. 18 

Stimets, Leentie, and John Wilcher 1797 June 25 

Straet, Lea, and Gerrit Post 1704 Dec. 27 

tmaecker, Annetje, and David Nataniels 1692 Mar. 13 

i tmaeckers, Rachel, and D tniel Van Winked 1707 April 27 

Straetmaker, Dirck, and Tryntje Bays, received certificate Nov. 24 to 

be m. Nov. 27 1698 Nov. 6 

Straetmaker, Jan, w. of Geesje Van Steenwyck, and Neeltje Buys, w. 

of Jacob Vygoor, received certificate Jan. 27, in. by Do. 

Bsrtholf 1707 Jan. 12 

Straetmaker, Jan Dirckse, and Geesje Gerritse 1666 Jan. 14 

Straetmaker, Margrieta, and Hendrick Gerritsen 1701 Mar. 16 

Straetmaker, Tryntje^ and Jan Claessen 1694 Sept. 23 

Si i e t makers, Jannetje, and Thomas Juriaanse 1691 May 17 

Stnyvea mt, Jenneke, and Hendrick Sikkels 1767 Feb. 21 

Stuyvesant, S tertje, and Egbert Post 1765 Nov. 30 

Stuyvezand, Petrus, b ai X. York, and Pryntje Preyer, b. and 1. at 

B rgeri 1733 Oct. 27 

Stynmet3, Casparns, b and 1. at Ahasymis, and Marytje Hendricksen, 

b. at Port Royal, 1. at Bergen 1727 Aug. 5 

Stynmets, Helena, and Isaac Hennion 1726? 

Stynmets, Urselena, and R >elof Libbertse Westervelt 1688 Mar. 11 

Sueberingh, [da, and [saac Billau 16S1 Nov. 2 

Saberingh, Lnca from Midwoud, L. Isld., 1. at Minkachqnee, and 

.M riiij • Dorlant, from Breuckelen, 1. at St. Isl., received cer- 
tificate April 30, 1690 1690 April 6 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 573 

Swartwout, Roelof, w. of Eva Albers, and Francyntje Andries, w. of 

Aii. Lubbers, with certificate from Do. Selyns' 1691 Nov. 22 

Swertwont, Anthony, from Kingstown, Esopus, and Jannetje Cobus, 
from N. Albany, b »tb 1. at !'. t m, rnrivnl ivrtilicate to Ksjpus 
May 8, 1(393 1693 May 8 

T 

Tades, Machiel, , and Treyntje Jacobs, 1GG8 June 8 

Taelman— see Douwese, Hermen. 

T.insi'i), Miry, airl Kduard Jefferys 1720 

Teunise, Aeltje, and Cornells Claesz 1C81 Dec. 11 

Thomas, Amyas, and Eliza Hill, both of N. Y 1801 Sept. 28 

Thomas, C ttryna, and< iharles Macheleen. 1678 Mar. 11 

Thomaserj, Arien, from N. York, and Maaike Cobussen, from Albany, 

both 1. at Bergen, m. June 21 by the minister at Bergen 1686 May 30 

Thomasen, Thomas, from Bergen, and Sara Van Dueselen, from Al- 
bany, received certific ite S >pt. 17 to Achquecknonck 1701 

Thomasse, Catharyna, and Tennis Jansen Spier 1684 

Thomasse, Fredrick, and Catharyna Hoppe, m. Oct. 23 by minister at 

N. York g . 1672 

Thompson, N ithaniel, and Catherine Mascker, both of B^rgeu 1798 

Thorp, Susan, and Charles Gierke L798 

Toers, Aeltje, and Eidr-' Winne 1790 

Toers, Arent, b. and 1. at Bsrgen, aud Annatje Spier, b. and 1. at Pem- 

merpog 1730 J uly 19 

Toers, Claes Arentse, from Amsterdam, Holland, and Jacomyntje Van 
Neste. from N. York, received certificate to Breuckleu, July 8, 

and wen- m. there July 13 1684 Juue 22 

Toers, Lourus Arense, from Amsterdam, Holland, and Francyntje 

Tomas, from N. York M. at New York 1672 Aug. 15 

Toers, Nicklaas, and Jannetje Van Reype, both b. aud I. at Bergeu, m. 

by 1 )o. W. Jackson 1766 

Toers, Saertie, and Thomas Jacobusse 1771 

Tomas, Fraueyutje, aud Lourus Areuse Toers . 1672 

Tomasse, .Johannes, b. and 1. at Bergen, aud Marytje Van Deusen, w. 
of Tymen Van Valensyn, 1. in New irk, Essex Co., received a r 

tificate Dec. 24, 1705, m. at Achquecknonk 1706 

Tomassen, Juriaen, and Reyckje Hermen 1667 

Toren, Rachel, and Abrm. Stagg 1800 

V 

Vau Beuren, Silvester, and Annamanda van der Pool, w. of -1 i 

Waugh,3 both of Bergen 1801 Jau. 1 

1 in the Wu York Church records the marriage is thus entered : Roelof Swartwout, 
Wed' Van Eva Uberts, en Francyntie Andries, Wede Van Abraham Lubbertszen, d' Eerste 
wonende Lnde Esopus, en tunic alhier. 

2 Kao. 3 Winfield gives this as James Wra 



Aug. 


17 


Sept. 


14 


Sept. 


22 


Dec. 


29 


Nov. 


6 


Nov. 


G 



May 


31 


Jan. 


13 


Aug. 


15 


Jau. 


1 


May 


25 


Feb. 


1 



574 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Blarcom, Johauues Jansz, from Bergen, aucl Metje Jaus. Juue 
11, 1693, first proclamation at Midwout; June 18, first procla- 
mation at Bergen; m. July 16, by It. Van Giesen, at Bergen. . .1693 -July 16 

Van Blercom, Hester, and Lourens Barents 1707 Aug. 27 

Van Blerekorn, Gysbert JauseD, and Magdaleua Likomba, botb 1. at 
Bergen, m. June 1G at Bergen by R. Van Giesen in presence of 

Court 17C6 June 16 

Vau Benkelaer, Evert Everlse, and Hillegond Jacobs, received certifi- 
cate June 7 to be m. June 8, by Justice Enoch Mighielse 1707 May 1 1 

Van Borckeloo, Wilhem Hermeusen, from N. Utrecht, and Maria Cor- 
deljou, the groom 1. at Constapelshoeck, the bride at N. Utrecht, 

received certificate Aug. 1, and m. April 5 at Amersfoort 1097 Mar. 7 

Van Boskerk, Lourens, b. at Hackemack, and Fytje Cornelissen Vree- 

lant, b. at Gemoeaepau, both 1. at Pemmerpoch 1709 Sept. 18 

van Buskirk, Cornelius, of Staten Island, and Peggy van Home, of 

Bergen Point 1800 Dec. 24 

van Dalson, Johu, and Elchie Carlock, w. of Teunis Qain, both of 

N. Y 1800 Nov. 16 

Van de Bilt, \v., Jau Aertseu, and Maddaleentje H mse, w., received 

certificate to Bieuckeleu on Dec. 10. 1681 

Van de Voorst, Aunetje, and Johannes Meyer 1677 

Van de Voorst, Johauua, and Jau Ariaens Sips 1631 

Vau de Voorst, Pietertje, and Marcelis Pieters ... 16S1 

Vau de Voorst, Vroutje, and Audries Meyer 1671 

Van den Bos, Heudriek Jausz, from N. York, and Maria Booaas, from 

Leiden, Holl., received certificate to Staten Island on Oat. 17. .1635 

van der Hoef, Eeva, and Peter Sickels 1791 

Van der Hoef, Johaunis, b. at Hackensack, and Maria Eartsie, b. at 

Kiuderhoek 1738 

Van der Hoeveu, Hendrik, and Eva Jacobussen Slot, b. at Hackensack, 

and 1. at Bergen 1723 

van der Hoof, Haury, and Naomi Day, both of English Neighbour- 
hood 1797 

van der Hoof, Jaue, and Michael Vraeland 1799 

van der Hoof, Johu, aud Rhode McKay, both from N. Y 1796 

van der Hoof, Marritie, aud Jaob Ontwater .1797 

vau der Hydeu, Win Anthony, aud Henrietta Wilheliinena Elizabeth 

van Holteu, both from Holland an 1 now 1. at Bergen 1800 Aug. 16 

Vanderlinde, Rielof, from Wageniugen iu Gelderlaud, aud Susanna 
nend ricks Brouckhorst, from Midwout on Long Island, m. at 

Bergen by the preacher ; 1632 

Van der Linden, M ichtelt, aud Albert Zaberoski 1676 

Vau der Vorst, Marya, and Uldrik Brouwer 1738 

Van der Swaluie, C mstantia, and Pieter Gerritse 163S 

Van Deuseu, Marytje, and Johauues Tomasse 1706 

Vau Dueselen, Sara, aud Thomas Thomasen. . 1701 



Nov. 


13 


May 


27 


April 


6 


April 


24 


Nov. 


5 


Sept. 


27 


Oct. 


8 


April 


22 


May 


11 


June 


3 


May 


11 


Nov. 


27 


Sspt. 


30 



Oct. 


2 


Dec. 


17 


Oct. 


8 


June 


10 


Jau. 


1 


Aug. 


17 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



575 



van Geeseu, Polly, an-:! Rynier vau Geeseu 1801 

van Gaessu, Rynier, of Euglish Neighbourhood, and Polly van Gee- 
seu, of Sekakos 1801 

van Gelder, M iria, and Abnn. Moore 1794 

Van Griesen, Abraham, from Bsrgen, anil Fytje Anlriesse, from Geni- 
onepa, in. Oct. 23, 1691, at Bergen, by Voorlezer It. Van 

Giesen, before the Congreg. in pres. of the Court 1091 

Van Gieseu, Anna Mary, and Job tunes Jansz , 1686 

Van Gieseu, Bistiaen, 1. at Achquecbnonk, and Aeltje Hendrickx, 1. at 
II ickeusack, both from Midwout, m. Juue 25 at Bargen, by Do. 

Tesseiuaker 1688 

Vau Giesen, Isaack, from Bargen, aud Cornelia Hendrickx, from Mid- 
wont, L. I., 1. at H ickensack, in. Aug. 10, 1690, at Bargeu 1690 

Vau Gieseu, Isiack, w. of Cornelia Haudriks Bliukerboff, aud Hille- 

gout Kiaasan Kuiper, b. at H isemesi 1708 

Vau Gieseu, Jacob, from Bergen, 1. there, and Rusje Plnvier, from N. 

York, 1. there, in upon certificate at N. York Juue 1 1693 

Van Gieseu, Johanuis, from Utrecht, Netherlaud, aud Aeltje Schep- 
mo3<, w. of Jan Evertse Keteltas, received certificate to N. York 

July 11, 1637 1687 

Van Gieseu, Madd aleeua, aud Coruelis Roelofs 1677 

Vau Giesen, Reynier, w. of Dirckje Coruelis Vau Groeuliude, aud Hen- 
drickje Janse Buys, w. of Coruelis Verwey, groom Voorlezer 

at Bergeu, m. Oct. 17 ou the "Polvly v 2 by Do. Bertholf 1699 

Vau Gieseu, Reyuier, b. at 2nd Kiv., 1. at Totua, and Catvyntje Mar- 

selis, b. aud 1. at B argeu 1737 

vau Hauteu, Agie, aud Miudert Garrabrauce 1800 

van Hauteu, Catherine, aud Jacob Zabriskie 1801 

vau H mteu, Esther, aud Aarou H iogland 1714 

van H mteu, Helmik, aud Catherine van Rypen, both of Bargen 1799 

vau Hauteu, Joseph, aud Catherine Garrison, both of New Hempstead, 

N. Y 1801 

vau Hiuten, Michael, aud Aeltie van Home, both of Bergeu 1793 

vau H jlten, Henrietta Wilhelimena Elizabeth, aud Win. Autbony vau 

der Hyden 1800 

Vau Hooren, A shtje, and Enoch M. Vreelau 1 1705 

Van Hooren, R itger, from N. York, 1. at Hackensack, aud Neeltje 
Dirckx, \v. of Jan Vanderlinleu, 1. at Gamonepa, received cer- 
tificate June 28 1G97 

Vau H)om, B ireut Birentseu, b. at Pammarpog, aud Jenueken 

Pieters, b. and 1. at Bergen 1712 

Vau Hooru, Marytje, aud Elias Johanuissen Vrealand . . 17J3 



April 23 



April 


23 


Jan. 


25 


Oct. 


4 


Mar. 


7 


June 


10 


July 


27 


Sept. 


26 


May 


7 


Juue 


26 


Oct, 


14 



Oct, 1 

April 17 
Dec. 13 
Dec. 12 
Oct. 12 
Dec. — 

Sept. 20 
Dec. 15 

Aug. 16 
Jan. 13 



April 25 

Feb. 23 
May 11 



i M. at New York Oct. 19. 1708. 

2 The Polifiy neighborhood is now known as Woodbridge ; it is between Rutherford 
and Hackensack, 



576 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Hooru, Neeltye, and Jureye van Rype 1790 Nov. 6 

VanHx>rn, Pieter, w. of Tryutje Van Dyck, b. at Pemmebogh, and 

Elisabeth Gabriels, b. at N. Albany, m. iu pres. of Just. Helmig 

Roelofsen, by Adrian Vermeulen 1708 May 9 

van Home, Aeltie, and Michael van Hauten 17n3 Dec. 15 

van Home, Burger, of Bergen Point, and Anna Buskirk, of Staten 

Island 1801 Feb. 12 

van Home, Cornelius, and Sally Cliuedeny, both of Bergen 1799 Nov. 14 

van Home, Rachel, and David Braambush 1795 Mar. 26 

Van Houte, Dirck Helinigse, b. and 1. at Bergen, and Metje Gerre- 

brantse, b. and 1. at Gemoenepan 1711 Sept. 9 

Van Houte, Elisabeth Helm, and Johannis Post 1713 ? 

Van Houte, Johannes, and Annatie Callerd 1782 Dec. 19 

Van Houten, Claasie, aud Hartmau Blinckerhoff 1714 Oct. 20 

Van Houten, Feytje, aud Jacob Demoth 17 1 7 Oct, 1 1 

Van Houten, Jauuetje, and Jacob Van Wagenen 1742 Oct. 1 7 

Van Houten, Johannis Heltnigsen, aud Helena Johanuissen Vreelaud. 1719 May 30 
Vau Houten, Roeiof Helrnigseu, w. of Egje Corn. Vreelaud, aud Feytje 

Sikkels, b. at Albany, 1. at Bergen 1711 Dec. 15 

van Kleff, D.iuiel, of Staten Islaud, aud Altie Dedrix, of Bargen . . ..1797 June 24 

Van Laer, Aaltje, and Abraham Ackerman M. 1633 May 28 

Van Neste, Jacomyntje, and Claes Areutse Toers 1634 Juue 22 

Vau Neste, Sara, aud Christoffel Steynmets 1699 

Vau Nieuwkerck, Matheus Cornelisse, \v. of Anna Lubi, b. at Slechteu- 

horst iu Gelderland, and Catryna Poulus, from Bergen, N. J., 

both 1. at Bergen, m. Aug. 15 at Bergen by the Voorlezer, II. 

Van Gieseu, in presence of the Court at Bjrgeu, in the church. 1636 July 5 
Vau Nienwkerk, Gerrit Mattheussen, b. aud 1. at Bergen, and C itryutje 

Kuypers, b. aud 1. at Ahasemus 1730 Sept. 5 

Vau Nienwkerk, Januitje, and Gerrit Dideriks 1733 April 21 

Van Nieuwkerke, Paulus, b. aud 1. at Bergen, aud Helena Spiers, b. 

aud 1. at Pemmerpog 1728 Juue 18 

Vau Nukerck, Mathus Cornelisse, aud Anna Lubi, m. Dec. 14, 1670, 

by Court at Bergen 1670 Nov. 27 

Van Nurdeu, Elizabeth, aud Hartmau Briukerhoof . 1797 Oct. 21 

Vau Oogsten, Beelitje Dirckx, aud Gerrit Juriaeus .... 1693 May 14 

Van Oogsteu, Dirck Janse, and Elisabeth Cornells, were m. upon cer- 
tificate at New York 1672 Jau. 14 

Van Oosteroom, Jau Hendrickse, from N. York, and Mechteltje Koe- 
lofse, from Breuckleu on Long Island, received certificate to 

Midwout, on Aug. 18, aud were M. 1633 Aug. 19 

vau Orden, Lstitia Oldis, w., aud Jeremiah Voumaus 1801 Nov. 8 

Vau Reype, Catrieutie, and Gerrit Vau Reype 1779 May 2 

Vau Reype, Gerrit, w., aud Catrieutie Vau Reype, both b. aud 1. at 

Bergen, in. by Dom. Gerrit Leydekker, New York 1779 May 2 

Van Reype, Gerrit, aud Jauuetje Winne 1785 Nov. 19 



May 


31 


Oct. 


— 


Nov. 


G 


Dec. 


— 


July 


10 


Dec. 


9 



Dec. 8 



Mar. 


8 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


10 


Oct. 


17 


Mar. 


22 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 577 

Van Reype, Jannetje, and Nicklaas Toers 1 766 

van Kype, Dirick, y. m., and Jemieke Vreeland, y. d 1798 

van Hype, Jureye, y. m. , and Neeltjo vau Hoom, y. d 1790 

van Eypen, Catherine, and Belmik vau llanten 1799 

Van Steenwyk, l J iet Cornel isse, and Hendrickje Arentse, in. July 31, 

before Court at Bergen 1670 

van Tile, Michael, and Sophia Cubberlay, both of Painrapaugh 1797 

Van Tuil, Machiel, and Saertie Hocpcr, both b. on Staten Isld. and 1. 

at Pemmeropog 1766 Aug. 24 

Van Tuyl, Abraham, from Staten Island, and Metje Vreeland, b. at 

Stony Point 1738 

Van Vorst, Cornells, b. and 1. at Ahasemis, and Claasje De Moth, b. 

and 1. at Bergen 1726 

Van Voorst, Cornells, from Hasymas, and Feytje. Gerrits, from Gein- 

onepa, m. April 6 by the minister at Bergen 1685 

Van Wageuen, Autie. and Johannis Diderix 1768 

Van Wageuen, Catherine, and Henry van Winkel , 1801 

Van Wagenen, Cornells, aud Catrina Seggels, both b. and 1. at Bergen. 1742 

Van Wagenen, Gerrit, and Mirgrietje Van Winkel 1740 

Vau Wagenen, Helmigh, from Bergen, and Martje Brinkerhof, b. at 

Gemceaepau 1735 Sept. 26 

Van Wagenen, Jacob, and Jannetje Van Houten, both b. aud 1. at 

Bergen 1742 

Van Wagenen, Jannetje, and Heudrik Demoth 1740 

Vau Wagenen, Johannis, and Aaltje Vreeland 1748 

Van Wageuen, Johannis, and Neesje Van Wagenen 1749 

Van Wageueu, Klaasie, and Peter Westervelt 1796 

Van Wageuen, Lea, and Hendrick Blinkerhoff. 1779 

Vau Wagenen, Neesje, and Johannis Van Wagenen 1749 

Vau Wageuiugen, Autje Gerritsen, and Johaunis Neef jes 1710 

Van Wageuingeu, Autje, and Ide Sip 1725 

Van Wageniugen, Gerrit Harmaus, b. and 1. at Achquecknonk, aud 

Autje Sip, b. and 1. at Bergen 1713 Oct. 30 

Vau Wageuingeu, Jacob Gerritsen, b. and 1. at Pemmerpog, and Lea 

Gerrits, b. and 1. at Bergen 1719 May 2 

Vau Westervelt, Juriaen, and Geeshe Bongert, with certificate from 

Hackensack 1690 April 22 

Van Winckel, Jacob Jacobse, from New Albany, and Aaltje Daniels, 

from N. York, have been married Dec. 15 by the Voorlezer R. 

Van Gieseu in presence of the Court 1675 Nov. 14 

Van Winckel, Johannis Walings, aud Hillegond Sippe, groom from 

Achqueckuonck, and 1. there, bride from Bergen and 1. there. .1710 Sept. 30 
Van Winckel, Symon Jacobse, from N. Jersey, and Aunetie Ariaense 

Sips, from N. York, have been married Dec. 15 by R. Van Gie- 

sen, Voorlezer, in presence of Court. . 1675 Nov. 14 

42 



Oct. 


17 


Oct. 


30 


Oct. 


17 


Nov. 


8 


Oct. 


30 


June 


19 


Nov t 


8 


Oct. 


9 


May 


23 



Feb. 


26 


June 


29 


Oct. 


29 



Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


3 


May 


2 


May 


— 


Jan. 


10 



578 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Winckel, Walingh Jacobse, and Catkaryna Machielse, in. March 

15 by Court at Bergen 1671 

Van Winkel. Aaltje, and Cornells Gerritsen 1728 

Van Wiukel, Annetje Jacobse, and Johannes Steynmets 1676 

Van Winkel, Daniel, from Bergen, and Rachel Straetniaeckers, from 

Hobokeu, received certificate to New York May 15 1707 April 27 

Van Winkel, Daniel, w. of Rachel Straetmaacker, and Jaunetje Cor- 
nells Vreelaut, both b. under Bergen, m. at N. York, by G. 

Dubois 1709 

van Winkel, Garret, and Cornelia Vreeland, both of Bergen 1801 

Van Winkel, Geertruy, and Johannes Didericks 1724 

Van Winkel, Hendrik, b. at Bergen, and Catryntje Waldron, b. at N. 

York, both 1. at Bergen 1726 

Van Winkel, Henry, and Catherine van Wagenen, both of Bergen . . . ] 801 

Van Winkel, Jacob Jacobsen, Jr., and EegjePoulus, both b. at Bergen 

and 1. at Achqueckoonck, received certificate March 26 and 

were married at Acbquecknonck April 11 1703 Mar. 7 

Van Winkel, Jacob Jacobsen, w. of Aaltje Daniels, and Grietje Hen- 

drickx Hellingh, both 1. at Bergen, in. March 25 1695 Mar. 10 

Van Winkel, Jacob Symonsen, aud Jacoinyntje Matheus, received cer- 
tificate to Achquecknonk April 20 1701 

Van Winkel, Jaunetje, and Jacob Diedriks 1738 

van Winkel, Joseph, and Janneken Vreeland, w. of Henry Newkerk, 

both of Bergen . 1793 

Van Winkel, Margrietje, and Gerrit Van Wagenen 1746 

Van Winkel Margrietje Jacobs, and Abraham Vreelant 1699 

Van Winkel, Margrietje, and Johannes Jurriansen 1740 

van Winkel, Rachel, and Martin Winner 1797 

Van Winkel, Simou Jacobsou, b. at Bergen, aud Jaunetje Aljee, w. of 

Steven Albertse, b. at Hackensack 1710 

Van Winkel, Tryntje Jacobsen, and Meyndert Gerrebrant 1715 

Van Wouglim, Ary, b. on Staten Islaud, and Seleytje Preyer, b. at 

Barge, 1. at Ahasemus. 1715 

van Wyck, Mary, and Peter A. Me~ier. . 1800 

van Ziele, Keziah, and Samuel Shephard 1793 

Verkerck, Jaunetje, from Midwout, and a Young Maul from Ahasy- 
mus, received certificate Feb. 2, 1707, m. by Do. Freeman at 

Midwout . .. 1707 Jan. 19 

Vermeule, Adriaeu, b. at Vlissingen, Zeeland, w. of Dina Swarts, and 
Christina Fredericks, b. at Bergen, m. by Do. Guilliaem Ber- 

tholf, of Hackensack 1708 July 1 

Vreeland, Aagje Hartmans, and Cornells Hendricksen Blinkerhoff . . 1708 May 21 
Vreeland, Aaltje, and Johanuis Van Wagenen 1748 Oct. 17 

1 Doubtless Hendrick Claesen Kuyper, son of Claes Jansen Van Purmerant (who as- 
sumed the name of Kuyper— or Cooper— long before his death). 



April 


7 


Nov. 


26 


May 


26 


Mar. 


22 


Oct. 


8 


Sept. 


5 


April 


1 


May 


27 


May 


7 


Mar. 


25 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


29 



25 
3 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 579 

Viteeland, Aegtie Johaunisseu, and Cornells Helmigseu 1711 Mar. 24 

Vfeeland, Ariaantje Hartmause, and Zaeharias Sickela 1719 Nov. 7 

Vreeland, Catharina, aud Aart Albertse 1692 May 29 

Vreeland, Claes Hertinanse, from Geinonepa, aud Aunetje Hauseu, 

fromN. Utrecht, L. I., received certificate May 24 aud 

married May 25 at Gemouepa by Do. Bertholf 1697 April 

Vreelaud, Cornelia, aud Garrit van "Winkel 1801 Oct. 

Vreelaud, Cornelis Machiels, from N. York, and Metje Dircks Braeck, 

from N. York, received certificate to N. York, May 11 1681 April 17 

Vreeland, Elias Johannisseu, b. at Gemoenepau, aud Marytje Vau 

Hooru, b. at Pemmerpog, both 1. at Gemceuepan 1723 May 1 1 

Vreelaud, Elsje, and Edward Earle 1688 Jan. 29 

Vreeland, Euoch Machielse, aud Dirckje Meyers, received June 20, 

certificate to New York 1670 June 5 

Vreeland, Enoch Michiels, w. of Dierckje Myers, 1. at Minkachquee, 

and Grietje Wessels, w. of Jau Janse Laugedyk, 1. at N. York . 1691 Aug. 23 
Vreeland, Enoch M., w. of Grietje Wessels, and Achtje Van Hooren, 

both 1. at Minkachquie, m. at N. York by Do. Dubois 1705 

Vreeland, Helena Johannissen, and Johannis Helmigseu Van Hjuteu.1719 

Vreeland, Hester, and Johannes Diedriks 1739 

Vreeland, Jacob, and Catherine Brinkerhoof, both of Bergen 1801 

Vreeland, Janneken, and Stephen Vreeland 1797 

Vreeland, Johannes Machielse, from N. York, aud Claesje Dirckse 

Braeck, from Manhattan Island, m. by the preacher from 

Esopus, at Bergen 1682 May 14 

Vreeland, Johannis, b. at Pemmerepog, and Helena Gerbrantse, b. at 

Gemceuepa 1778 June 21 

Vreeland, Johannis Johannissen, b. and 1. at Gemonepan, and Autje 

Didericks, b. and 1. at Bergen 1726 

Vreeland, John, and Polly Westervelt, both of Engl. Neighbourhood. . 1796 

Vreeland, Machiel, and Geertie Sickels 1781 

Vreeland, Marytje Hartmansen, and Thomas Fredriksen 1711 

Vreelaud, Metje, and Abraham Vau Tuyl 1738 

Vreeland, Michael, and Altie Oatwater, both of Bergen Township . . .1801 
Vreeland, Michael, and Rachel de Groot, both of Engl. Nghbhd.. . . 1796 
Vreeland, Michael, and Jane van der Hoof, both of English Neigh- 
bourhood 1799 May 11 

Vreeland, Michiel Hartmansen, b. aud 1. at Gemcenepan, and Elisabeth 

Gerrits, b. aud 1. at Bergen 1719 

Vreeland, Stephen, and Janneken Vreeland, both of Bergen 1797 

Vreelaud, Winchie, aud Benjamin Westervelt. . 1797 

Vreelaut, Abraham, aud Margrietje Jacobs Van Winkel, received cer- 
tificate Oct. 28, 1699, to Hackensack 1699 

Vreelaut, Achtje Coruelis, and Roelof Helmighsz 1701 

Vreelaut, Corneelus, y. m., aud Jenueke Sip, y. d 1788 



Jan. 


13 


May 


30 


April 


1! 


Jau. 


■21 


Dec. 


16 



July 


30 


Sept. 


16 


Dec. 


8 


Nov. 


29 


Feb. 


13 



May 


4 


Dec. 


16 


April 


15 


Oct. 


8 


April 


■21 


Oct. 


2 



580 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Vreelaut, Direk Hertinanse, b. at Gernonepa, and Margrieta Dircks 
Banta, b. at Hackensack, m. Nov. 22, after received certificate 

Nov. 2 I, to Hackinsack 1702 Oct. 18 

Yreelant, Fytje Cjrnelissen, and Lourens Van Boskerk 1709 Sept. 18 

Yreelant, Elizabet, and Peter Sip 1789 Nov. 1 

Yreelant, Fytje Hertmans, and Dirck Poulussen 1699 July 30 

Yreelant, Jannetje Cornelis, and Daniel Yan Winkel 1709 Sept. 3 

Yreelant, Jannetye, and Aareut Newkerk J793 Nov. — 

Yreelant, Maehiel, y. ni., and Annatje Gerrebrantse, y. d 1789 Nov. 5 

Yreelant, Jenneke, and Dirrick van Rype. 1798 Nov. — 

Yreelant, Michiel, and Marya Joris, received certificate Nov. 27 1691 Oct. 11 

Yreland, Klaas, b. at Geniceuepan, and Catlintje Zipb, from Bergen, m. 

by Do. Jackson 1757 Dec. 1 

w 

Yrelant, Hartman, and Martje Gerbrants, botb b. at Gemcenepan 1739 Nov. 20 

Wald[ron] Anna, and Abrm Prior 1796 Dec. 20 

Waldron, Catryntje, and Hendrik Yan Winkel 1726 May — 

Waldron, Joseph, b. at Rev, 1 1. at Pernmerpocb, and Antje Diederieks, 

b. at Bergen, 1. there 1757 Dec. 3 

Waliughs, Anna, and Hermanus Gerrits 1690 Sept. 21 

Waliughs. Elisabeth, and Joseph Arsele 1678 May 26 

Wangh, Annamanda van der Pool, and Silvester van Beuren 1801 July 1 

Webbe, ? Jan, with letters from the French Church at Kinkachgemeck 
in Bergen Co., E. N. Jersey, and Annetje Cornelis, w., m. by 

R. Yan Giesen, in presence of Court 1693 Mar. 5 

Wessels, Grietje, and Enoch Micbiels Yreel and 1691 Aug. 23 

Westervelt, Benjamin, and Winchie Yreeland, both of Engl. N 1797 April 15 

Westervelt, Lncretia, and John Day ] 798 Dec. 15 

Westervelt, Margrietje, and Maerten Poulussen 1694 Mar. 25 

Westervelt, Orseltje, and Albertas Spier 1712 June 5 

We-tervelt, Peter, of Tee-neck, and Klaasie Yan Wagenen, of Bergen 1796 Oct. 30 

Westervelt, Polly, and John Vreeland 1796 July 30 

Westervelt, Roelof Lubbertse, from Meppel, 1. at Hackensack, and 
Urselena Stynmets, from Bergen, 1. at Hasymus, m. April 11 

by Rev. Selyns at N. York. 1688 Mar. 11 

Westervelt, William, and C itherine Decker, both of Bull's Ferry 1800 Sept. 14 

We-tervelt — see Yan Westervelt. 

Wilcher, John, and Leentie Stimets, both of Engl. N ... 1797 June 25 

Willemsz, Wonter, from N. York. 1. at Hoboken, and Dieuwer Joon% 

from Bergen, 1. there, m. at Bergen April 22 1689 Mar. 30 

Williams, John, and Rebecca Smith, both of Bergen Wood 1795 July 26 

Winne, Antje, and Robbert Sikkels 1740 Oct. 8 

Wirme, Edo, y. m.. and Aeltye Toers, y. d 1790 Nov. 6 

1 Rye. Westchester, X. Y. 



BERGEN CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 58 I 

Winue, Jannetje, and Gerrit Van Reype 1785 Nov. 19 

Winue, Johauuis, and Aaltje Diedericks, both b. at Bergen 1758 Dec. 10 

Winue, Livynus, and Annatje Zip ... 1749 Oct. 8 

Winner, Martin, and Rachel van Wiukel, both of Bergen 17U7 April 1 

Woed, Abraham, and Rutie Kleyndini 1783 Oct. 12 

Y 

Youmaus, Jeremiah, and Letitia Oldis, w. of Lawrence van Orden, 

both of English Neighbourhood 1801 Nov. 8 

z 

Zaberoski, Albert, from Enghstburgh, 1 and Machtelt Van der Linden, 

from N. York, received certificate on Jan. 8, 1677 1676 Dec. 17 

Zabriskie, Jacob, and Catherine van Hauten, both of Bergen 1801 Dec. 12 

Zikkels, Willem, b. and 1. at Bergen, and Elisabeth Kuyper, b. and 1. 

at Ahasymus 1732 Aug. 10 

Zip, Annatje, and Livynus Winue 1749 Oct. 8 

Ziph, Catlintje, and Klaas Vreeland 1757 Dec. 1 

1 Engelsber?. in Austrian Silesia. 



Essex County Clerk's Marriage Records, 

1795-1801. 



The following is a transcript from the Record of Returns of Marriages, 1795-1800, 
kept in the office of the Clerk of the County of Essex, pursuant to Sec. VIII., of "An 
Act concerning marriages," passed the 4th of March, 1795. The records have been 
herewith arranged in alphabetical order. 

These records are entered in a folio volume, in which the returns of the officiating 
clergymen or magistrates have been copied as accurately as they could be deciphered, 
and the records, in turn, have been copied carefully for this purpose, with some diffi- 
culty, in many cases, owing to the peculiar chirography of the scribes. The names 
have been arranged in alphabetical order for publication in this volume, the full en- 
try being given under the head of the males, and the names and dates under the head 
of the females. As a matter of information, the names of the persons officiating, 
where given, have been indicated by the initials before the dates. 

S. G. — Rev. Stephen Grover, pastor of the Presbyterian church at Caldwell, 1787- 

1833. 
A. J. — Rev. Abel Jackson, pastor of the Presbyterian church at Bloomfield, 1800- 

1810. 
T. M. — Rev. Thomas Morrell, one of the leading Methodist Episcopal clergymen 
of his day. He was stationed at Philadelphia in 1794. but being pros- 
trated by illness in December of that year, returned to his father's resi- 
dence, at Elizabethtowu, in April, 1795, where he remained in feeble 
health until May, 1799. 
M. E. — Rev. Moses Edwards, one of the founders (1786) and priucipal supporters 
of the Baptist church at Northfield, a village in Livingston township ; he 
was licensed as a preacher, May 5, 1798, and ministered to the church, 
1801-1815. 
U. O. — Rev. Uzal Ogden, Rector of Trinity Protestant Episcopal church, Newark, 

1788-1805. 
M. R. — Rev. Menzies Rayner, Rector of St. John's Protestant Episcopal church, 

Elizabethtown, 1796-1801. 
H. K. — Rev. Henry Kollock, pastor of the First Presbyterian church at Elizabeth- 
town, 1800-1803. 
W. V. H.— Rev. William Van Home, pastor of the Scotch Plains Baptist church, 

1785-1807. 
J. V. A. — Rev. Jacob Vn Artsdalen, pastor of the Presbyterian church at Spring- 
field, now in Union county, 1774-1801. 
D. L. —David Little, Justice of the Peace. 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 583 

J. D.— Rev. John Duryee, pastor of the Reformed Dutch church at Fairfield, 1801- 
1817. 

The returns of marriages by the Rev. Henry Schoonmaker, pastor of the Re- 
formed Dutch church at Acquackanonk, and the returns by the Rev. Peter Stryker, 
pastor of the Reformed Dutch church at Belleville, 1794-1809, are not printed in 
the following list; the latter are given in connection with the records of the church, 
on subsequent pages. The records of the Acquackanonk church (now the First Re- 
formed church of Passaic) will be given in another volume. 

Essex county included the present Union county until 1857. Hence the appear- 
ance here of marriage returns from Elizabethtown, Scotch Plains and other places 
now in the latter county. 

A 

Allen, Miss Jeana, and William Conolly 1800 May 10 

Avery, Hezekiah, and Martha Corby, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 July 20 

B 

Badgely, Susannah, and Isaac Pierson 1798 Sept. 24 

Baker, Phebe, and John Edwards 1801 May 28 

Baldwin, Elizabeth, and James Lerish 1801 Oct. 31 

Baldwin, Joanna, and David Riker. 1800 Mar. 4 

Baldwin, Mathias, and Hannah Ward A. J. 1800 July 24 

Baldwin, Sally, and Conrad Beam 1800 Dec. 25 

Baldwin, Thomas, and Betsey Camp T. SI. 1801 Aug. 9 

Ball, Timothy, and Polly Martin, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 Feb. 7 

Balla, Samuel, and Mary Edwards, both of the Parish of Springfield 

and township of the same place and County of Essex . M. E. 1801 Mar. 4 
Barnal, Richard, and Sara Smith, both of the Parish of Northfield and 

township of Spring[held] and County of Essex M. E. 1801 June 28 

Bates, David, and Sarah Gould, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 April 16 

Bates, Win, and Polly Dodd, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 Dec. 12 

Beach, Thomas, and Miss Betsey Conyl U. O. 1800 Aug. 4 

Beam, Conrad, and Sally Baldwin A. J. 1800 Dec. 25 

Bedstead, John H, and Lynreky- Riker, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 Nov. 13 

Bell, Mary, and Richard Whitehead 1795 July 14 

Blackford, John, and Margaret Laing, both of Westfield 1798 Jan. 24 

Blaire, John Unibale, and Miss Mary McKinney, both of New 

York U. O. 1798 Feb. 9 

Blight, George, and Deborah Hetfield, both of Elizabeth Town.M. R. 1798 Jan. 13 
Bliss, Beza, of New York, and Betsey Thomas, of Elizabeth 

Town ". M. R. 1796 Sept. 3 

Bond, Elizabeth, and Barkley Cunningham 1800 Nov. 23 

Bond, Elizabeth, and Lewis Ogden 1799 May 25 

Bonnel, Elizabeth, and Moses Burnet 1798 Mar. 10 

Bonuel, James, and Prusia Stackhouse MR. 1800 May 18 

1 Query: Cory. 2 Query: Synechy. i. e., Cynthia, 



584 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bonnet, Samuel, and Jane Crane, both of Elizabeth Town. . ..M. R. 1796 

Bowers, Miss Catharine, and Jacob Lee 1801 

Brant, Moses, and Miss Abigail Conkling H. K. 1801 

Britten, Polly, and Mun Hart ". 1801 

Brown, Elias, and Polly Masieker, at Caldwell .S. G. 1798 

Brown, Miss Elizabeth, and Joel Post 1796 

Brown, Mary, and Jot ham Faitoute 1799 

Brown, Pheby, and Garret Van Riper 1797 

Brown, Miss Sally, and Mr. Benjamin Magee 1802 

Brown, Sarah, and Garret Vauess 1798 

Bryant, Abigail, and Jeremiah Mills, Jun 1798 

Bryant, Rev. Peter, and Eliza Stites, both of Elizabeth Town. W. V. H. 1795 

Bryant, Sarah, and Joseph Halsey, 3d 1796 

Budau, Rosanue, and Joseph Marolles 1799 

Bugot, Capt. John, and Miss Catharine Cumming U. O. 1797 

Burnet, Miss Helmiah, and James Stray 1799 

Burnet, Jonathan, and Polly Meeker , J. V. A. 1795 

Burnet, Moses, of Morris Town, and Elizabeth Bonnel, of West- 
field W. V. H. 1798 

Burton, William, and Lucey Smith D. L. 1795 

Butler, Daniel, of Bergen, and Phebe Connet, of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1796 

Buttin, Wilbur, and Mary Price, both of Elizabeth Town. . . M. R. 1799 

c 

Cadmus, Aaron, and Daney Freeland, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 

Cadnms, Caty, and Henry Vaness 1797 

Calacpi (?), 1 Cecilia, and George Welsh 1799 

Cammel, Sarah, and Timothy Talmy 1797 

Camp, Betsey, and Thomas Baldwin 1801 

Campbell, James, and Joanna Jones J. V. A. 1796 

Canfield, Ambross, and Polly Crane, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Canfield, Elizabeth, and Abner Dodd 1800 

Carmen, Ischabod, and Miss Mary Longworth U. O. 1795 

Chandler, Jane T., and William Dayton, both of Eliz. Town 1796 

Chandler, Samuel, and Hannah Dawes, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1798 

Chetwood, John, and Susan Jelf, both of E. Town M. R. 1796 

Chrouts, Jane, and Isaac Tompkins 1800 

Clark, Elizabeth, and Crane, of Newark 1800 

Clark, Miss Naucy, and Charles Ogden 1796 

Clark, Norris, and Johanna Hays, by Nathaniel Little, J. P 1796 

Clark, Sarah, and William Miller, of Elizabeth Town 1796 

1 Query: Gillespie. 



Mar. 


24 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


21 


Jan. 


1 


May 


1-2 


May 


21 


Dec. 


29 


Dec. 


29 


Jan. 


10 


May 


29 


May 


29 


July 


2 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


31 


May 


9 


Oct. 


13 


Mir. 


9 


Mar. 


10 


April 


28 


Dec. 


28 


Dec. 


11 



Aug. 


15 


Sept. 


2 


Sept. 


30 


May 


13 


Aug. 


9 


Mar. 


3 


Feb. 


21 


Jan. 


26 


Dec. 


14 


May 


3 


April 


17 


Nov. 


19 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


13 


Jan. 


14 


June 


4 


May 


22 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 585 

Clarke, Timothy, and Patience Osborn, both of the Township of 

Westfield W, V. II. 1796 

Cfoddington, Joseph, and Nancy Hall TJ. O. 1799 

Cole, Isaac, and Betsey Oliver T. M. 1801 

Cole, John, of Elizabeth Town, and Caty Vanderbilt, of Staten 

Island M. 11. 1800 

Colie, Jacob, and Betsey Smith J. V. A. 1795 

Cougar, Samuel, and Miss H inah Hays U. O. 1796 

Conkliug, Miss Abigail, and Moses Brant. . . 1801 

Conkling, Kezia, and Andrew Gurthwaite 1800 

Conkling, Miss Mary, and Edward Hedden 1800 

Connet, Phebe, and Daniel Butler 1796 

Couolly, William, New York, and Miss Jeaua Allen, Newark. . ,U. O. 1800 

Cony, Miss Betsey, and Thomas Beach ... . 1800 

Cony, William, and Betsey Meeker, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Cook, Francis, and Polly Cook, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Cook, Pheby, and Joseph Edwards 1796 

Cook, Polly, and Francis Cook 1799 

Cooly, Michael, and Caty Vaness, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 

Corby, Martha, and Hezekiah Avery 1797 

Corby, Ezekiel, and Rebecca Day, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 

Corby, Poly, and Peter Van Blaricom 1798 

Corter, Elias, and Suky Williams, at Caldwell . S. G. 1797 

Cox, Sally, and Phillip De Camp 1800 

Crane, of Newark, and Elizabeth Clark H. K. 1800 

Craue, Ezekiel, and Anna Shotwell, both of Elizabeth Towu. .M. R. 1798 

Crane, Daniel, and Hannah D. Grace A. J. 1799 

Crane, Dorcas, and Timothy Crane ... 1799 

Crane, Jane, and Samuel Bonnet, both of Elizabeth Town 1796 

Craue, Lyda, and Heusn Harrison 1796 

Craue, Polly, and Ambross Canfield ... 1799 

Crane Robert, and Fanny Pool, both of Elizabeth Town M. R. 1797 

Craue, Sally, and John Ogden 1801 

Crane, Timothy, and Dorcas Crane, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Crawford, John, and Miss Mary Johnson . . 1798 

Cromwell, John, and Frances Nicholls, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1797 

Crowell, Mary, and Benjamin Wade 1801 

Culver, David aud Unice Osborne, both of this place [Elizabethtown], 

by Aaron Lane, J. P 1795 

Cumruing, Miss Catharine, and Capt. John Bu«ot 1797 

Cunningham, Barkley, and Elizabeth Bond, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1800 

D 

Darby, Ezra, and Phebe Swan, both of the township of Westfield, in 

the county of Essex W. V. H. 1795 May 

43 



April 


27 


Sept. 


29 


Oct. 


3 


Nov. 


5 


April 


19 


Jan. 


9 


Nov. 


21 


Feb. 


8 


June 


13 


Dec. 


28 


May 


10 


Aug. 


4 


Jan. 


23 


June 


9 


Jan. 


24 


June 


9 


July 


3 


July 


20 


Nov. 


13 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


11 


Nov. 


9 


Dec. 


13 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


4 


July 


4 


Mar. 


24 


April 


24 


Feb. 


21 


Oct. 


28 


Jan. 


31 


July 


4 


Sept. 


9 


Aug. 


17 


May 


24 


Nov. 


10 


May 


9 


Nov. 


23 



586 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Davice, Catharine, and Henry Taylor 1800 

Davis, Elizabetb, and John Davis 1800 

Davis, Euos, and Nancy Hays, both of Westfield W. V. H. 1797 

Davis, John, and Elizabeth Davis 1800 

Dawes, Fanny, and Luke Haviion Higgins 1798 

Dawes, Hannah, and Samuel Chandler 1798 

Day, Rebecca, and Ezekiel Corby 1798 

Dayton, Cornelia R., and Horatio R. Dayton 1800 

Dayton, Horatio R., and Cornelia R. Dayton, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1800 

Dayton, William, and Jane T. Chandler, both of Eliz. Town. . M. R. 179G 

De Camp, Phillip, and Sally Cox, both of Rah way M. R. 1800 

De Camp, Sally, and John Riker , 1799 

De Hart, Capt. Jacob, of Philadelphia, and Sarah Jouet, of Elizabeth 

Town ... M. R. 1798 

De Hart, Louisa Esther Flint, and John William Paterson 1798 

De Wint, Ann, and David D. Leary 1793 

Dean, Samuel, and Phebe Edwards, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1796 

Deckeman, Sarepta, and Cyrus Tooker 1795 

Delanoir, Miss Maria Autynette, and Michael Paff 1801 

Denman, Aaron, of Springfield, and Elizabeth Mulford, of Elizabeth 

Town M. R, 1798 

Denman, Abigail, and Edward Faitoute 1798 

Denman, Mr. Samuel, and Miss Anna Maria Hampton, at Eliza- 
beth H. K. 1801 

Derby, Elias, and Sarah Smith, both of Elizabeth Town M. R. 1796 

Deulea, William, and Sarah Taylor J. V. A. 1796 

Dianna, a black woman belonging to Ford Cutter, and Saul, a Negro 

Man belonging to Anthony Morse 1798 

Dickey, Hannah, and James Williams 1795 

Dissosway, Israel R., of Staten Island, and Elisabeth S. Ogden, of 

Elizabeth Town M. R. 1799 

Dodd, Abigail, and Jacob Ward 1800 

Dodd, Abner, and Elizabeth Canfield A. J. 1800 

Dodd, David, and Lydia Ward. A. J. 1800 

Dodd, Polly, and Wm. Bates 1798 

Dodd, Sally, and James Garri 1801 

Dodd, Stephen, and Phebe Pierson A. J. 1799 

Domavea (?), Lorance, and Margit Romer, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 

Dossey, Michael, and Phebe Miller, by Samuel Tyler, J. P 1798 

Dovington, Polly, and John Vanderbelt 1 799 

Drewer, Timothy, and Leah Willis, both of Elizabeth Town. M. R. 1796 

Dunning, Susana, and James Latimir 1800 

Dye, Anne, and Hassiel Hopper 1796 



Oct. 


23 


July 


17 


July 


2 


July 


17 


Dec. 


30 


April 


17 


Nov. 


13 


Jan. 


28 


Jan. 


28 


May 


3 


Nov. 


9 


Mar. 


3 


Oct. 


28 


April 


18 


Sept. 


17 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


23 


May 


3 


Feb. 


13 


Nov. 


27 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


26 


Aug. 


11 


Sept. 


1 


April 


22 


Mar. 


2 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


22 


Dec. 


12 


Feb. 


11 


Nov. 


28 


Jan. 


1 


Feb. 


1 


Nov. 


10 


April 


[ 30 


Aug. 


31 


Mar. 


5 



Dec. 


12 


Jan. 


13 


Jan. 


8 


Mar. 


8 


Nov. 


25 



i 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 5K7 

E 

Earl, John, and Sarah Thompson T. M. 1801 

Earl, Stephen, and Elizabeth Jobes, both of the Borough of Eliza- 
beth M. II. 1799 

Eaton, Susan, and Morris Woodruff 1800 

Eckley, Thomas, and Miss Isabel Johnson 1798 

Edwards, Easther, and Isaac Reevs 1800 

Edwards, John, and Phebe Baker, both of the Parish of Springfield 

and Township of the same place and County of Essex. .M. E. 1801 May 28 
Edwards, John Jackson, of New York, and Mary Ann Ogden, of Eliza- 
beth Town M. R. 1798 Mar. 19 

Edwards, Joseph, and Pheby Cook, at Caldwell. S. G. 1793 Jan. 21 

Edwards, Mary, and Samuel Balla 1801 Mar, 

Edwards, Michael, and Betsey Jagger, both of Connecticut 

Farms M. R. 1797 Feb. 7 

Edwards, Phebe, and Samuel Dean 1796 Nov. 29 

Egbert, Enos, and Sally Lyon H. K. 1801 Jan. 6 

Elliot, Augustus, and Miss Sally Williams H. K. 1801 Sept. 5 

Esther, John Clark's black woman, and Bill Johnson, a Blackman . . . 1799 May 26 

F 

Faitoute, Edward, and Abigail Denman, both of the Borough of 

Elizabeth M. R. 1798 Nov. 27 

Faitoute, Jotham, and Mary Brown, both of North Farms, in the Bor- 
ough of Elizabeth M. R. 1799 

Foot, Captain, and Hannah Stone, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1799 

Frazee, , and Abraham Tucker 1795 

Frazee, Hiel, and Kesiah Tucker, both of Westfield W. V. H. 1798 

Freeland, Daney, and Aaron Cadmus 1798 

Freeman, John, and Aulehai Syndlebos, both of the Township of Cald- 
well, in the County of Essex, by Enos Martin, J. P 1800 

Freeman, Mary, and John Neavo 1802 

French, Mary, and David Hays, both of Westfield Township 1796 

G 

Garri, James, and Sally Dodd A. J. 1801 

Gildersleeve, Thomas, and Phebe Roock J. V. A. 1795 

Gillom, Elizabeth, and Davis Lyon 1798 

Goble, Calvin, and Miss Martha Pearson U. O. 1795 

Gould, Anthony, and Polly Sindford, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Gould, Caty, and Jacob Smith 1797 

Gould, Sarah, and David Bates 1799 

Grace, Hannah D. , and Daniel Crane 1799 

Grey, Sarah, and Benjamin Hand, both of the township of Westfield. 1795 

Griffin, Rachel, and John Qays 1796 

Grover, Hannah, and Thomas Vincent 1796 



Dec. 


29 


Oct. 


18 


Mar. 


18 


April 


21 


Aug. 


15 


Dec. 


21 


Dec. 


4 


Oct. 


2 


Feb. 


14 


Dec. 


24 


May 


26 


May 


7 


Jan. 


15 


Nov. 


— 


April 


16 


Dec. 


4 


Aug. 


30 


Mar. 


21 


May 


25 



588 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Gurthwaite, Andrew, and Kezia Conkling, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1800 Feb. 8 

H 

Hagerty, Mary, and John Kid . 1799 

H ill, N iney. and Joseph Co idington 1799 

Halsey, Joseph 3d, and Sarah Bryant J. V. A. 1796 

Halsted, Molly, and Th. Mills 1801 

Hambetou, Phebe, and Thomas Lee 1795 

Hampton, Miss Anna Maria, and Mr. Samuel Denman, . . 1801 

Hand, Benjamin, and Sarah Grey, both of the township of West- 
field W. V. H. 1795 

Hand, Mrs. Prudence, and Mr. Benjamin Higgins , ... 1801 

Harrison, Hensn, and Lyda Crane, at Caldwell S. G. 1796 

Harrison, John, and Abby Ogden, at Caldwell S. G. 17991 

Harrison, Mathew, and Sarah Harrison. A. J. 1800 

Harrison, Sarah, and Mathew Harrison 1800 

Hart, Joseph, and May McGroath, both of Elizabeth Town. M. R. 1798 

Hart, Man, and Polly Britten H. K. 1801 

Hayes, Catharine Anderson, and William Pierson 1797 

Hays, David, and Mary French, both of Westfield Town- 
ship W. V. H. 1796 

Hays, Miss Hanah, and Samuel Cougar 179G 

Hays, Johauna, and Norris Clark 1796 

Hays, Miss Phebe, and Tabor Peirsou 1797 

Hays, Nancy, and Euos Davis 1797 

Headley, Betsey, aud Eliezer Miller 1796 

Hedden, Edward, and Miss Mary Conckliug, both of Orange 

Dale U. O. 1800 

Hedgin, Sarah, aud Lewis Miller 1795 

Heillet, James, of Westfield, aud Cloe Thompsou, of Connecticut 

Farms M. R. 1800 June 29 

Helm, Benjamin, Esq., aud Elizabeth Jackson, widow, by Eucrease 

Gould, J. P 1796 

Hendricks, Phebe, aud Nehemiah Wade, both of Elizabeth Town ...1796 

Hepsie, Margaret, and John Smith 1801 

Hesley, Rachel, aud Manuel Lasure 1 1796 

Hettield, Deborah, and George Plight 1798 

Hig«iu, Charles, aud Hannah Paul T. M. 1801 

Higgins, Mr. Benjamin, and Mrs. Prudence Haud, both of Elizabeth 
Town, Rahway, by Anthony Morse, Aldermau of the Borough 

of Elizabeth 1801 Nov. 21 

Higgins, Luke Havilon and Fanny Dawes, both of the Borough [of 

Elizabeth] M. R. 1798 Dec. 30 

Hopper, Hassiel, and Auue Dye, at Caldwell S. G. 1796 Mar. 5 

i The entries next before and next after are April us and May ~~>. respectively. 



Jan. 


7 


Sept. 


29 


Feb. 


4 


Jan. 


27 


May 


1 


Dec. 


10 


Aug. 


30 


Nov. 


21 


April 


24 


Mar. 


6 


Mar. 


6 


Feb. 


11 


Jan. 


1 


Oct. 


26 


Oct. 


2 


Jan. 


9 


June 


4 


Nov. 


20 


July 


2 


Jan. 


9 


June 


13 


Dec. 


12 



Aug. 


1 1 


April 


30 


Nov. 


'1-1 


Oct. 


— 


Jan. 


13 


Oct. 


\\) 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



589 



Howard, Robert, and Nancy Wilson, both of Rahway M. It. 1800 Nov. 4 

Hudspeth, Robt., and Rhoda Russell. J. V. A. 1796 May 17 

Hughes, Ch. M., and Fanny Williams U.K. 1801 Feb. 1 

Hush, Anno, and John Vaness 1707 Oct. — 

Hutchings, Nancy, and David Ross, both of Westfield Township 179G Sept. 24 

Hyltou, Mary, and Louis Le Guen 1799 Feb. 4 

J 

Jackson, Elizabeth, widow, and Benjamin Helm, Esq 1790 Aug. 14 

Jacobus, Aaron, and Ache. Vanriper, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 June 9 

Jacobus, Jenny, and Abrm Vandroof 1799 Jan. 19 

Jacobus, Jenny, and Henry King 1798 Aug. 12 

Jacobus, Miry, and Itobt. Vaness 1797 Oct. — 

Jacobus, Richard, and Betsey Low, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 Mar. 9 

Jacobus, Tunis, and Lydia Vreeland. at Caldwell. ... S. G. 17991 

Jacobusen, Jacob, and Suky Noe, at Caldwell S. G. 1796 June 29 

Jagger, Betsey, and Michael Edwards ... 1797 Feb. 7 

Jagger, Silas, aud Sarah Meeker, both of Connecticut Farms M. R. 1796 Jan. 15 

Jelf, Susan, and John Chetwood, both of E. Town 1796 Nov. 19 

Jenison— see Tenison. 

Jewel, Phebe, aud John Smith 1797 Jan. 22 

Jobes, Elizabeth, and Stephen Earl 1799 Jan. 13 

Johnson, David, of New Ark, aud Rachael Spinning, of Lyons 

Farms M. R. 1800 Nov. 7 

Johnson, Miss Hannah, and John R. Masier. 1795 May 7 

Johnson, Miss Isabel, aud Thomas Eckley 1798 Mar. 8 

Johnson, John C, and Pheby Ward, at Caldwell .S. G. 1799 June 29 

Johnson, Miss Mary, and John Crawford 1798 Sept. 9 

Johnson, Miss Polly, and Henry W. Kiss 1800 Oct. 15 

Johnston, Bill, a Blackmau, aud Esther. John Clark's black woman, 

by permission of her master, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1799 May 26 

Jones, Joanna, and James Campbell 1796 Mar. 3 

Jones, Miry, and Christopher Stagg 1800 Jan. 2 

Jones, Mr. Simeon, and Miss Betse Paterson, by Eucrease Gould, J. P. 1796 Aug. 14 
Jonson, David, and Johannah Meeker, both of the parish of Oring, 2 

in the township of Newark and County of Essex M. E. 1800 Sept. 24 

Jouet, Sarah, aud Capt. Jacob De Hart 1798 Oct. 28 

Joyce, Rozana, and Edward Price 1801 Dec. 5 

K 

Kean, Susan, aud Julian Ursin Niemciewitz 1800 Jnly 2 

Kid, John, and Mary Hagerty ". ....U. O. 1799 Jan. 7 

King, Henry, aud Jenny Jacobus, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 Aug. 12 

Kingsland, Doctor Burnet R., Barbadoes Neck, and Miss Elizabeth 

Smith, Elizabeth Town U. O. 1795 Oct. 31 



1 Between June 29 and July 1. apparently, 



Orange. 



590 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kingsland, Miss Hannah, and John Stevenson 1796 Nov. 7 

Kiss, Henry W., New York, and Miss Polly Johnson, Newark. .U. O. 1800 Oct. ]5 

L 

Laing, Margaret, and John Blackford 1798 Jan. 24 

Lasure, Manuel, and Rachel Hesley 1796 Oct. — 

Latimir, James, and Susana Dunning U O. 1800 Aug. 31 

Le Guen, Louis, late of the Isle of France, now residing New York, 
and Mary Hyltou, daughter of William Hylton, Esquire, late of 
the Island of Jamaica, now residing in the State of Vir- 
ginia M. R. 1799 Feb. 4 

Leary, David D., and Ann De Wint, both of Morris Town. . .M. R. 1798 Sept. 17 

Lee, Jacob, and Miss Catharine Bowers H. K. 1801 Sept. 17 

Lee, Thomas, aud Phebe Hambleton, both of New York U. O. 1795 May 1 

Leighton, Sarah Ann, and Nathaniel Williams 1798 June 16 

Lerish, James, and Elizibeth Baldwin, at Newark, by the Rev. E. D. 

Griffin 1801 Oct, 31 

Lewis, Martha, and Smith Parsil ,. 1795 Dec. 31 

Littel, Susannah, and John Taylor, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1800 Nov. 2 

Little, Hannah, and John Smith. 1795 Nov. 30 

Loacy, Susaua, and Samuel Stephens 1801 Jan. 1 

Longworth, Miss Mary, and Ischabod Carmen 1795 Dec. 14 

Lovell, Thomas, of New York, and Sarah Morrell, of E Town . M. R. 1796 Dec. 17 

Low, Betsey, and Richard Jacobus. ....*..- 1799 Mar. 9 

Lyon, Betsey, aud Joseph Williams 1798 June 9 

Lyon, Davis, son of Daniel Lyon, of Springfield, in Essex county, and 
Elizabeth Gillom, daughter of Arnold Gillom, deceased, of the 

aforesaid county, by Sam'l Tyler, Springfield, J. P 1798 July 10 

Lyon, Sally, aud Euos Egbert 1801 Jan. 6 

M 

McAdams, Sally, and Hampton Woodruff 1799 Aug. 8 

McCubbin, Robert, and Caty Whitlock, by Encrease Gould, J. P 1796 Jan. 5 

McGroath, Mary, and Joseph Hart 1798 Feb. 11 

McKinney. Miss Mary, and John Unibale Blaire 1798 Feb. 9 

Macloglau, Catharine, and James Welsh 1799 Oct. 20 

Magee, Mr. Benjamin, and Miss Sally Brown, at Elizabeth. . .H. K. 1802 Jan. 10 

Magee, Mary, and Isaac Tichnor 1801 June 1 

Marolles, Joseph Nicholas Michel Gaignerou Johnson, of Martinique, 

and Roseauua Budau, of Guadaloupei 1799 Oct. 31 

i Joseph De Marolles ] Recorded Sept 30, 1800 Aaron Ogden Clk. Elizabeth eompte 
in j. d'Essex province de la nouvelle Jersey Etats Unis de l'Amer- 

Marie De Marolles iQue Septentrionale le quatre Septembre 1799. Je soussU,nie 
Jacques Charles Halbout, pretre, certifie avoir conjoint en Legitime mariage suivant lerite 
de l'eglise catholique romaine Joseph Nicholas Michel Gaignerou Johnson Marolles de la 
paroisse de Lamentin isle Martinique tils majeur de feu Joseph Gaignerou Johnson 



April 


17 


Nov. 


9 


Oct. 


23 


Sept. 


5 


Oct. 


24 


April 


17 


Feb. 


7 


May 


12 


May 


7 


May 


26 


Jan. 


23 


Sept. 


24 


Jan. 


17 


Dec. 


6 


Mar. 


9 


Jan. 


15 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 591 

Mush, Abraham, and Mary Townley Morse, both of Rahway.M. R. 1796 Nov. 20 
Marsh, David, of Westfield, and Esther Martin, of Woodbridge 

Neck M. R. 1799 

Marsh, Hetty, and Samuel Wiuauts 1800 

Marsh, James, and Elizabeth Thomas, both of Westfield Town- 
ship W. V. H. 1796 

Marsh, Sarah, and William Passil 1795 

Martin, David, and Susannah Shotwell, by Ezra Darby, J. P 1798 

Martin, Esther, and David Marsh 1799 

Martin, Polly, and Timothy Ball 1799 

Masieker, Polly, and Elias Brown 1798 

Master, John R., and Miss Hannah Johnson IT. O. 1795 

Massecker, Harman, and Lydia Speer, E. C J. D. 1801 

Meeker, Betsey, and William Conyl 1799 

Meeker, Johannah, and David Jonson 1800 

Meeker, Jonathan, and Phebe Tomkius D. L. 1796 

Meeker, Miss Phebe, and Mr. Moses Price 1801 

Meeker, Polly, and Jonathan Burnet 1795 

Meeker, Sarah, and Silas J agger, both of C jnnecticut Farms 1796 

Meeker, Stephen, and Catharine Reeves, both of the Parish of North- 
field, in the township of Springfield and County of 

Essex M. E. 1800 Aug. 13 

Meredith, William, Esq., Philadelphia, and Miss Gitty Ogden, New- 
ark U. O. 1795 

Merrill, Hetty, and Josiah Thompson 1800 

Miller, Aaron, and Rhoda Tucker T. M. 1801 

Miller, Eliezer, and Betsey Headley J. V. A. 1796 

Miller, Lewis, and Sarah Hedgin J. V. A. 1795 

Miller, Phebe, and Elijah Ross 1797 

Marolles habitant de la elite isle, et de feue Marie Elizabeth Derverges Maupertuis 
Marolles son epouse, d'une part, et Roseanna Budau tille mineure de Jacques Pierre Budau 
et de Rosette Roujol Budau son epouse de la paroisse de St. Bertrand grande terre isle 
Guadaloupe avec le consentement de son pere ici present, d'autre part, en presence de Louis 
Nicholas Guillaume Derverges Maupertuis, onoledudit con tract ant. de Paul Malherbe son 
parent tons deux de Tisle Martinique d' Elie Joseph Criquant de Latour de St. Dominique- 
et ile Lambert Victor Alexandre Croquet Durival de la Guadaloupe. tons residents a Eliza- 
beth Town on dans les environs aussi que les dits contractants. 

En temoignage de ce que depres les dits partis ont signeen presence des temoins aussi 
soussigne el de plusieurs autresamis ici convoques. En foi de quoi j'ai delivre le present 
certiricat le dit jour et an que sous 

Vidi et approbavi Gulielmus ' ; - Marolles Rosanne Budau 

O'Brien Pastor Excelsior S. Petri Maupertuis 

A.postali Neo Eboracum Co. New York Criquanl De La 

hodie 31st Oct. 1799 Re-- page 284 

P. Dela Croix Josephe Mercier Ene" Domblaid 

Mai II. The .1. Ilalhout 

> Iroquel Durival 
I Query: Cory. 



Nov. 


26 


July 


3 


June 


7 


Jan. 


9 


Dec. 


12 


April 


13 



5 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Miller, Phebe. and Michael Dossey lTtiS Feb, 1 

Miller. Samuel Brook?, and Margaret Swan, both of V 

field W. V. H. 1797 April 1 

:. William, and Sarah Clark, of Elizabeth Town W. V. II. 179'.; May 22 

Mills, Elmer, and Phebe Stewart, both of Westfield W. V. H. 1798 Jan. i 

Jeremiah. Jan., and Abigail Bryant, both of West- 
field W. V. H. 1798 May 29 

Mills, M - E Westfield, and Snsan Terrill, of Rahway MR 179;* Sept. 15 

Mills. Th.. and Molly Halsted H. K. 1801 Jan. 27 

- n (or Jenison) 1798 Nov. 1 

i Thomas 1 aisou (or Jenison) ... .1797 Jan. '21 

More, Rachel, and William More 1796 April — 

.William, Caldwell S. G. L? i ril — 

- . Mary Townley, and Abraham M . ray 1796 Nov. 20 

- -'C li 3 

MorrelL Sarab. ... and Thomas L jvell, of New York 1796 De>-. 17 

rd, Elizabeth, and Aaron Penman. . . 1798 Feb. 13 

Mnlford, Jonath itharine Watkins. J. Y. A. 1796 Jan. 13 

s Hannah Spinning, at Elizabeth. .. £L K. 1801 Dec 

Myers. Rudolph, and Mary Scarlet, both of New Y"ork M. R 1796 Oct. 30 

N 

N . John, and Mary Freeman, by Euos Martin, J. P 18 _ 

Nieholls, I in Cromwell L? 

Niemciewitz. i Julian Ursin. and Snsan Kean. at Elizabeth Town, by 

John Henry H ibart, Deacon in Pro. Epis. Ch . . 9 

N , Snky, and Jacob Jacobusen 

n, David, and Chari; '. both of :". h of Eh'za- 
fch M. R. 17 - 

o 

n, Abby. and John H • 1799 

rles, and Miss Nancy Clark U. O. 17 

... Elizabeth, and Israel I! - - y 

Miss id William Meredith 

H. K. 18 

..id Elizabeth B :-nd. both of Elizabeth Town . M. R 

-.1. Mary Ann. and John Ja :kson Edwards 17 i 

r, b:>th of New York . . ,M. R 
Oliver. Aaron, of Rahway, and Rebecca Race, of Elizabeth- 

:: M. P. 1797 

Oliver. Br:- - .ac Cole 

i A Pi lish I ' ■:::.:. who accompanied K with the rank of Col- 

onel. - - i daughter of Jersey, and widow of 

Job:. 3 na. 



Pec. 


i 


A ;_•. 


17 


Jalv 


2 


June 


•29 



Jan. 


U 


Mar. 


■2 




. 


Jan. 


31 


May 


2a 


Mar. 


19 


Sept. 


7 


Jan. 


24 


Oct. 


3 



lay 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 593 

Oliver, Elizabetb, and Stephen Ogdea 1800 Sept. 7 

Osborn, Unice, and David Culver 1795 Nov. 10 

Osborne, Patience, and Timothy Clarke 1796 April 27 

Osborne, Sarah, and Hugh Wallace 1798 Dec. 25 

P 

Pall, Michael, and Miss Maria Antynette Delanoir, both of ' 

York U. O. 1801 

Parcel, Remington, I I beapside, and Edy Vanclake, of New 

York M. R. 1 798 

Parsil, Smith, and Martha Lewis J. V. A. 1795 

Parsonett, Sarah, and Ephraim Yaness 1799 

Passil, William, and Sarah Marsh J. V. A. 1795 

Paterson, Betse, and Simeon Jones 17. k; 

Paterson, John William, '.f New York, and Louisa Esther Flint De 

Hart, of Eliz ibi th Town M.. R. 1 798 

Paul, Hannah, ami Charles Higgin 1801 

Payuet, Lukes, ' ami Caty Vaness, al Caldwell S. G. 1796 

Payne, Hannah, and Ephraim Tucker ...1798 

Pearson, Miss Martha, and Calvin Cole 1795 

Peirson, Tabor, ami Mi ss Phebe Hays U. O. 1797 

Personet, Moses, of Caldwell, and Betsey Crane, of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1797 

Philips, Mi" Mary, ami Peter Praul . . .17 

Pierson, Isaac, and Susannah Badgely, at Caldwell S. C. 1798 

Pierson, Phebe, and Stephen Dodd 1799 

Pirn-, Robert, and Elizabetb Taylor, by S im'l Tyler, J. P .... L800 

Pierson, Susannah, and James Wade 1797 

Pierson, William, ami Catharine Ami tb of Elizabeth 

M. R. 1797 

Pool, Fanny, and Robert Crane 17'j7 

Post, Francis, and Rachel Speer, Essex County J. D. 

Post, -I »el, anil Miss Elizabeth Brown, both of New York U. 1796 

Praul, Peter and .Mi-- Mary Philip- U. O. 1796 

Price, Abigail, and Edward ( !i tne 17;.i7 

Price, Edward, and Pozana Joyce T. M. ; - II I i 

Price. Mary, and Wilbur Buttin ... . 

Mr. M - -. and Miss Phebe Meeker, at Elizabeth . . . H. K. 1801 

Q. 

Qays, John, and Rachel Griffin J. V. A. 179 i Mar. -iY 

R 

Race, Rebecca, and Aaron Oliver 17',»7 Jan. 24 

Redman, Francis, and Mary Youn . U. O. 1800 Aug. 23 

l Querv: Pa.snet. i. e; Personette'r 
44 



s Oct. 


25 


Dec. 


31 


1 May 


25 


'> Sept. 


5 


; Aug. 


14 


< April 


18 


1 Oct. 


19 


"1 Jan. 


12 


Sept. 


12 


May 


7 


Nov. 


20 




16 


Mar. 


19 


Sept. 


24 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


25 


S.pt. 


11 


Oct. 


26 


Oct. 


28 


Oct. 


21 


Mas- 


21 


Mar. 


19 


Nov. 


19 


Dec. 


5 


!' c. 


14 




6 



594 



NEW fERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS 



Reeves, Catharine, and Stephen Meeker 1800 Aug. 

Reeves, Isaac, and Easter Edwards, both of tbe Parish of Northfiekl, 

in the township of Springfield and county of Essex . . M. E. 1800 

1 ; Las< iu. Lyneky, i and Ephraim Vaness 1798 

Richards, Sarah, and Jacob Siren ... 17: '7 

Riggs, Rachel and Jacob Wood 1796 

Riker, David, and Joanna Baldwin A. J. 1800 

Riker, James, and Hannah Ward, at Caldwell S. G .1798 

Riker, John, and Sally De Camp, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Riker, Lyureky,- and John H. Beadstead 1798 

Riker, Peter, and Mary Sindle, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 

Romer, Margit, and Lorance Domavea 1798 

Roock, Phebe, and Thomas Gildersleeve 1795 

Roos, David, and Nancy Hutchings, both of Westfield . . . W. V. H. 1796 

Ross, Elijah, and Phebe Miller, both of Westfield W. Y. H. 1797 

Ross, Noah, and Mary Sayre J. V. A. 1795 

Russell, Rboda, and Robt. Hudspeth 1796 

Ryder, Isaac, and Calalina Smith, Essex County J. D. 1801 

Ryheu, Syneka.aud Jeremiah Wester 1799 



Nov. 

Dec. 

July 

Jan. 

Mar. 

Mar. 

Mar. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Dec. 

Sept. 

April 13 



13 

25 
16 

3 
24 

4 
29 

3 
13 
15 

1 
24 
24 



Dec. 
May 

June 
July 



20 

17 

14 

6 



S 

Scarlet, Mary, and Rudolf Myers, both of New York 1796 

Shelhouse, George, and Mary Swift T. M. 1801 

Shotwell, Anna, and Ezekiel Crane 17t*8 

Shotwell, Susannah, and David Martin 1798 

Sale, Phebe, and Clark Townley 1798 

Sally , Negro, and William , Negro 17'.>7 

Salnave, Elizabeth, and Gabriel Smith 1799 

Sandford, Polly, and Anthony Gould ... 1799 

Saul, a Negro Man b slonging to Auth my M >rs \ and Diauua, a black 

woman belonging to Ford Cutter M. R. 1798 

Sayre, Mary, and Noah Ross . . ... 1785 

Sindle, Mary, and Peter Riker 1798 

Siren, Jacob, and Sarah Richards, both of 'Elizabeth Town. .M. R 1 7;< 7 
Smally, David, Jim., of S >merset Couuty, and Nancy Tucker, of 

Westfield W. V. II. 1798 

Smith, Betsey, and Lewis Tooker 1795 

Smith, i; stsey, and Jacob Colie 1795 

Smith, Calalina, and Isaac Ryder 1801 

Smitb, Miss Elizabeth, and Dr. Burnet R. Eingsiand 1795 

Smith, Miss Elizabeth, and Robinson Thomas ... 1796 

Smith. Gabriel, and Elizabeth Seluave, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1799 

Smith, Jacob, and Caty Goald, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 



Oct. 


30 


Dec. 


2 


Feb. 


17 


Oct. 


24 


Mar. 


12 


Julv 


'22 


May 


11 


Jan. 


15 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


•20 


Dec. 


15 


July 


3 


Feb. 


21 


Aug. 


19 


April 


19 


June 


14 


Oct. 


31 


April 


24 



May 

Nov. 



! 1 



i Synechy Ryerson. 



- Synechy. 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERKS MARRIAGE RECORDS. 595 

Smith, John, and Hannah Little, both of this place [Elizabethtown ?] 

by Aaron Lane, J. P 1795 Nov. 30 

Smith, John, and Phoebe Jewel, both of Elizabeth Town M. R. 1797 Jan. 22 

Smith, John, and Margaret Hepsie T. M. 180] Nov. 22 

Smith, Lucey, and William Barton 1795 April 28 

Smith, Sara, and Richard Barnal . . . 1801 June 28 

Smith, Sarah, and Elias Derby 1796 Dec. 2G 

Speer, Aaron, and Hester Vaness, Essex County J. D. 1801 Oct. 11 

Speer, Lydia, and Harman Massecker 1801 May 26 

Speer, Polly, and Daniel Tyler 1798 Dec. 553 

Speer, Rachel, and Francis Post .'. ... - 1801 Oct. 21 

Spier, Cornelius, and Jenny Spier, at Caldwell. S. G. 1793 Feb. 15 

Spier, Garret, and Polly Tuttle, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 Aug. 9 

Spier, Jenny, and Cornelius Spier 1798 Feb. 15 

Spinning, Abner, and Sarah Tooker, both of Elizabeth Town. M. R. 1796 July 30 

Spinning, Miss Hannah, and Mr. Isaac Muun 1801 Dec. 20 

Spinning, Rachel, and David Johnson. 1800 Nov. 7 

Stackhorn, Mary, and Eliphalet Trembly 1797 Oct, 30 

Stackhouse, Prusia, and James Bonuel 1800 May 18 

Stackhouse, Rhoda, and Charles T. Tooker 1799 May 29 

Stagg, Christopher, and Mary Jones, both of Rahway ..... M. R. 1800 Jan. 2 

Stephens, Samuel, and Susana Loacy A. J. 1800 Jan. 1 

Stevenson, John, and Miss Hannah Kingsland U. O. 1796 Nov. 7 

Stewart, Phebe, and Elmer Mills 1798 Jan. 4 

Stewart, John, and Phebe Tompkins A. J. 1801 Nov. 3 

Stites, Eliza, and Rev. Feter Bryant, both of Elizabeth Town 1795 July 2 

Stites, Ephraiui, [or Ephraim P. Stites], and Anna Williams. . . A. J. 1799 Dec. 8 

Stone, Hannah, and Captain Foot . . 1799 Oct. 18 

Stray, James, and Miss Helmiah Burnet U. O. 1799 Oct. 13 

Swan, Margaret, and Samuel Brooks Miller 1797 April 1 

Swan, Phebe, and Ezra Darby, both of the township of AVestiield. in 

the county of Essex 1795 May :i 

Swift, Mary, ami ( *eorge Shelhonse 1801 Dec. 2 

Syudlebos, Anlehai, and John Freeman 18u0 Dec, 21 

T 

Tallmy, Timothy, and Sarah Cammel U. O. 1797 May 13 

Taylor, Elizabeth, and Robert Pine 1800 Nov. 25 

Taylor, Henry, and Catharine Davice, both of the Parish of Oring, ' 

and township of Newark and County of Essex M. E. 1800 Oct. 23 

Taylor, John, and Susannah Littel, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1800 Nov. 2 

Taylor, Sarah, and William Deulea 17'.i<'> Aug. 11 

Tenison (or Jenison), John Thomas, and Miss Mary Ann Moore. .1". O. 1797 Jan. 2 1 

Tenison (or Jenison), John Thomas, and Miss Margaret Moore . U. O. 1798 Nov. 1 

1 Orange. 



596 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Terrill, Anna, and William Wood 1800 May 21 

Terril, Susan, and Moses Mills 1790 Sept. 15 

Thomas Betsey, of Elizabeth Town, and Beza Bliss, of New York. . .170(5 Sept. 3 

Thomas, Elisabeth, and James Marsh 1700 Oct, 23 

Thomas, Kobiusou, and Miss Elizabeth Smith, both of Elizabeth 

Town U. O. 170G April 24 

Thompson, Cloe, and James Heillet 1800 Jnue 29 

Thompson, Josiah, and Hetty Merrill, both of Staten Island .M. E. 1800 July 3 

Thompson, Sarah, and John Earl 1801 Dec. 12 

Tichnor, Isaac, and Mary Magee, both of the parish of Northheld, and 

township of Springfield and County of Esses M. E. 1801 June 1 

Tomkins, Phebe, and Jonathan Meeker 1796 Jan. 17 

Tomkins, Sam'l, and Mrs. Tompson, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 July 5 

Tomkins, Sarah, and Elias Williams 1797 Dec. 3 

Tompkins, Isaac, and Jane Chrouts . . . A. J. 1801 Dec. 24 

Tompkins, Pheby, and John Stewart 1801 Nov. 3 

Tompson, Mrs., and Sam'l Tomkins 1797 July 5 

Tooker, Charles T., and Iihoda Stackhouse, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1709 May 29 

Tooker, Cyrus, and Sarepta Deckemau J. V. A. 1795 Dec. 23 

Tooker, Lewis, and Betsey Smith J. V. A. 1795 Aug. 19 

Tooker, Sarah, and Abner Spinning, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P 1790 July 30 

Townley, Clark, and Phebe Sale, both of Elizabeth Town M. R. 1798 Mar. 12 

Townley, Edward, and Abigail Price, both of Elizabeth Town.. M. R. 1797 Nov. 19 
Townley, William, and Margaret Tucker, both of Essex 

County W. V. H. 1797 Aug. 6 

Trembly, Eliphalet, and Mary Stackhoru, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1 797 Oct. 30 

Tucker, Abner, and Frazee, both of Westfield Township, Essex 

County W. V. H. 1795 Mar. 18 

Tucker, Ephraim, and Hannah Payne, by Ezra Darby, J. P 1798 Sept. 12 

Tucker, Kesiah, and Hiel Frazee.. 1798 April 21 

Tucker, Margaret, and William Townley 1797 Aug. 6 

Tucker, Nancy, and David Small v, Jun 1798 Feb. 24 

Tucker, Rhoda, and Aaron Miller 1801 June 7 

Tuttle, Polly, and Garret Spier 1798 Aug. 9 

Tyler, Daniel, and Polly Spier, at Caldwell S. G. 1798 Dec. 23 

V 

Van Blaricom, Peter, and Poly Corby, at Caldwell S. G. 1708 Jan. 1 

Van Riper, Garret, and Pheby Brown, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 Dec. 29 

Van Riper, Rachel, and John Williams 1800 Nov. 17 

Vanclake, Edey, and Remington Parcel 1798 Oct. 25 

Vanderbelt, John, and Polly Dovington, both of Elizabeth 

Town , M. R. 1799 Nov. 10 

Vanderbilt, < !aty, and John Cole 1800 Nov. 5 



ESSEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 

Vandine, Caty, and Abraham Vreeland 1791) 

Vandroof, 1 Abrrn, and Jenny Jacobus, at Caldwell S. (1. 1 791) 

Vanduser, William, and Cloe Wade both of Elizabeth Town. M. II. 1799 

Vaness, ( !aty, and Luke Pavuet. - 1796 

Vaness, ( ';ity, and Michael ( Jooly 1797 

Vaness, Ephraim, and Syneky Kiason,-' at Caldwell S G. 1798 

Vaness, Ephraim, and Sarah Parsonett, at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Vaness, Garret, and Sarah Brown, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 

Vaness, Henry, and Caty Cadmus, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 

Vaness, Hester, and Aaron Speer . . 1801 

Vaness, John, and Anne Hush, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 

Vaness, Robt., and Mary Jacobus, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 

Vincent, Thomas, and Hauuah Grover, at Caldwell S (1. 1796 

Vreeland, Abraham, and Caty Vandine, at Caldwell . S. G. 1799 

Vreeland, Lydia, and Tunis Jacobus. . 1799 

Vanriper, Ache, and Aaron Jacobus 1799 

w 

Wade, Benjamiu, and Mary Crowell, at Elizabeth Town.. . . T. M. 1801 

Wade, Cloe, and William Vanduser 1799 

Wade, James, and Susannah Piersou, by Sam'l Tyler, J. P. , by agree- 
ment of the parents at Springfield 1797 

Wade, James, and Nancy Morse, both of Elizabeth Town M. R. 1798 

Wade, Nehemiab, and Phebe Hendricks, both of Elizabeth 

Town M. R. 1796 

Wallace, Hugh, and Sarah Osborne, both of Essex County, by Sam'l 

Tyler, J. P 1798 

Ward, Hannah, and James Riker 1798 

Ward, Hannah, and Mathias Baldwin 18U0 

Ward, Lydia, and David Dodd 1 S00 

Ward, Jacob, and Abigail Dodd A. J. 1800 

Ward, Mary, and Joseph Williams 1799 

Ward, Pheby, and John C. Johnson 1799 

Waterfield, Miss Susan, and Thomas Wignin 1799 

Watkins, Catharine, and Jonathan Mulford 1796 

Welsh. George, and Cecilia Calacpi (?) U. O. 1799 

Welsh, James, and Catharine Macloglan U. 0. 1799 

Wester, Jeremiah, and Syneka Ryheu at Caldwell S. G. 1799 

Whithead, Richard, and Mary Bell, both of this place [Elizabethtown?] 

by Aaron Lane, J. P 179", 

Whitlock, Caty, and Robert McCubbin 1796 

Wignin, Thomas, and Miss Susan Waterfield, both of New 

York U. O. 1799 

William , Negro, and Sally , Negro, at Caldwell S. G 1797 

i Vanderhoof. 2 Synechy Ryerson. 



597 



June 


15 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


'20 


Jan. 


12 


July 


3 


Dec. 


16 


May 


25 


May 


29 


Sept. 


2 


Oct. 


11 


Oct. 


— 


Oct. 


— 


May 


25 


June 


15 


June 


9 


May 


24 


Nov. 


20 


Sept. 


11 


Sept. 


22 



April 30 



Dec. 


25 


Mar. 


29 


July 


24 


Jan. 


22 


Jan. 


30 


Dec. 


7 


June 


29 


Sept. 


22 


Jan. 


13 


Sept. 


30 


Oct. 


•20 


July 


6 


July 


14 


Jan. 


5 


Sept. 


22 


Jul.y 


22 



S9§ NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Williams, Anna, and Ephraim States, or Epbraiin P. Stites 1799 Dec. 8 

Williams, Elias, and Sarah Tomkins, at Caldwell S. G. 1797 Dee. 3 

Williams, Fanny, and Ch. M. Hughes 1801 Feb. 1 

Williams, James, SergeaDt in the American Army, ami Haunah Dickey, 

of Elizabeth Town, by Aaron Lime J. P. 1795 April 22 

Williams, Joseph, of Elizabeth Town, and Betsey Lyon, of Lyon's 

Farms M. R. 179S 

Williams, Joseph, and Mary Ward A. J. 1799 

Williams, John, and Rachel Van Riper, both of Second River... U. O. 1800 

Williams, Mathew, and Phebe Williams A. J. 1800 

Williams, Nathaniel, and Sarah Ann Leighton, both of Williams's 

Farm M. E. 1798 

Williams, Phebe, and Mathew Williams 1800 

Williams, Miss Sally, and Augustus Elliot 1801 

Williams, Snky, and Elias Corter 1797 

Willis, Leah, and Timothy Drewer, both of Elizabeth Town 1790 

Wilson, Nancy, and Robert Howard 1800 

Winants, Samuel, and Hetty Marsh, both of Rahway M. R. 1800 

Wood, Jacob, and Rachel Riggs J. V. A. 1796 

Wood, William, and Anna Terrill, both cf Rahway M. R. 1800 

Woodruff, Andrew, of Elizabeth Town, and Phebe Lyon Woodruff, of 

Woodruff's Farm M. R. 1797 

Woodruff, Charity, and David Nutman 1798 

Woodruff. Hamilton, of Philadelphia, and Sally McAdams, of Eliza- 
beth Town M. R. 1799 

Woodruff, Morris, and Susan Eaton, both of Elizabeth Town . M. R, 1800 
Woodruff, Phebe Lyon, and Andrew Woodruff 1797 



Young, Mary, and Francis Redman 1800 Aug. 23 



June 


9 


Dec. 


7 


Nov. 


17 


Oct. 


9 


June 


16 


Oct. 


9 


Sept. 


5 


Mar. 


11 


April 


30 


Nov. 


4 


Nov. 


9 


Jan. 


2-4 


May 


21 


Dec. 


9 


Oct. 


25 


Aug. 


8 


Jan. 


8 


Dec. 






Marriage Records of Baptist Church at Lyons Farm 



1795 -1800 



The Baptist Church at Lyons Farms (a village adjacent to the. Waverly railroad 
station, between Newark and Elizabeth, and so called from the fir-t settlers. William 
and Henry Lyon), was constituted April 16, 1769, by twelve persons, chiefly from the 
Scotch Plains Church. The pulpit was supplied by various clergymen — from Scotch 

Plains, New York, Morristown and elsewhere — until 1779, when the Rev. 

Ward was called, being ordained at Short Hills, May 8. 1779. From Oct 4, 1780, to 
June 29, 1785, there is but one entry in the records — of a meeting on Sept. 20. 1783. 
George Guthrie, minister, administered the rite of baptism on June 29, 1785, and 
frequently thereafter until April 16, 1786. The next church meeting was on March 
7, 1787, amd the next on Aug. 30, 1788, at which time it appears that the Kev. Joseph 
Stephens was supplying the pulpit. He was dismissed Dec. 20, 1788, to the churches 
at Upper Freehold and New Mills. The next meeting was held on Sept. 26, 1789, 
when a committee was appointed to secure the services of the Rev. William Vanhorne, 
of the Scotch Plains church, for oue quarter of his time for one year. The next 
meeting reported in the church book was on March 11, 1792. It was "Agreed to give 
Bror ; Peter Bryant of Piscataway an Invitation to serve us as a Preacher for the next 
3 months, requiring two thirds of the Lords days in the said time. Bror : Clisby after 
informed us that Bror : Bryant accepted the same, the Time to commence the first day 
of April 1792." The Bev. Peter Bryant was thereupon engaged for three months, 
and was ordained pastor of the church on Sept. 13, 1792. He continued pastor until 
the close of the year 1807. He kept the church records in admirable shape, writing 
a beautiful hand. His register of marriages began January 1, 1793, and was arranged 
thus: 

it;i;i £ s I) 

Jany 1. 1. J ohn Pray of New York, Taylor — to Sally Crane 

of Lyon's-Farms - 8 " 

Each marriage was numbered at the begiuniug, and the marriage fee received was 
noted at the end. Thus we learn that duriug the eight years, 1793-1800, he per- 
formed sixty marriage ceremonies, and received therefor fees amounting to c:>5, 17s. 
6d., or $89. '•»<), an average of $1. 50. The usual fee was 8s., or $1 ; the highest was 
£1, 4s., or $3. 

The old book of records is a stout folio, in excellent preservation, bound in parch- 
ment, and lettered on the front cover: 



600 .NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS 

1769 

LYONS' FARMS 

Baptist Church 

Book 

Record Marriages Jan 1 

1793 

It contains the records of church proceedings from April 16, 1769, to Nov. 2, 1854, 
kept in somewhat desultory fashion; also records of baptisms (of adult persons 
received into the church), aud records of marriages. 

The editor is indebted to the authorities of the church for the loan of this precious 
volume, for the purpose of copying the following record of marriages prior to 1801. 

A few notes may be convenient regarding the names of places mentioned in these 
records: 

Bridge-Town — Lower Rahway. 

Cam ptown— known since 1852 as Irvington. 

Canoe Brook — a small stream in Livingston township. The straggling settlements 
along it were known by the name of the brook, and later the principal hamlet 
was called North Farms and Nortbheld. 

Connecticut Farms— now more generally called Union, about three miles west of 
Elizabeth. 

Rath way — Rahway. 

Williams' Farms — between Elizabeth and West held. 

B 

1 taker, Rebecca, and Daniel Crowels 1799 

Ball, Hannah, and George Jewell 1797 

Bennet, James, and Jenny Bowman, of Elizabeth Town 1795 

Bogart, John, carpenter, aud Mary Van Pelt, both of Staten Island, 

North-End 1795 

Bowman, Jenny, and James Bennet .1795 

Brown, Hetty, and Ashur Edwards 1796 

Bruin, Josiah, of Camp-Town, and Lydh Roberts, of Newark 1799 

liunuel, Caleb, ami Charity Price, b jth of Elizabeth Town 1795 

c 

Capron, David, taylor, of Elizabeth-Town, aud Mary Ogland, of the 

same place 1797 

Clark, Hannah, aud Josef Wilcoks 1799 

Clay, Thomas, North Farms, and Phebe Durand, of the same place. .1799 

Clisby, Polly, and Uzal Johnston 1800 

Coleman, Epenetus, farmer, of Lyons-Farms, and Suckey Moore- 
house, of Elizabeth-Town 1797 

Congor, Betsy, and Timothy Crane 1793 

Congor, Samuel, shoe-maker, of Lyon's Farms, and Abby 'Kelly, of 

the Harbour 1795 Feb. 15 



June 


19 


May 


15 


Aug. 


2 


Jan. 


11 


Aug. 


2 


Feb. 


14 


Feb. 


23 


Sept. 


26 



June 


11 


Sept. 


14 


Oct. 


19 


Sept. 


13 


July 


12 


Oct. 


26 



LYONS FARMS CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 

Core, Betsy, and Isaac Hays 1791 

Crane, Betsy, and Aaron Nutinan 1800 

Crane, Jacob, of Elizabeth Town, and Sally Seers, of the same place.. 1800 

Crane, Johanna, and Abraham Scudder .... 1797 

Crane, Moses, of Elizabeth-Town, and Phebe Crane, of North Farms . 1799 

Crane, Phebe, and Moses Crane 1799 

Crane, Sally, and John Pray 1793 

Crane, Sally, and James Jewell 179G 

Crane, Sally, and Seth Woodruff 1800 

Crane, Timothy, shoe-maker, and Betsy Congor, both of Lyon's 

Farms 1793 

Crowel, Daniel, of Orange, and Rebecca Baker, of North-Farms 1799 

D 

Dean, Luther, and Unice Meeker, both of Elizabeth Town 1795 

Drake, Andrew, Staten Island, farmer, and Polly Mulford, of Connec- 
ticut Farms 1795 

Durand, Phebe, and Thomas Clay 1799 

E 

Edwards, Ashur, farmer, and Hetty Brown, seemster, both of Canoe 

Brook 1796 

Edwards, Isaac, farmer, and Susannah King, both of Canoe Brook. . .1796 
Edwards, Patience, and Benjamin Halbert 1797 

F 

Force, Lydia, and Jonathan Ward 1800 

Force, Mary Ann, and Frazy Haies. 1799 

Foster, Betsy, and Amos Williams 1799 

Fremer, Jemima, and David Whitehead 1797 

G 

Garthwright, John, shoe-maker, Connecticut-Farms, and Eunice 

Lloyd, of the same place 1800 

Grummon, Isaac, farmer, of Lyon's Farms, and Jemima Price, of the 

same place 1799 

Grummon, Polly, and Timothy Woodruff 1800 

Green, John Denman, and Lydia Hand, of Rahway 1794 

Green, Lydia, and Isaac Hand 1 798 

Greene, Sally, and Aaron Meeker 1793 

H 

Haies, Frazy, carpenter, of Woodbridge, and Mary Ann Force, of the 

same place 1799 

Halbert, Benjamin, cooper, Morris-Town, and Patience Edwards, 
widow, School Mad., Williams-Farms, (illegal). N. B. — Void 

by previous marriage 1797 

45 ' 



6oi 

Jan. 1 

May 14 

Oct. 20 

June 24 

Aug. 31 

Aug. 31 

Jan. 1 

Nov. 23 

Dec. 20 

Oct. 26 

June 9 



May 7 

June 20 
Oct. 19 



Feb. 


14 


Mar. 


13 


Sept. 


5 


May 


31 


Sept. 


12 


Nov. 


4 


April 


10 



Oct. 25 

Mar. 31 
July 10 
Feb. 9 
April 8 
April 7 



Sept. 12 



Sept. 5 



602 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



Feb. 15 
Mar. 13 



Hand, Isaac, farmer, aud Lydia Green, both of Springfield 1798 April 8 

Hand, Lydia, aud John Denraau Green 1794 Feb. 9 

Harris, Phebe, and Moses Hayes 1798 Sept. 17 

Harrison, Patty, aud John Renslay 1798 Oct. 10 

Harrison, Sally, and Joel Meeker. ... 1800 April 12 

Hayes, Moses, of New-ark, and Phebe Harris, of Elizabeth-Town ...1798 Sept. 17 

Hays, Isaac, blacksmith, and Betsy Core, both of New-ark 1794 Jan. 1 

Heddon, Aaron, of Camp-Town, and Abby Woodruff, same place 1890 June 21 

J 

Jarvis, Benjamin, of tfathway, and Phebe Ogdon, of Elizabeth-Town. 1798 Nov. 13 

Jewell, George, farmer, of Sodom, and Hannah Ball, of the same 

place, widow 1797 May 15 

Jewell, James, farmer, Elizabeth-Town, and Sally Crane, of Bottle- 
Hill, married at Mr. Js. Willcock's, Eliz. -Town 1796 Nov. 23 

Johnston, Uzal, chair-maker, Eliz. Town, and Polly Clisby, of 

Newark 1800 Sept. 13 

Jones, Martha, aud Amos Price 1797 April 11 

K 

Kelly, Abby, aud Samuel Cougor ... 1795 

King, Susannah, and Isaac Edwards 1796 

L 

Lloyd, Eunice, aud John Garthwright 1800 Oct. 25 

Love, John Nicolas, baker, New- York, and Abby Taylor, of Lyon's 

Farms 1798 Sept. 22 

M 

Machesney, Peggy, and Isaac Meeker ... 1795 

Marsh, Polly, aud Nathaniel Mitchell 1800 

Meeker, Aaron, mason, of Lyons Farms, aud Sally Green, of the 

same place 1793 

Meeker, Isaac, farmer, aud Peggy Machesney, both of Cauoe Brook. .1795 
Meeker, Joel, farmer, of Lyon's Farms, and Sally Harrison, of 

Sodom 1800 

Meeker, Lidia, aud Johu Stewart 1800 

Meeker, Prussia, and William Woodruff 1798 

Meeker, Unice, and Luther Deau 1795 

Mitchell, Nathaniel, aud Polly Marsh, both of Elizabeth-Town 1800 

Moore, Polly, and Phibbe Shemash 1790 

Moorehouse, Suckey, and Epenetus Coleman. . . 17:>7 

Mulford, Polly, and Andrew Drake 1795 

N 

Nesbit, Joseph, School-Master, and Ruth Price, both of Eliza. Town, . 1798 Aug. 15 



Aug. 


9 


Dec. 


3 


April 


7 


Aug. 


9 


April 


12 


Dec. 


24 


April 


30 


May 


7 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


16 


July 


12 


June 


20 



LYONS FARMS CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



6o- 



Nutmau, Aaron, of Springfield, and Betsy Crane, of Connecticut 

Farms 1800 May 14 

O 

Ogdeu, Joseph, Farmer, of New Galloway, and Comfort Price, of 

Lyons Farms 1794 

Ogdon, Pbebe, and Benjamin Jarvis 1798 

Ogdon, Rebecca, and Abner Osborn 1795 

Ogland, Mary, and David Capron 1797 

Osborn, Abner, Miller, of Sodom, and Rebecca Ogdon, of Connecti- 
cut Farms 1795 

Osborn, Tripbene, and Stephen Willcocks 1793 



Feb. 


27 


Nov. 


13 


Mar. 


5 


June 


11 


Mar. 


5 


Nov. 


17 



Parker, Jonathan, taylor, of Elizabeth-Town, and Susanuah Price, 

of the same place 1797 

Parcell, Abner, carpenter, Elizabeth-Town, and Polly Wheeler, 

Widow, of Lyon's Farms 1799 

Piersou, Hannah, and Wheeler Wade 1794 

Pray, John, of New York, taylor, and Sally Crane, of Lyon's Farms. . 1793 
Price, Amos, taylor, of Elizabeth-Town, and Martha Jones, of Sodom 1797 

Price, Charity, and Caleb Buunel 1795 

Price, Comfort, and Joseph Ogdon 1794 

Price, Jemima, and Isaac Grummon 1799 

Price, Ruth, and Joseph Nesbits 1798 

Price, Susannah, and Jonathan Parker 1797 

R 

Reeves, Rhoda, and Caleb Smith 1796 

Renslay, John, shoemaker, of New York, and Patty Harrison, Lyon's 

Farms 1798 

Roberts, Lydia, and Josiah Bruin 1799 

Roberts, Seers, of Camp-Town, farmer, and Sally Willson, Widow, of 

the same place 1800 



April 1 



s 



(Ab. 



Scudder, Abraham, and Johanna Crane, both of North-Farms. 

Scudder, sadler.) 1798 

Seers, Sally, and Jacob Crane 1800 

Shemasb, Phibbe, farmer, and Polly Moore, both of Bridge-Town. . .1796 

Spinning, Sally, aud Daniel Winings 1793 

Smith, Caleb, farmer, and Rhoda Reeves, both of Canoe Brook 1796 

Stewart, John, of Lyon's-Farms in Newark, and Lidia Meeker, of the 

same place 1800 

Swift, Henry, taylor, of Elizabeth-Town, and Mary Willis, of 

Rahway 1797 



Mar. 


24 


June 


30 


Jan. 


1 


April 


11 


Sept. 


26 


Feb. 


27 


Mar. 


31 


Aug. 


15 


April 


1 



Nov. 13 

Oct. 10 
Feb. 23 

April 9 



June 24 

Oct. 20 

Oct. 16 

Oct. 13 

Nov. 13 

Dec. 24 

May 6 



604 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

T 

Taylor, Abby, and Johu Nicolas Love 1798 Sept. 22 

V 

Valentine, Daniel, shoe-maker, and Rachael Winans, both of Lyon T s 

Farms 1799 Feb. 14 

Van Pelt, Mary, and John Bogart 1795 Jan. 11 

W 

Wade, Wheeler, shoe-maker, and Hannah Pierson, both of Connec- 
ticut Farms 1794 June 30 

Ward, Jonathan, shoe-maker, of North-Farms, and Lydia Force, of 

the same place 1800 May 31 

Wheeler, Polly, and Abner Parcells 1799 Mar. 24 

Whitehead, David, of Lyons Farms, and Jemima Fremer, of Camp 

Town 1797 April 10 

Wilcocks, Joseph, shoe-maker, of Camp-Town, and Hannah Clark, of 

the same place 1799 Sept. 14 

Willcocks, Stephen, and Triphene Osborn, both of Camp-Town 1793 Nov. 17 

Williams, Amos, of New-ark, carpenter, and Betsy Foster, of Lyon's 

Farms 1799 Nov. 4 

Willis, Mary, and Henry Swift 1797 May 6 

Willson, Sally, and Seers Roberts. 1800 April 9 

Winans, Rachael, and Dauiel Valentine 1799 Feb. 14 

Winiugs, Daniel, mason, of Lyons Farms, and Sally Spinning, of the 

same place 1793 Oct. 13 

Woodruff, Abby, and Aaron Heddon 1800 June 21 

Woodruff, Seth, mason, of Elizabeth-Town, and Sally Crane, of 

Lyons-Farms, in Newark 1800 Dec. 20 

Woodruff, Timothy, mason, Eliz.-Town, and Polly GrummoD, Lyon's 

Farms 1800 July 10 

Woodruff, William, of Morris-Town, miller, and Prussia Meeker, of 

Connecticut Farms 1798 April 30 



Second River Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Records, 



1730 1774, 1794-180O. 



The Reformed Dutch Church at Second River (now Belleville), in Essex county, 
was an offshoot of the Acquackanonk (now Passaic) Church, and was organized in 
1700. These two Churches were ministered unto by the Rev. Guliam Bertholf, 1700- 
1724, and by the Rev. Henricus Coens, 1725-1730. The Second River Church then 
separated from the Acquackanonk Church, and had for pastors the Rev. Cornelius 
Van Santvoord, 1730-1732 (in conjunction with Staten Island), the Rev. Gerardus 
Haeghoort, 1735-1776; the Rev. Matthew Leydt, 1779-1780 (in conjunction with 
Gansegat, now Fairfield) ; the Rev. Henricus Schoonmaker, 1784-1791 (in conjunc- 
tion with Acquackanonk); the Rev. Peter Stryker, 1794-1809, and 1810-1812. 

Dominie Bertholf was pastor of the Hackensack Church until his death, in 1724, 
and appears to have kept the records of all his charges in the Hackensack books. 
The Belleville Church has its own registers of communicants, from 1726; of mar- 
riages, from 1730 to 1774, and from 1794 to date; of baptisms, from 1727; and of its 
consistories, from 1726. It is not known what has become of the marriage records 
between 1774 and 1794; it is probable that they were kept by the pastors in the reg- 
isters of other churches of which they had charge. 

The following lists are furnished by the Holland Society, from its copy of the 
records from 1726 to 1774; from 1794 to 1801, the lists have been copied from the 
original register, kept by the Rev. Peter Stryker. It is to be regretted that he did not 
give as full details as his predecessors. 

The followiug are explanations of some of the place-names occurring in these 
records : 

Achqueckenonk, Achqueguok, Achweghenoch, Acquignenonck— Acquackanonk, 
now Passaic. 

Beskenreits — Baskenridge. 

Gansegat — now Fairfield. 

Hanover— in Morris county. 

Hoopwill —Hopewell. 

Klyne Jonkers — Yonkers, N. Y. 

Pachaneck, Pechkonegh, Pechenack, Pechneneck, etc. — Pacquanac, Pequanuock, 
Morris county. 

New Brittain — between Somerville and Morristown. 

Pipek — Peapack. 

Peckman's River — now Cedar Grove and vicinity. 

Pomptham — Pompton . 

Uylekil — "Owl Creek," in Morris county. 

Wachauw — now White Hall, Morris county. 

Wesel — a neighborhood southeast of Paterson. 



Nov. 


4 


April 


17 


Mar. 


26 


Jan. 


28 


Aug. 


9 



Nov. 


29 


June 


18 


Oct. 


27 



6o6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

A 

Ackly, John, from New York, ami Rachel Hooglant, from .Second 

Riv., upon license, witness John Spier, Elder 1770 

Ahlemau, Henry, and Maria Catrina ('ami 1797 

Allar, Charity, and Edward Jones 1797 

Anderson, Robert, and Mrs. Pietertje Mosely 1797 

Audriesen, Jury, and Judick Kiut, both living iu Pipek 1742 

Audio, David, born iu Scotland, and Maria Roset, both living at Sec- 
ond Riv 1738 Dec 

B 

Bergen, Richard, and Elizabeth Leslie. 1794 

Beunet, Herman, and Eliza Lezelier 1797 

Berry, Mary, and Thomas Cadmus 1799 

Berry, Pieter, from Morris Co., and Susanna Jones, from Bergen Co., 

man - , upon license 1715 Aug. 

Bertholf, Guiljaem, born at Scralenburgh, living at Pomptham, and 

Jannetie Jacobusse, born at Wezel, living at Hanover 1736 

Bikelo, Johannes, and Autie Yan Xieukerk, both from Acquegnonck . .1747 
Billyou, Jacob, and Johanna Yan Zeil, both from Bergen Co., marr. 

upon license 1758 

Billingtou, Anna, ' and James Rolson 1764 

Bitstead, Andrew, and Louisa Schoever 1797 

Black. Nicke, and William Burgoyne, slaves 1797 

Boss, Jacob, and Catrina Sherntan, marr. upon certif ... 1759 

Boss, Janueke, and Jacob Smit ... 1752 

B istwick, William, and Abigael Grummond, both from Newark, marr. 

with license 1773 Feb. 25 

Braadberry, Elisabeth, and Abrain Yan Rype 1747 

Bras, Gen-it. and Antic Janse, both living at Second Riv., witness Jan 

Haal 1759 Oct. 13 

Bras, Pieter, born at Hackensack, and Saartie Volck, born at Second 

Riv., both living there ... 1734 

Bras, Sara, and Hans Michel's Smit 1741 

Brass, Catrina, and Heudrik Oudwater 1752 

Brower, Lea, and Jacobus Yerwey 1743 

Brown, John, and Sarah Morris. . . 1798 

Brown, Sophia, and Henry Van Winkle 1798 

Bruen, Nathaniel, and Abigail Harrison 1798 

Bruyn. Elisabeth, and Ary Cadmus 173-j. 

Bruyu, Elisabeth, and Pieter Mauriss, both living at Second Riv 1772 

Bruyn, Hendrik, sou of Barent, and Rachel Burger, both from Second 

River 1756 

Bruyn, Hillegond, and Hendrik Francisco 1757 

1 Her maiden name was Anna America. 



Nov. 


17 


May 


30 


May 


29 


Jan. 


22 


Mar. 


1 


Nov. 


5 


April 


10 


Jan. 


23 



April 


14 


Jan. 


9 


Feb. 


23 


Feb. 


23 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


24 


Mar. 


22 


Dec. 


21 


June 


25 


Feb. 


14 


Jan. 


14 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



607 



Bruyn, Hillegonda, and Jacob Van Winkel 1750 May 19 

Bruyn, Jacobus, from Second Riv., and Catharina Leasear, from New 

York, marr. upon license 1754 Oct. 5 

Bruyn, Johannes, born at Second River, and Hillegont Van Oiesen, 

born at Hackensack, both liv. at Second Riv. 1730 

Bruyn, Johaunis, and Elisabeth Sautvoort, both living at Second Riv. 1751 

Bruyn, Margrietje, and Arien Kouiug, both living at Seco?id Riv 1744 

Bruyn, Steyutie, and Francois Wouterse 1741 

Budd, Mary, and Baltus De Hart 1796 

Budd, Phoebe, and Casparus King 1794 

Burger, Manus, born at New York, living at Hackensack, and Annatie 

Koejemans, born and living at Second Riv 1734 

Burger, Rachel, and Hendrik Bruyn 1756 

Burgoyne, William, and Nicke Black, slaves 1799 

c 

Cadmus, Abraham, and Margaret Leslie 1794 

Cadmus, Arj', born at Bergen, and Elisabeth Bruyn, widow of Hannes 

Mandeviel, born at Second Riv., both living there 1734 

Cadmus, Catharina, and Evert Van Es 1736 

Cadmus, Elizabeth, and William Groshoug 1794 

Cadmus, Engeltie, and Theunis Spier 1735 

Cadmus, Hermanus, and Sarah Ward 1798 

Cadmus, Margrietje, and Arie Jacobusse 1737 

Cadmus, Maria, and Jan Mead 1753 

Cadmus, Maria, and Johannes Mead 1753 

Cadmus, Marytie, and Cornells Jeralemon 1739 

Cadmus, Marytie, and William King 1757 

Cadmus, Melchert, and Elisabeth Ellen, both living at Second Riv . . .1741 

Cadmus, Pieteitie, and Thomas Cadmus 17G0 

Cadmus, Saertie, and Hendrik Spier 1748 

Cadmus, Thomas, born at Bergen, and Cornelia Jeralemon, born at 

Second Riv., both living there 1733 

Cadmus, Thomas, and Pietertie Cadmus, both from Second Riv., 

marr. upon license 1 760 

Cadmus, Thomas, and Mary Berry 1799 

Campbell, Maria, and Abraham Frausisco 1796 

Cann, Maria ( 'atrina, and Henry Ahleman 1797 

Came, John, and Jane Kip, both from New York 1776 

Cesar, a slave of Arent Schuyler, and Grace, a slave of William Horn- 
blower 1797 

Chapin, Clarissa, and Samuel Humphry 1800 

Cidney, Sara, and Paulus Rome 176G 

Claes, Jan Everse, widower of Elisabeth Boumau, born at Osnabruck, 
and Catharina Soldaat, born at Ackinsack, both living at Sec- 
ond Riv. 1735 Dec. 11 



Dec. 


6 


June 


1 


June 


2 


Oot. 


26 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


27 


Feb. 


14 


Nov. 


5 


Nov. 


29 


Dec. 


21 


Sept. 


1 


Dec. 


20 


Aug. 


16 


Dec. 


3 


June 


29 


Jan. 


17 


Jan. 


17 


April 


21 


July 


28 


Oct. 


4 


June 


29 


May 


13 


June 


30 


June 


29 


Oct. 


27 


Mar. 


12 


April 


17 


Sept. 


14 


Feb. 


18 


Aug. 


21 


Oct. 


12 



Oct. 


21 


June 


5 


Nov. 


21 


Nov. 


11 


July 


5 


Oct. 


22 


May 


12 


Dec. 


5 


Jan. 


19 



6o8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Clark, Robert, widower of Rachel Cloud, bom in Ireland, and Abigal 
Piugham (?) widow of William Pease, both living at Second 

Riv., witnesses, Thames Siklaar and Abram Van Gieseu 1764 

Clarkson, Polly, and Niclaes Gerbrandse 1755 

Coccifer, Tryntie, and Vander Hoeff 1710 

Coerte, Johannes, born at Wesel, living at Hancver, and Aunetie Stor, 

born in the Esopus, living at Hanover 1735 

Coeyeman, Jacob, and Rachel Garrabrantz 1798 

Coorte, Johannes, widower of Tryntie Siuit, from the Gansegat, and 
Rachel Doolhage, from Pekmans River, witness, Jan Dool- 

hagen 1751 

Cornelison, Rev. John, and Catharine Mezier, at Bergen 1795 

Coyeman, Margerita, and Thomas Vreeman Van hype, marr. with 

license of April 17 1750 

Coymans, Lea, and Jacob Spier, both living at Second Riv 1746 

Coyman, Rachel, and Adriaan Van Rype, both from Second Riv. . . .1764 

D 

Dally, Anna, and William Kingslant 17-12 Oct. 19 

Davids, Jannetie, and Johannes Gerbrants, both living at Second Riv. 1756 April 10 
Davis, Phebe, from Newark, and Andrew Pierse, marr. with license. . .1750 May 6 

De Hart, Baltus, and Mary Budd 1796 Oct, 26 

DeHart, Matthias, from Elisabethtown, and Catharina Kingslant, 

from N. Berbadus, marr. with license of March 31 1746 

Demarre, David, and Maria Van Buskerk, both from Bergen Co., 

marr. with license 1748 Aug. 1 

De Kemis, Jenneke, and Cornelis Van Giesen 1748 Aug. 6 

Deremis, Gleen, 1 from Ackquegnonck, and Elisabeth Yong, from Han- 
over 1744 Oct. 2 

Devoisne, Hester, and Hendrik Van Winkel 1764 Nov. 25 

De Voor, John, and Aeltie Jacobusse, both from Second River, marr. 

upon certif. 1758 Nov. 19 

De Vousne, John, and Sietie Van Winkel, both living at Second Hi v., 

marr. upon license 1766 Dec. 21 

Dinah, a slave to P. S.~' and Henry Zelius, a free Mulatto. 1798 Feb. 24 

Dobbins, Elizabeth, and Isaac Soveril 1796 Jan. 6 

Dodd, Mrs. Sarah, and Amy King 1799 Jan. 27 

Doolhaage, Rachel, and Johannes Coorte 1751 Oct. 22 

Doolhaven, Leentie, and Johannis Vreelant 1752 Oct. 7 

Dorhager, Femmetie, and Marselis Ydese 1741 Nov. 21 

Douwe, Arie, and Mary King, both from Second Riv., married upon 

license of Feb. 9 1748 

Douwe, Johannes, born at New York, aud Elisabeth Jeralomon, both 

living at Second Riv., marr. with liceuse 1740 Dec. 3 

i Golinc. Julian, - Peter Schuyler. 



April 


17 


Jan. 


29 


Oct. 


1 


Oct. 


4 


Oct. 


23 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 6og 

E 

Eerie, Catryna, aud Jacob Gerrebrantse, both from Bergen Co., marr. 

upon license 1 759 

Egberse, Annetie, and Isaak Ryke 1751 

Egberse, Waling, and Marytie Spier, both from Second Riv., witness, 

John Spier 1749 

Ellen, Elisabeth, and Melchert Cadmus, both living at Second Riv . 1741 
Erwin, Cornelius, aud Lydia King 1799 

F 

Folk, Marytie, and Olevert Heyddi 1735 Sept. 27 

Forster, Saartie, and Samuel Smit 1772 

Fransisco, Abraham, and Maria Campbell 1796 

Fraucisco, Geesje, aud Niclaes Styg, both living in bet Gansegat 1740 

Francisco, Hendrik, and Hillegond Brnyn, both living at Second Riv.. 1757 

Francisco, John Sip, and Mary Little 1796 

Franscisco, Mary, and Thomas Stagg 1795 

Francisko, Michiel, and Maria Van der Hoeff, both from the 

Gansegat 1753 

Freeland, Cytje, and John Van Winkle 1799 

Freeland, Mary, and John Joralemon 1796 

Furlough, Ann, and John Perkins 1798 

G 

Garner, Aany, and John Roskrow 1767 

Garrabrautz, Elizabeth, and Jacob Garrabrantz 1796 

Garrabrantz, Helena, and Paul Poulson 1795 

Garrabrantz, Jacob, and Elizabeth Garrabrantz 1796 

Garrabrantz, Jane, and Aaron Morris 1800 

Garrabrantz, Mary, and Joseph Sigler ... 1797 

Garrabrantz, Peter, and Elizabeth Garretsou 1798 

Garrabrantz, Rachel, and Jacob Coeyeman 1798 

Garrebrantz, Garrit, and Leah Joralemon. 1800 

Garretson, Elizabeth, and Peter Garrabrantz 1798 

Gerbrandse, Marselis, and Geertruy Van Dalsem, both living at Sec- 
ond River 1742 

Gerbrandse, Niclaes, and Polly Clarksou, marr. upou certif 1755 

Gerbrants, Johannes, and Jaunetie Davids, both living at Second Riv 1756 
Gerbrantse, Gerbrant, and Catharina Pier, both from Second River, 

marr. upon license of Oct. 28 1747 

Gerrebrantse, Jacob, and Catryna Eerie, both from Bergen Co., marr. 

upon license • • 1759 April 17 

Gerritsou. Anna, and Dial' Van Winkel 1715 June 17 

Grace, a slave of William Hornblower, and Cesar, a slave of A rent 

Schuyler 1797 

i Daniel. 
46 



Dec. 


1 


Mar. 


12 


May 


13 


Jan. 


14 


Feb. 


19 


Oct. 


31 


Nov. 


11 


Dec. 


14 


Sept. 


3 


Apiil 


10 


Aug. 


1 


May 


8 


Aug. 


11 


May 


8 


Dec. 


28 


Dec. 


14 


Feb. 


4 


July 


5 


Feb. 


8 


Feb. 


4 


April 


19 


June 


5 


April 


10 



Feb. 18 



Sept. 


23 


Jan. 


1 


Mar. 


22 


Sept. 


27 


May 


2"> 


Nov. 


4 


Dec. 


30 


July 


6 


Alio;. 


21 



6lO NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Greenfield, Lewis, ami Mary Schephard 17li7 May 23 

Grimes, Hannah, and James Speer. 1799 April 14 

Groshong, William, and Elizabeth Cadmus 1794 Dec. 20 

Grummond, Abigael, and William Bostwick 1773 Feb. 25 

H 

Haal, Elisabeth, and Abraui Messelaar 1759 

Hall, Phoebe, and William King 1797 

Harrison, Abigail, and Nathaniel Brnen 1798 

Heyddi, Olevert, born at Westchester, living at Newark, and Marytie 

Folk, born and living at Secoud River 1735 

Heyle, Petrus, and Geertie Van Duyn, both from Pomton 1717 

Hooglant, Rachel, and John Ackly 1776 

Houston, David, and Mary Van Winkle 1797 

Howel, Edward, and Pietertje Joralemon . 1795 

Humphry, Samuel, and Clarissa Chapin 1800 

Hasten, Robbert, boru iu Scotland, living in Bergen Co., and Alida 

Van Winckele, born and living at Second River 1733 Sept. 8 

Huysman, Mattheus, born and living at Hackensack, and Hester Vin- 
cent, widow of Hendrik Jeralemon, born at Klyne Jonkers, liv- 
ing at Second River 173& Oct. 9 

Hyler (?), Marytie, and Johannes Parleman 1755 April 19 

J 

Jacobus, Abraham, aud Jaueker Post. 1800 Aug. 3 

Jacobus, Fanny, and Edward Williams 1799 Nov. 28 

Jacobuss, Brand, widower, born and living in Morris Co., and Ger- 

retie Spier, born and living in Essex Co 1767 Dec. 1 

Jacobusse, Adriaau, widower, aud Mary Paulusse, widow, both from 

Second Riv., marr. upon license 1761 Sept. 19 

Jacobusse, Aeltie, and John De Voor 1758 Nov. 19 

Janse, Antie, and Gerrit Bras 1759 Oct. 13 

Jacobusse, Arie, living at Pechkonegh, and Margrietje Cadmus, living 

at Second Riv 1 737 June 29 

Jacobusse, Feytie, and Cornells Spier 1758 Jan. 11 

Jacobusse, Hendrick, widower of Aeltie Westervelt, and Aechie Pau- 
lusse, born at Secoud Riv., both living there 1733 Dec. 15 

Jacobusse, Januetie, and Guiljaem Bertholf 1730 Nov. 17 

Jacobusse, Johannes, and Leentie Spier, both living at Second Riv. .1740 April 6 
Jacobusse, Pieter, from Second Riv., and Hester Van Es, from Pomp- 
tan, witness, Simeon Van Es 1750 May 26 

Jacobusze, Jan, and Helena Paulusse, both born and living at Second 

Riv 1735 Mar. 1 

Jeraleman, Pietertie, and John Lewis. 1767 Jan. 29 

Jeraleman, Cornelia, and Thomas Cadmus 1733 June 30 



April 


21 


Dec. 


3 


Oct. 


5 


Sept. 


4 


Sept. 


7 


Mar. 


26 


Sept. 


18 


Aug. 


9 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 6l 1 

Jeralemon, Cornells, and Marytie Cadmus, both living at Second Riv., 

marr. with license 1739 

Jeralomon, Elisabeth, and Johannes Douwe 1740 

Jeralomon, Elisabeth, and William Van Imburgh 1754 

Jeraleinon, Hilletie, and Abram Winne 1766 

Johnson, Moses, and Hester Mandeville 1800 

Jones, Edward, and Charity Allar -. 1797 

Jones, Simeon R., and Rebecca Ward 1795 

Jones, Susanna, and Pieter Berry 1715 

Jong, Pieter, widower of Marytie Slot, and Elisabeth Van Duyn, both 

from Pomptan 1747 Oct. 20 

.Toons, Thomas, born at Herrefort, England, and Brechie Pouwer, 

widow of Jacob Meet, both living at Second Riv 1733 

Joralemon, Ann, and Hermanns King 1800 

Joralemon, Cornelius, and Nelly Juriaanz 1795 

Joralemon, James T., and Mary Rutan 1800 

Joralemon, John, and Mary Freelaud 1796 

Joralemon, John, and Eliz. Wynants 1796 

Joralemon, Leah, and Garrit Garrabrantz 1800 

Joralemon, Mary, and Jacob Putnam Meeker 1798 

Joralemon, Nicholas, and Mary Lewis 1800 

Joralemon, Pietertje, and Edward Ilowel 1795 

Joralemon, Sarah, and Samuel Rutan 1798 

Juriaanz, Eliz., and Abraham Van Emburgh 1795 

Juriaanz, Nelly, and Cornelius Joralemon 1795 

K 

Keen, John, and Kety Roo, both living on Second Riv., witnesses, 

Samuel and Steven Ward 1771 

Keen, William, aud Margaret Wauters 1800 

Kembel, Elisabeth, and Philip Roegee 1733 

Kidney, John, and Maria Wiune 1797 

Kidney— see Cidney. 

King, Aury, aud Mrs. Sarah Dodd 1799 

King, Casparus, and Phoebe Budd 1794 

King, David, from Newark, and Catharina Van Winkel, from Second 

River, marr. upon certificate of Do Chapmanl 1774 Jan. 1 1 

King, Hendrik, and Lea Stymets, both from Essex Co., marr. upon 

license 1761 

King, Ht rmanus, and Ann Jorolemon 1800 

King, John F. , and Mary King 1 80 ° 

King, Lydia, and Cornelius Erwin 1799 

King, Mary, and John F. King 1800 

King, Mary, and Arie Douwe 1748 

i The Rev. Jedediab Chapman, pastor of the Presbyterian church at Orange, 1766 1800. 



June 


30 


June 


29 


Sept. 


27 


Jan. 


2 


Sept. 


3 


Oct. 


20 


Feb. 


8 


Feb. 


7 


Feb. 


2 


July 


6 


May 


30 


Sept. 


27 


Sept. 


27 



Nov. 


25 


Sept. 


7 


Nov. 


10 


July 


19 


Jan. 


27 


Dec. 


24 



Mar. 


21 


June 


29 


Feb. 


16 


Oct. 


23 


Feb. 


16 



6l2 



NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 



King, William, and Marytie Cadmus, both from Second Riv., marr. 

upon license 1757 

King, William, and Phoebe Hall 1797 

Kingslant, Catharina, and Matthias DeHart 1746 

Kingslant, William, from Second Riv., and Anna Dally, widow, from 

New York, marr. with license 1712 

Kint, Judick, and Jury Andriesen, both living in Pipek 1742 

Kip, Jane, and John Carne, both from New York 1776 

Koeiemans, Treyntie, and Christoffel Steymes 17G6 

Koejemaus, Annatie, and Mantis Burger 1734 

Koerte, Neeltie, and Jacobus Spier, both from Achquechenonk 1740 

Koeyemans, Ariaentie, and Johannes Van Emburgh ... 1731 

Koning, Aden, and Margrietje Bruyn, both living at Second River. . .1744 

Kouing, Catriua, and Adam Phester 1745 

Koning, John, and Maria Morris, both living at Second Riv. 1745 

Kreitz, Maria Catrina, and John Schriber 1796 



July 28 
Jan. 1 



Oct. 19 
Aug. 9 
Sept. 14 
June 21 
Jan. 27 
June 3 
Mar. 14 
June 2 
Mar. 11 
May 11 
Feb. 24 



Laurier, Christiaan, from Wachauw, and Sara Pier, from Morris Co., 

witness, Jacob Pier 1749 May 6 

Leasear, Catharina, and Jacobus Bruyn 1754 Oct. 5 

Leslie, Elizabeth, and Richard Bergen 1794 Nov. 29 

Leslie, George, and Isabella Neil 1799 Sept. 9 

Leslie, Margaret, and Abraham Cadmus 1794 Nov. 29 

Lewis, John, and Pietertie Jeraleman, both from Berbadus Neck, 

marr. upon license 1767 Jan. 

Lewis, Mary, and Nicholas Joralemon 1800 Feb. 

Lezelier, Eliza, and Herman Bennet . 1797 June 

Linford, Abraham, and Mary Van Riper 1796 April 

Liuford, Mary, and Henry Steymets 1796 May 

Little, Mary, and John Sip Francisco 1796 Feb. 

Lou, Anna, and Thomas Wilckson (?) 1736 

Lyense, Willem, and Ariaantie Wouterse, both from New York. 1756 June 12 



M 

McKarll, Joseph, born in Ireland, and Mary Sproils, liviug in Besken- 
reits, witness, William Hamilton. Banns published three times, 

but were never married Banns 1758 Sept. 23 

MacGinnis, Uzal, and Jane Teeple 1795 Aug. 24 

Mandeville, Abraham, and Catharine Steger 1800 Dec. 20 

Mandeville, Hester, and Moses Johnson 1800 Sept. 7 

Maurise, Catryntie, and Thomas Santvoort 1759 June 28 

Mauriss, Pieter, and Elisabeth Bruyn, both living at Second River . . . 1772 June 25 

Mead, Elisabeth, and Gysbert Van der Hoeff 1771 Mar. 20 

Mead, Jan, and Maria Cadmus 1753 Jan. 17 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 613 

Mead, Johannes, from Pecheuech, ami Maria Cadmus, from the 

Gansegat 1753 Jan. 17 

Meeker, Jacob Putnam, and Mary Joralemon 1798 Feb. 7 

Meeks, Joseph, and Sarah Vau Dyke 18C0 June 29 

Messeker. Abraham, born at Hoopwill, and Annatie Tan der Hoeff, 

born at New Britain, both living at Second Riv 1735 Aug. 16 

Messelaar, Abram, and Elisabeth Haal, both living at Second Riv., 

witness, Abram Boss 1759 Sept. 23 

Meyers, Jane, and Abraham Van Blarkum 1795 Feb. 12 

Mezier, Catharine, and Rev. John Cornelison 1795 May 12 

Mitzard, John, born in Pennsylvania, and Maria Pengborn, boru in 

Newark 1767 Sept. 20 

Moore, Dalle, and Dennys Prys , 1733 Aug. 25 

Morris, Aaron, and Jane Garrabrautz 1800 Dec. 28 

Morris, Maria, and John Koning 1745 May 11 

Morris, Sarah, and John Brown 1798 Sept. 5 

Morris, Stephen, and Catharine Smith 1799 Oct. 15 

Mosely, Mrs. Pietertje, and Robert Anderson 1797 Jan. 28 

Mourisse, Francyntie, and Robert Saudvoort. 1762 Feb. 25 

Mourisse, Mauris, and Polly Sandvoort, both from Pequanneck, in 

Morris Co., witness, Robbert Sandvoort 1761 Sept. 9 

N 

Neil, Isabella, and George Leslie 1799 Sept. 9 

o 

Osborn, Moses, and Mary Van Brakel 1797 Aug. 6 

Oudwater, Hendrik, and Catrina Brass 1752 Feb. 23 

Oudwater, Tryntie, and Enoch Paulusse 1756 April 9 

P 

Pangborn, Joseph, and Mrs. Sarah Steger 1800 Nov. 29 

Parleman, Johannes, and Marytie Hyler (?), both living on the Uyle- 

kill, marr. upon certif 1755 April 19 

Paulusse, Abram, from Second Riv., and Marytie Van Rype, from Ac- 

quegnonk, witness, Johannis Van Rype 1719 Oct. 20 

Paulusse, Aechie, and Hendrick Jacobusse 1733 Dec. 15 

Paulusse, Enoch, and Tryntie Oudwater, both living at Second Riv. . . 1756 April 9 

Paulusse, Helena, and Jan Jacobusze 1735 Mar. 1 

Paulusse, Jannetie, and Hendrik Van Es 1759 Nov. 22 

Paulusse, Mary, and Adriaan Jacobusse 1761 Sept. 19 

Pengborn, Maria, and John Mitzard 1767 Sept. 20 

Perkins, John, and Ann Furlough 1798 April 10 

Phester, Adam, living at New York, and Catrina Koning, living at 

Second Riv 1745 Mar. 11 

Phillips, Eva, and William Weller 1757 Aug. 2 



Nov. 


20 


July 


20 


July 


20 


Nov. 


20 


Dec. 


4 


Dec. 


4 


May 


G 


May 


6 


Oct, 


21 


Sept. 


16 


Oct. 


26 


Aug. 


3 


Aug. 


11 


Juue 


30 



614 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Pier, Abrairi, and Cathrina Pier 1751 

Pier, Abram, and Catrina Pier, both from Pochueuech 1751 

Pier, Catharina, and Gerbrant Gerbrantse 1747 

Pier, Cathrina, and Abram Pier , 1751 

Pier, Cathrina, and Abram Pier 1751 

Pier, Johannes, born at N. Berbadus Neck, living at Hanover, and 

Hester Van Nes, from the Gansegat, witness, Petrus Van Nes. .1751 

Pier, Johannes, and Hester Van Es, both from the Uylekill .... 1751 

Pier, Sara, and Christiaan Laurier : 1749 

Pierse, Andrew, and Phebe Davis, from Newark, marr. with license. .1750 

Pingham (?), Abigal, and Robert Clark 1764 

Post, Alexander, and Pryntie Sinit, both from Achquechenonk 1742 

Post, Catharina, and Johaunis Steynmets 1736 

Post, Janeker, and Abraham Jacobus 1 800 

Poulson, Paul, and Helena Garrabrantz 1795 

Pouwer, Brechie, and Thomas Joons 1733 

Prys, Dennys, born in Ireland, and Dalle Moore, born at Dublin, Ire- 
land, both living here at Second Riv 1733 Aug. 25 

R 

Reyken, Femmetie, and Abraham Steeger. 1740 Aug. 12 

Roegee, Philip, born at Bordeaux, in France, and Elisabeth Kembel, 

widow of Tammes Weylman, born in Frybool, ' both living at 

Second Riv 1733 Nov. 10 

Rolsoh, James, born in Old England, and Anna Billington, widow of 

James Billington, living at Berbadus Neck, witness, James 

Bottler 1764 Jan. 22 

Rome, Paulus, from Morris Co., and Sara Cidney, from Essex Co., 

marr. upon license 1766 

Roo, Kety, and John Keen 1771 

Roset, Maria, and David Andro .... 1738 

Roskrow, John, from Cornwall, in England, and Aany Garner, widow 

of James Roleson, both living at Berbadus Neck 1767 

Rutan, Mary, and James T. Joralamon ; 1800 

Rntau, Samuel, and Sarah Joralemon 1798 

Ryke, Isaak, living at the Gansegat, and Annetie Egberse, living at 

Achquegnonk 1751 

Ryke, Saertie, and Abraham Van der Hoef ' 1747 

Ryke, Wyntie, and Abraham Van Giesen 1769 

S 

Sandvoort, Polly, and Mauris Mourisse 1761 Sept. 9 

Sandvoort, Robert, and Francyntie Mourisse, both from Morris Co., 

witnesses, Jacob Mourisse and Joh Bruyn Barentson 1762 Feb. 25 

Sandfort, Nancy, and Cornells Van Zeyle 1753 July 15 

1 Qucr\ : Freehold. 



Oct. 


12 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


2 


Aug. 


1 


Jan. 


2 


May 


30 


Jan. 


29 


June 


27 


April 


9 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 



6l 5 



Santvoort, Elisabeth, and Johannis Bruyn 1711 .June 1 

Sautvoort, Thomas, and Catryntie Manrise, both from Morris Co., wit- 
nesses, Jan-Bruyn and Mauris Maurise 1759 June 28 

Schephard, Mary, and Lewis Greenfield . 1767 May 23 

Schephard, Thomas, from England, and Maria Ydesen, from Second 

Riv. , marr. upon certif 1759 Feb. 4 

Sehoever, Louisa, and Andrew Bitstaed 1797 Mar. 1 

Schriber, John, and Maria Catrina Kreitz 1796 Feb. 24 

Sherntan, Catrina, and Jacob Boss 1759 April 10 

Sickelse, Aeltie, and Abraham Spier 1754 May 11 

Sigler, Joseph, and Miry Garrabrantz 1797 Dec. 14 

Sigler, Thomas, and Mary Speer 1799 Dec. 23 

Smit, HansMichele, and Sara Bras, both from Second River, marr. 

with license . . : 1741 Jan. 9 

Smit, Jacob, and Janueke Boss 1752 Jan. 23 

Smit, Jacobus, born and living at Achquegnok, and JeunekeBas, from 

N. Berbadus Neck, witness, Arie Bos 1752 Jan. 23 

Smit, Lea, and Johannes Sphier 1747 Nov. 6 

Smit, Pryntie, and Alexander Post ... 1742 Sept. 16 

Smit, Samuel, born on Long Island, and Saai'tie Forster, from Newark. 1772 Dec. 1 

Smith, Catharine, and Stephen Morris 1799 Oct. 15 

Soldaat, Catharina, and Jan Everse Claes 1735 Dec. 11 

Soveril, Isaac, and Elizabeth Dobbins 1796 Jau. 6 

Sphier, Johannes, and Lea Smit, both living at Second River 1717 Nov. I! 

Speer, James, and Hannah Grimes 1799 April 14 

Speer, Mary, and Thomas Sigler 1799 Dec. 23 

Spier, Abraham, and Aeltie Sickelse, both from Bergen Co., marr. 

with license 1754 May 1 1 

Spier, Abraham, and Emmetie Wouterse, both living at Second Riv., 

marr. with license 1772 Oct. 8 

Spier, Cornells, born at Acqueckonk, living at Peckmans River, and 

Feytie Jacobusse, living at Second Riv 1758 Jan. 11 

Spier, Esah, and Jacob G. Vreelant 1773 Sept, 25 

Spier, Heudrik, and Saertie Cadmus, both living at Second Riv 1748 May 13 

Spier, Jacob, and Lea C >ymans, both living at Second Riv . 1746 Dec. 5 

Spier, Jacobus, and Neeltie Koerte, both from Achqiiecheaonk. ...1740 June 3 

Spier, Johauuis, and Magdalena Van Dyck, both living at Second Riv 1746 May 11 

Spier, Gerretie, and Brand Jacobuss 1767 Dec. 1 

Spier, Lea, and Isack Van Giesen . . .' 1746 Nov. 1 

Spier. Leentie, and Johannes Jacobusse 1740 April 6 

Spier, Marytie, and Waling Egberse 1749 Oct. 1 

Spier, Saertie, and Jau Wouterse 1752 Oct. 3 

Spier, Theunis, born at Second River, and Eugeltie Cadmus, born at 

Bergen, both living at Second Riv 1735 Aug. 16 

Sproils, Mary, and Joseph McKarll 1758 Sept. 23 

Stagg, Thomas, and Mary Frauscisco. , 1795 Oct. 31 



6l6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Steeger, Abraham, and Femmetie Reyken, living at Second Riv 1740 Aug. 12 

Steger, Catharine, and Abraham Mandeville 1800 Dec. 20 

Steger, Jacob, and Catharine Teeple 1798 April 5 

Steger, Mrs. Sarah, and Joseph Pangborn 1800 Nov. 29 

Steimit, Gerrit, and Pietertie Tuerse, marr. with license of . . 1744 Nov. 12 

Steymes, Christoffel, and Treyntie Koeiemaus, both living at Second 

Riv 1766 June 21 

Steymets, Henry, and Mary Linford 1796 May 7 

Steyumets, Johannes, and Catharina Post, from Achvveghenoch 1736 Oct. 26 

Stor, Annetie, and Johannes Coerte 1735 Nov. 11 

Styg, Niclaes, and Geesje Francisco, both living in het Gausegat. ...1740 May 13 
Stymets, Gerrit, from New York, and Marritie Van Rype, from Bar- 
bados Neck, witness, Helmig Sip, Elder 1767 May 30 

Stymets, Lea, and Hendrik King , 1761 Mar. 21 

T 

Teeple, Catharine, and Jacob Steger 1798 April 5 

Teeple, Jane, and Uzal MacGinnis 1795 Aug. 24 

Tuerse, Pietertie, and Gerrit Steimit, marr. with license of 1744 Nov. 12 

V 

Van Blarkum, Abraham, and Jane Meyers 1795 Feb. 12 

Van Brakel, Mary, and Moses Osborn 1797 Aug. 6 

Van Buskerk, Maria, and David Demarre 1748 Aug. 1 

Van Coortlant, Geertruy, and John Van Renzelaer 1756 Jan. 29 

Van Dalsem, Geertruy, and Marselis Gerbrandse 1742 April 19 

Van der Hoef, Abraham, and Saertie Ryke, both living at the Gan- 

segat 1747 June 27 

Vander Hoeff, , and Tryntie Coccifer, living at Second Riv 1740 Nov. 21 

Van der Hoeff, Annatie, and Abraham Messeker 1735 Aug. 16 

Van der Hoeff, Gysbert, and Elisabeth Mead, both living at Pach- 

auech 1771 Mar. 20 

Vander Hoeff, Maria, and Michiel Francisko 1753 Nov. 1 1 

Van Duyn, Elisabeth, and Pieter Jong 1747 Oct. 20 

Van Duyn, Geertie, and Petrus Heyle 1747 May 25 

Van Duyn, Marte, widower, and Jannetie Vreelant, both from 

Pequaneck, iu Morris Co., marr. upon license 1760 April 3 

Van Dyck, Magdalena, and Johannis Spier 1746 May 1 1 

Van Dyk, Hanna, and Hendrik Van Giesen, m. with license of . . . ... 1750 Dec. 24 

Van Dyke, Sarah, and Joseph Meeks 1800 June 29 

Van Emburgh, Abraham, and Eliz. Juriaanz 1795 Sept. 27 

Van Emburgh, Abraham, and Rhoda Wheeler 1799 Oct. 13 

Van Emburgh, Gideon, and Elisabeth Wendel, both from Second Riv., 

marr. upon license 1759 Feb. 18 

Van Emburgh, Johannes, born at Hackensack, and Ariaentie Koeye- 

maus, born at Second Riv., both living there. 1731 Mar. 14 



Nov. 


22 


Dec. 


4 


May 


26 


Jan. 


27 


April 


9 


Mar. 


14 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 6\J 

Van Es, Evert, from Acquecheuoch, and Cathariua Cadmus, living at 

Second Riv 1736 Sept. 1 

Van Es, Hendrik, widower, from Morris Co., and Jarmetie Paulusse, 

from Second Riv., marr. upon license 1759 

Van Es, Hester, and Johannes Pier 1751 

Van E-, Hester, and Pieter Jacobusse 1750 

Vau Giese, Abraham, and Marytie Van Vorst, marr. upon certif 1751 

Van Giesen, Abraham, widower, from Achcpieguok, and Wyntie Ryke, 

widow 1^69 

Van Giesen, Aeltie, and Michiel Vreelant, Jun 1749 

Van Giesen, Cornelis, and Jenneke De Remis, both living at Acqueg- 

nonck 1748 Aug. 6 

Van Giesen, Hendrik, and Hanna Van Dyk, both from Second Riv., 

marr. with license of 1750 Dec. 24 

Van Giesen, Hillegont, and Johannes Bruyn 1730 Dec. 6 

Van Giesen, Isaack, and Lea Spier, both from Second Riv., marr. with 

license 1746 Nov. 1 

Van Imburgh, William, and Elisabeth Jeralomon, from Second Riv., . 

marr. upon license 1754 

Van Nes, Hester, and Johannes Pier 1751 

Van Nieukerk, Antie, and Johannes Bikelo 1747 

Van Reuzelaer, John, widower, from Albany, and Geertruy Van Coort- 

lant, from Second Riv., marr. upon license 1756 

Van Riper, Mary, and Abraham Linford 1796 

Van Rype, Abram, and Elisabeth Braadberry, both from Acqueg- 

nouck, l marr. upon license of 1747 Nov. 28 

Van Rype, Abram, widower,- and Margarita Van Rype, widow, both 

fri >m Second River, marr. upon license of 1 756 

Van Rype, Adriaan, and Rachel Coyman, both from Second Riv 1764 

Van Rype, Margarita, and Abram Vau Rype 1756 

Van Rype, Marritie, and Gerrit Stymets 1767 

Van Rype, Marytie, and Abram Paulusse 1749 

Van Rype, Thomas Vreeman,3 aud Margerita Coyeman, marr. with 

license of 17o0 

Van Vorst, Marytie, and Abraham Van Giese 1751 

Van Wageninge, Feytie, and Dirk Vreelant 1763 

Van Wiuckele, Alida, and Robbert Husten 1733 

Van Winckele, Tryntie, and Daniel Worms 1733 

Van Winkel, Casparus, from Acqueknonck, and Lydia Van Wiukel, 

from Second Riv 1748 

Van Winkel, Cathariua, and David King 1774 

i For some account of this Van Rype and the Bradbury family, sec History of Paterson. 
by William Nelson. I., 158. 

2 See ibid.. 161. 

3 Doubtless an error for Urians; i. e.. Thomas, son of Juriaen or Urian Van Rype. 
47 



Oct. 


5 


Dec. 


4 


May 


30 


Jan. 


29 


April 


23 



Nov. 


27 


Jan. 


19 


Nov. 


27 


Mav 


30 


Oct. 


20 


April 


17 


Jan. 


27 


Sept. 


14 


Sept. 


8 


Sept. 


8 


Jan. 


29 


Jan. 


11 



May 


19 


Jan. 


29 


Dec. 


21 


Feb. 


24 


Dec. 


2 


Deo. 


14 


Dec. 


30 


May 


29 


Feb. 


23 


July 


15 


Feb. 


23 


Oct. 


9 


April 


14 


Feb. 


23 



6l8 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Van Winkle, Cytje, and Henry Van Winkle 1798 Dec. 2 

Van Winkel, Dial,l and Anna Gerritson, both from Second River, 

marr. upon license of June 15 1751 June 17 

Van Winkel, Hendrik, widower, from Second Riv., and Hester De- 

voisne, widow, from Aquecknonk, marr. upon license 1764 Nov. 25 

Van Winkel, Jacob, and Hillegonda Bruyn, both from Second River, 

witness, Johannes Bruyn 1750 

Van Winkel, Lydia, and Caspar as Van Winkel 1748 

Van Winkel, Sietie, and John De Vousne 1766 

Van Winkle, Henry, and Sophia Brown 1798 

Van Winkle, Henry, and Cytje Van Winkle 1798 

Van Winkle, John, and Cytje Freeland 1799 

Van Winkle, Mary, and David Houston 1797 

Van Zeil, Johanna, and Jacob Billyou 1758 

Van Zeyle, Aegie, and Abram Vrelant 1751 

Van Zeyle, Cornelis, aud Nancy Sandfort 1753 

Verwey, Jacobus, and Lea Brouwer, both from Acquignenonck, marr. 

upon the testimony of Harman Juriansen, Elder at Acq 1743 

Vincent, Hester, and Mattheus Huysmau 1735 

Volck, Saartie, and Pieter Bras 1734 

Vrelant, Abram, and Aegie Van Zeyle, both from Second Riv 1751 

Vreelant, Dirk, and Feytie Van Wageuinge, both from Essex Co., 

marr. upon license 1763 Sept. 14 

Vreelant, Hendrik, and Emmetie Wouterse, both living at Second .» 

River 1758 Dec. 31 

Vreelant, Jacob G., and Esah Spier, both from Essex Co., and belong- 
ing to the Dutch Ch. at Second Riv., marr. with license 1773 

Vreelant, Jannetie, and Marte Van Dayn 1760 

Vreelant, Johannis, widower of Metje Jurriaanse, from Morris Co., 

and Leentie Doolhaven, from the Gansegat 1752 

Vreelant, Michiel, Jr., and Aeltie Van Giesen, marr. with license. . . . 1749 

w 

Ward, Rebecca, and Simeon R. Jones 1795 

Ward, Sarah, and Hermanus Cadmus 1798 

Wauters, Margaret, and William Keen. 1800 

Weller, William, born in Germany, and Eva Phillips, both living at 

Second Riv., witness, John Coccifer 1757 

Wendel, Elisabeth, and Gideon Van Emburgh 1759 

Wheeler, Rhoda, and Abraham Van Emburgh 1799 

Wilckson, Thomas, aud Anna Lou, from Second River, with license of .1736 

Williams, Edward, and Fanny Jacobus 1799 

Winne, Abram, and Hilletie Jeralemon, both living at Second River, 

marr. upon license 1766 Sept. 

i Dan'l. or Daniel. 



Sept. 


25 


April 


3 


Oct. 


7 


Mar. 


14 


Sept. 


18 


Dec. 


3 


Sept. 


7 


Aug. 


2 


Feb. 


18 


Oct. 


13 


Nov. 


r.i 


Nov. 


28 



SECOND RIVER CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 619 

Winne, Maria, and John Kidney 1797 July 19 

Worms, Daniel, widower of Tryntie Van Wormer, born at Darmstadt, 

living at Hanover, and Tryntie Van Wiuckele, born and liviug 

at Second Kiv 1733 Sept. 8 

Wouterse, Ariaantie, aud Willem Lyense 1756 June 12 

Wouterse, Emmetie, and Heudrik Vreelant 1758 Dec. 31 

Wouterse, Emmetie, and Abraham Spier 1772 Oct. 8 

Wouterse, Fraucois, and Steyntie Bruyn, both from Second Riv., marr. 

with license of 1741 Dec. 1 

Wouterse, Jan, from Second River, and Saertie Spier, from the Gan- 

segat, witness, Gerrit Spier. 1752 Oct. 3 

Wynants, Eliz., and John Joralemon 1796 Oct. 20 

Y 

Ydese, Marselis, and Femmetie Dorhager, from het Gansegat 1741 Nov. 21 

Ydesen, Maria, aud Thomas Schephard 1759 Feb. 4 

Yong, Elisabeth, and Gleen Deremis 1744 Oct. 2 

z 

Zelius, Henry, [a free Mulatto], 1 aud Dinah, a slave to P. S 1798 Feb. 21 

1 The words in brackets are not in the church record, but are in the return made to the 
County Clerk. 



Christ Church, New Brunswick, Marriage Records, 



1758-1778. 



A congregation in connection with the Church of England erected at New Bruns- 
wick a substantial stone church, 55 feet long, 45 feet wide, and 20 feet high, in 1744, 
and having subsequently provided a house and glebe, the Society for the Propagation 
of the Gospel in Foreign Parts sent them a missionary, in the person of Mr. Wood, in 
1749 or 1750. He was succeeded in 1754 by the Rev. Mr. Seabury, Jr., and he in 
turn in 1757 by the Eev. Robert McKean, who removed to Perth Amboy in 1763. 
Subsequent missionaries in charge were: the Rev. Leonard Cutting, 1763-1766; the 
Rev. Abraham Beach, 1767-1784. The ministers in charge thereafter were: the 
Rev. Mr. Rowland, 1784-1785; the Rev. George Ogilvie, 1787-1790; the Rev. Henry 
Vandyke, 1791-1794; the Rev. John Henry Hobart, 1799-1800. 

No record of the proceedings of the church organization previous to 1790 is 
known to exist, nor any marriage records prior to 1800, except those given herewith: 

A 

Alliu, Francis, and Robert Petit 1775 Nov. 5 

Anderson, Yakomintie, and Simon Wycoff 1771 Aug. 7 

Appleby. George, and Deborah Sallom 1770 July 2 

Armstrong, Jane, and Peter Graham 1768 June 23 

B 

Blair, Susannah, and Alexander Campbell 1758 Dec. 26 

Boyce, Mary, and Richard Kills 1768 Sept. 15 

Boyce, Mary, and Volkert Fulkerson 1772 Sept. 27 

Boyce, Sitey, and Jacob Sydam 1774 Jan. 6 

Bryan, Alice, and John Park 1773 Dec. 21 

C 

Cambell, Elizabeth, and Hezekiah Dunham 1769 Oct. 26 

Campbell, Alexr., Sergt. Light Infry., and Susannah Blair, of New 

Brunswick 1758 Dec. 26 

Churchward, Win., and Margaret Rich 1778 May 20 

Clarke, Peter, and Gitta Mulford 1772 June 7 

Conger, Sarah, and Richd. Gardner 1773 June 30 

Conolly, Catharine, and Win. Graham 1773 Feb. 24 

Cowenhoven, Peter, and Elizabeth Probosco 1777 Jan. 15 

D 

Davis, Sarah, and Wm. Sanford 1773 Jan. 20 

Demott, John, and Catharine Vroom 1773 Jan. 7 



Nov. 


27 


May 


12 


Oct. 


26 


Mar. 


17 


Oct. 


26 


April 


4 


Oct. 


26 


Nov. 


5 



CHRIST CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 02 1 

Dermis, Mary, and Samuel Hudson 1774 

Dennis, Sarah, and Richard Stites . . . , ] 776 

Dogau, Henry, Surgeon's Mate 29th Regt. and Lydia Lagrange of N. B. 1771 

Drake, James, and Jane Ogden, both of N. B 1769 

Duncan, John, soldier 47th Foot, and Mary Peck 1758 

Dungan, Edward Vaughn, of Elizabeth Town, and Frances Lagrange, 

cf N. B 1773 

Dunham, Hezekiah, and Elizabeth Cambell 1769 

Duykink, James, and Mary Taylor 1772 

E 

Evans, Mary, and Joseph Price 1773 Oct 

F 

Farguson, Henery, Sergt. 29th Regt. and Mary Pinhorn 1770 

Farmer, Elizabeth, and Peter Goelet 1775 

Fisher, John, and Margaret McCray, of Somerset Co 1758 

Foster, Sarah, and Daniel Turner 1772 

Foy, Capt. Eward, and Hannah van Home 1772 

French, Catharine, and Samuel Kemble 1758 

Frey, Mary, and David Shannon 1 778 

Fulkerson, Yolkert, and Mary Boyce 1772 

Furman, Hannah, and William van Deripe 1773 

G 

Gardner, Richard, of Long Island, and Sarah Conger, of Piscataqua. . 1773 

Gerrish, Joseph, and Sarah McAttee 1774 

Goelet, Peter, of N. Y., and Elizabeth Farmer, of Amboy 1775 

Graham, Peter, of Pluckhimin, and Jane Armstrong, of N. Brunswick. 1768 
Graham, William, and Catharine Conolly 1773 

H 

Hacker, Lydia, and Israel Phillips 1773 

Harpell, Christopher, and Eve Teal 1770 

Harrison, Elizabeth, and Isaac Hemmingway 1772 

Harrison, Gauitta, and James Nelson 1768 

Hemmingway, Isaac, and Elizabeth Harrison 1772 

Horn, Simon, and Leah Smock (had their dau. Rachel baptized same 

day) , 1768 

Home, Hannah, and Abraham Lane 1772 

Hudson, Samuel, and Mary Dennis, both of the Lauding 1771 

Huttou, Thomas, and Patience Stanford, both of Somerset Co 1774 

J 
Jones, Ann, and Wm. Thomas 1758 

Jones, Elizabeth, and Wm. Richardson 1778 

K 

Kemble, Samuel, and Catharine French, both of N. B 1758 

Kills, Richard, and Mary Boyce 1768 



July 


19 


Oct. 


26 


Nov. 


27 


July 


14 


July 


26 


Mar. 


9 


July 


20 


Sept. 


27 


July- 


2 


June 


30 


July 


24 


Oct. 


26 


June 


23 


Feb. 


24 


Feb. 


23 


July 


8 


April 


19 


Sept. 


20 


April 


19 


Oct. 


29 


Nov. 


24 


Nov. 


27 


May 


13 


Dec. 


25 


Sept. 


27 


Mar. 


9 


Sept. 


15 



622 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Kint, John, aud Mary Walker, of Piscataqua 1772 July 15 

Kursert (?), Elizabeth, and Benj. Salter 1770 July 24 

L 

LaGrange, Frances, and Edward Vaughn Dungan 1773 April 4 

Lagrauge, Lydia, aud Henry Dogau 1771 Oct. 26 

Lagrange, Susanuah, aud Arthur Wad man 1769 Mar. 1 1 

Laue, Abraham, and Hannah Home 1772 Nov. 24 

L'Bateaux, Joseph, aud Catharine Sickles 1769 Dec. 17 

Lott, Henry, aud Rache Segange 1772 Sept. 27 

M 

McAtee, Elizabeth, and James van Home 1777 Jan. 3 

McAttee, Sarah, and Joseph Gerrish 1774 July 24 

McCray, Margaret, and John Fisher 1758 Nov. 27 

Martin, Auu, and Isaac Munday 1774 Juue 7 

Mecom, Catharine, and Thomas Turner 1774 June 19 

Mouut, Dinah, and Cornelius Staats 1774 Jan. 25 

Moyland, Stephen, and Mary van Horn 1778 Sept. 12 

Mulford, Gitta, and Peter Clarke 1772 June 7 

Munday, Isaac, and Ann Martin, of Piscataqua 1774 June 7 

Munday, Thomas, and Sarah Willson 1770 Jan. 3 

N 

Nelson, James, Esqre, and Ganitta Harrison 1768 Sept. 20 

o, 

Ogden, Jane, and James Drake 1769 Mar. 17 

O'Neil, Timothy, and Mary Tarney 1767 Dec. 25 

P 

Park, John, and Alice Bryan, both of N. B 1773 Dec. 21 

Peck, Mary, and John Duncan 1758 Oct. 26 

Petit, Robert, aud Francis Allin 1775 Nov. 5 

Petty, David, and Charity Sparling ... 1774 Nov. 6 

Phillips, Israel, and Lydia Hacker, of German Town 1773 Feb. 23 

Pinhorn, Mary, aud Henry Fargusou 1770 July 19 

Price, Joseph, of St. Vinceut, and Mary Evans, of N. B 1773 Oct. 2 

Probosco, Elizabeth, aud Peter Cowenhoven 1777 Jan. 15 

R 

Rich, Margaret, and William Churchward 1778 May 20 

Richardson, Wm. , of Elizabeth Town, and Elizabeth Joues, of Wood- 
bridge 1778 Sept. 27 

Richmond, John, and Elizabeth Walker 1774 Dec. 2 

Rowland, Catharine, and William Thomson 1778 May 25 



CHRIST CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 623 

s 

Sallom, Deborah, and George Appleby 1770 

Sallum, Deborah, and William Stilwell 1775 

Salter, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Kursert (?) 1770 

Sanford, Wm., and Sarah Davis, both of Newark 1773 

Segauge, Rachel, and Henry Lott 1772 

Shannon, David, and Mary Frey 1778 

Sickles, Catharine, and Joseph L'Bateaux 1769 

Smock, Leah, and Simon Horn 1768 

Sparling, Charity, and David Petty 1 774 

Staats, Cornelius, and Dinah Mount ... 1771 

Stanford, Patience, and Thomas Hutton. . . 1774 

Stilwell, William, and Deborah Sallum .1775 

Stites, Richard, and Sarah Dennis 1776 

Stone, Wm , of VVoodbridge, and Lucy Walker, of Piscataqua 1758 

Sydam, Jacob, and Sitey Boyce 1771 

T 

Tarney, Mary, and Timothy O'Neil 1767 

Taylor, Mary, and James Duykink 1772 

Teal, Eve, and Christopher Harpell 1770 

Thomas, Wm., Private 47th Foot, and Anne Jones 1758 

Thomson, Wm. , and Catharine Rowland 1778 

Turner, Daniel, of Newark, aud Sarah Foster, of Piscataqua 1772 

Turner, Thomas, Ensign 47th Regt., and Catharine Mecom, of N. B. .1774 

V 

van Deripe, William, and Hannah Furman 1773 

van Horn, Mary, and Stephen Moyland 1778 

van Home, Hannah, and Capt. Edward Foy 1772 

van Home, James, and Elizabeth McAtee 1777 

van Kirk, John, and Lamitie van Nest 1775 

van Nest, Lamitie, and John van Kirk 1775 

Vroom, Catharine, and John Demott 1773 

w 

Wadmau, Arthur, Lieut. 26th Regt. , and Miss Susannah Lagrange, of 

N. B 1769 

Walker, Elizabeth, and John Richmond 1774 

Walker, Lucy, and William Stone 1758 

Walker, Mary, and John Kint 1772 

Waterhouse, John, Surgeon 47th Foot, and Miss Sophia Watson, of 

Perth Amboy. 1759 

Watson, Sophia, and John Waterhouse 1759 

Willson, Sarah, aud Thomas Munday 1770 

Wycoff, Simon, and Yakomintia Anderson 1771 



July 


2 


Jan. 


8 


July 


24 


Jan. 


20 


Sept. 


27 


•July 


20 


Dec. 


17 


Oct. 


29 


Nov. 


6 


Jan. 


25 


May 


13 


Jan. 


8 


May 


12 


April 


20 


Jan. 


6 


Dec. 


25 


Nov. 


5 


July 


8 


Dec. 


25 


May 


25 


July 


14 


June 


19 


July 


2 


Sept. 


12 


July 


26 


Jan. 


3 


Nov. 


18 


Nov. 


18 


Jan. 


7 



Mar. 


11 


Dec. 


2 


April 


20 


July 


15 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


12 


Jan. 


3 


Aug. 


7 



New Brunswick Reformed (Dutch) Church Marriage Records, 

1794-1799. 



The Dutch settlers in the Raritan Valley established a Reformed Dutch Church at 
Three Mile Run, about 1700-1703. Out of this grew the New Brunswick church, 
erected about 1714, and other churches, ministered uutu bj the Rev. Theodorus Ja- 
cobus Frelinghuyseu, 1720-1718; the Rev. Johannes Leydt, 1718-1783; the Kev. Ja- 
cob Rutsen Hardenbergh, pastor of the New Brunswick church, and President of 
Queen's (now Rutgers) College, 1786-1790; the Rev. Ira Condict, 1793-1811. 

The records of the church begin in 1717, and include somewhat scanty minutes of 
the Consistory, quite full lists of communicants and Consistories, and register of bap- 
tisms, from 1717 to date. The only marriage register known to exist begins with 
1791, and was kept by the Rev. Ira Condict. 

A 

Abert, Peter, aDd Mary van Tine, widow of Geo. van Neste . 1799 Feb. 27 

Ackerman, Neijie, and Daniel Pierson 1798 Sept. 23 

Anderson, Geo. , and Mary Lane 1795 April 25 

Applegate, Sarah, and Ruliff van Arsdalen 1794 July 26 

B 

Ball, Gerard, and Sarah Siddle 1796 June 23 

Bancker, John S., and Maria Ortenberger 1799 Nov. 11 

Bell, Thomas, and Catharine Cortlyou 1798 Dec. 20 

Bennet, Phebe, and Zakariah Buckelew 1795 Feb. 27 

Bennit, John, and Dinah Smith 1795 June — 

Bennitt, Peter, ami Lydia Buckalew 1795 Jan. 17 

Blain, Wm., and Sarah Sparling , 1798 Dec. 19 

Bodine, Maria, and Archibald Thompson 1795 Mar. — 

Boureau, Nicholas Henry, and Catherine Lupp 1796 Dec. 17 

Brees, Ann, and Guisbert Dehart 1799 Oct. 24 

Brown, James, and Helena Myers . 1795 July 7 

Brown, Luke, and Mary Suidam 1794 Dec. 4 

Buckelew, David, and Ann Cay wood 1797 Mar. 2 

Buckelew, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Meserol 1796 Jan. 7 

Buckelew, Fred'k, and Phebe Meserol 1795 April 1 7 

Buckelew, Lydia, and Peter Bennitt. . . . . 1795 Jan. 17 

Buckelew, Zakariah, and Phebe Bennet 1795 Feb. 27 

c 

( 'arpenter, Guff, and Zernah Dunham 1798 April 21 

Caywood, Ann, and David Buckelew . 1797 Mar. 2 



NEW BRUNSWICK DUTCH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 625 

Clark, John, ami Eleanor Schuyler 1795 May — 

Collins, Ann, and John Spader... 1796 Sept. 3 

Collins, Margaret, and Ericksou van Norden 1794 Oct. 3 

Conoly, John, and Idah Lane 1797 May(?) 14 

Cortlyou, Catharine, and Thos. Bell 1798 Dec. 20 

Covenhoven, Jane, and Garret Nevius ... 1795 Dec. 31 

Covert, Jane, and David Creemer 1798 Sept. 29 

Creemer, David, and Jane Covert. . . . 1798 Sept. 29 

Crenier, Henry, and Betsey Raino 1795 July 22 

Culberson, Eliza, and Joseph Iinlay 1795 Dec. 12 

D 

Davidson, Geo., and Margaret Denton 1797 

Davis, Mary, and Peter van Zante 1797 

Dehart, Guisbert and Ann Brees 1799 

Denton, Margaret, and Geo. Davidson 1797 

Ditinuss, Abrin., and Maria van Harlingen 1797 

Dunham, David, and Elenor Nevius 1798 

Dunham, Zeruah, and Guff Carpenter 1798 April 21 



Dec. 


3 


Dec. 


27 


Oct. 


24 


Dec. 


3 


May 


17 


May 


28 



E 

Ennis, John, and Betsy Rollin 1795 July 

F 

Farmer, Cornelia, and Benj. Tuthill 1798 

Firkins, Peter, and Sarah Hortwich ... 1797 

French, Ann, and John Suidam 1795 

French, Syche, and James van Strenburgh 1796 

French, Wm, and Catherine Stothoff 1796 



Garretson, Ann, and Stephen van Sicklen 1799 

Giddeman, Betsey, and James Labone . . 1795 

Gilltnan, John, and Joana Hance ... . 1798 

Griggs, Eliz'th, and Luke Whitlock 1799 

Griggs, Mary, and Richard Jacques 1'98 

H 

Hager, John, and Mary Sparling 1799 

Halfpenny, John, and Ester Nevius L796 

Hance, Joana, and John Gillman. . . . • 1796 

Hatfield, Catherine, and Jacob van Norstraud 1795 

Herill, Wm., and Ann van Arsdalen, widow of Hulich (Gulick) 1798 

Hortwich, Sarah, and Peter Firkins 1797 

Hulich, Ann van Arsdalen, and Wm. Herrill 1 798 

48 



26 



Dec. 


26 


May 


12 


May 


5 


Aug. 


8 


Sept. 


17 


Dec. 


19 


Aug. 


6 


May 


26 


Nov. 


1 


Dec. 


26 


July 


3 


Nov. 


3 


May 


26 


Mar. 


19 


Oct. 


30 


May 


12 


Oct. 


30 



626 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

I 

Iiulay, Joseph, and Eliza Culberson =». 1798 Dec. 12 

J 

Jacques, Peter Lott, and Clement Tuthill 1796 Feb. 24 

Jacques, Richard, and Mary Griggs 1798 Dec. 26 

Jenkins, Rebecca, and William Low 1798 April 15 

Jones, Moses, and Polly Smith 1796 April 24 

L 

Labone, James, and Betsey Giddeman 1795 Aug. 6 

Lane, Idah, and John Conoly 1797 Maj (?) 14 

Lane, Mary, and Geo. Anderson 1795 April 25 

Low, Wm., and Rebecca Jenkins 1798 April 15 

Lupp, Catherine, and Nicholas Henry Boureau 1796 Dec. 17 

M 

McGee, Catha., and Wm. Ward 1799 Dec. 15 

Meserol, Lenah, and Henry Outcalt 1799 Mar. 19 

Meserol, Jonathan, and Elizabeth Buckelew 1796 Jan. 7 

Merserol, Peter, and Catha. Vliet 1799 Mar. 4 

Meserol, Phebe, and Fred'k Buckelew 1795 April 17 

Myers, Helena, and James Brown 1795 July 7 

N 

Nevius, Abm., and Ida Suydam 1799 Dec. 21 

Nevius, Elenor, and David Dunham .... 1798 May 28 

Nevius, Ester, and John Halfpenny 1796 Nov. 3 

Nevius, Garret, and Jane Covenhoveu 1795 Dec. 31 

Nevius, John, and Polly Rollin 1796 May 12 

Nevius, John, and Hidtie van Arsdaleu 1799 Mar. 9 

Noble, Lydia, and Jedediah Orsburn . . 1795 Oct. 28 

o 

Ockermau, Neijie, and Daniel Piersou 1798 Sept. 23 

Orsburn, Jedediah, and Lydia Noble 1795 Oct. 28 

Ortenberger, Maria, and John S. Bancker 1799 Nov. 11 

Outcalt, Henry, and Lenah Meserol 1799 Mar. 19 

Outcolt, John, and Polly Taylor 1796 April 7 

Outcolt, Margaret, and Jeremiah Outcolt 1796 . April 6 

p 

Perrine, Matthew L. R., and Nancy Thompson . 1797 Nov. 28 

Perrine, Polly, and Wm. Sloan 1796 June 7 

Pierson, Daniel, and Neijie Ockerman ( Ackerman) 1798 Sept. 23 



NEW BRUNSWICK DUTCH CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. '». 



Pomyea, John, and Jane Williamson 1796 Oct. 13 

Probasco, Jacob, and Priscilla Smallcy 1799 June 16 

R 

Raino, Betsey, and Henry Cremer 1795 July 22 

Righmore, James, and Sarah van Pelt 1799 Mar. 1 7 

Rollin, Betsy, and John Ennis 1795 July 26 

Rolliu, Polly, and John Nevius 1796 May 12 

Ross, Wm., and Mary Williamson 1799 Sept. 11 

S 

Sloan, Wm., and Polly Perrine 1796 June 7 

Schureman, Jane, and Abm. van Arsdalen 1794 Sept. 27 

Schuyler, Eleanor, and John Clark 1795 May — 

Siddle, Sarah, and Gerard Ball -. 1796 June 23 

Slover, Isaac, and Alche Whttlock 1795 Nov. 4 

Smalley, Priscilla, and Jacob Probasco 1799 June 16 

Smith, Dinah, and John Bennit 1795 June — 

Smith, Polly, and Moses Jones 1796 April 24 

Smith, Nicoll, and July Tuthill 1796 May 19 

Spader, John, and Ann Collins 1796 Sept. 3 

Sparling, Mary, and John Hager 1799 July 3 

Sparling, Sarah, and Wm. Blain 1798 Dec. 19 

Stillwell, Jaue, and Jaques Voorhees 1799 May 1 

Stothoff, Catha., and Wm. French 1797 Sept. 17 

Suidam, John, and Ann French 1795 May 5 

Suidam, Mary, and Luke Brown , 1794 Dec. 4 

Suydam, Ida, and Abrm., Nevius 1799 Dec. 21 

T 

Taylor, Polly, and John Outcolt 1796 April 7 

Thompson, Archibald, and Maria Bodine 1795 Mar. — 

Thompson, Nancy, and Mathew L. R. Perrine 1797 Nov. 23 

Tuthill, Benj., and Cornelia Farmer 1798 Dec. 26 

Tuthill, Clemont, and Peter Lott Jaques 1796 Feb. 24 

Tcithjll, July, and Nicoll Smith 1796 May 19 

V 

van Arsdalen, Abrm , and Jaue Schureman 1794 Sept. 27 

van Arsdalen, Ann, and Wm. Herill 1798 Oct. 30 

van Arsdalen, Hultie, and John Nevius 1799 Mar. 9 

van Arsdalen, Ruliff, and Sarah Applegate 1794 July 26 

van Duersen, Jacob, and Ann Van Sicklen 1796 Aug. 4 

van Harlingeu, Maria, and Abrm. Ditmuss 1797 May 17 

van Neste,' Mary van Tine, and Peter Abert 1799 Feb. 27 



628 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

van Norden, Erickson, and Margaret Collins 1 794 Oct. 3 

van Norstrand, Abrin., and Phebe van Tine 1799 Aug. 12 

van X' ii strand, Jacob, and Catherine Hatfield 1795 Mar. 19 

van Pelt, Sarah, and James Righmore ' 1799 Mar. 17 

van Sicklen, Ann, and Jacob van Duersen 1796 Aug. 4 

van Sicklen, Stepheu,-and Ann Garretson 1799 Dec. 19 

van Stieubnrgb, James, and Syche French. 1796 Aug. 8 

van Tine, Mary, and Peter Abert 1799 Feb. 27 

van Tine, Phebe, and Abrm. van Norstrand .... 1799 Aug. 12 

van Zante, Peter, and Mary Davis . . 1798 Dec. 27 

Vliet, Catha., and Peter Meserol 1799 Mar. 4 

Voorhees, Jaques, and Jane Stillwell 1799 May 1 

Voorhees, Jeremiah, and Margaret Outcolt 179G April 6 

w 

Waldron, Maria, and Jacob Wyckoff 1794 Sept. 16 

Ward, Wm., and Catherine McGee 1799 Dec. 15 

Whitlock, Alche, and Isaac Slover 1795 Nov. 4 

Whitlock, Luke, and Elizth. Griggs 1799 Nov. 1 

Williamson, Jane, and John Poinyea ... 1796 Oct. 13 

Williamson, Mary, and Wm. Ross 1799 Sept. 1 1 

Wyckoff, Jacob, and Maria Waldron 1794 Sept. 16 



Middlesex County Clerk's Marriage Records, 



17!)5-1800. 



The following is a transcript from the Record of Returns of Marriages, 1795-1799, 

kept in the office of the Clerk of the County of Middlesex, pursuant to Sec. VIII. , of 
"An Act concerning marriages;" passed the 4th of March, 179,1. The records have 
been herewith arranged in alphabetical order. 

A 

Ackermau— see Ockaman, Occurmau. 

Akerman, David, and Mary McDowell 1798 Nov. 25 

Allen, Catherine, and Richard McKilds 1795 Sept. 28 

Allen, Samuel, and Elizabeth Bailey 1797 Sept. 7 

Alston, Jonathan, and Susannah Driskell 1797 Jan. 15 

Anderson, John, aud Elizabeth van Pelt 1799 Feb. 25 

Appleby, Elizabeth, and Francis Couenhoven 1798 May 27 

Applegate, Catharine, and William Ball 1797 Dec. 5 

Applegate, Catharine, aud Jesse Wright 1798 Sept. 2 

Applegate, Lydia, aud Jonathan Sowden 1794 Dec. 30 

Applegate, Richard, aud Mary Doughty 1799 May 25 

Applegate, Samuel, aud Jaue Johnston 1797 June 1 

Applegate, Sarah, and Britton Rogers 1799 Dec. 2G 

Applegate, Stephen, and Catherine Jorney 1799 Dec. 31 

Arnold, Charlotte, and David Thorp 1795 Oct. 25 

Atchley, Margaret, aud Thomas Phillips 1799 Sept. 15 

Ayers, Rhoda, and Lewis Kelly 1795 Dec. 8 

Axtoll, Henry, junior, and Hannah Cook 1797 April 17 

B 

Bailey, Elizabeth, and Samuel Alien 1797 Sept. 7 

Ball, Rachel, and Johu Buckellew 1798 Jan. 1-4 

Ball, William, aud Catherine Applegate 1797 Dec. 5 

Barber, Elizabeth, and Sylvanus Hutchinson 1797 Sept, 3 

Barkelow, John, and Ann Minor 1797 Nov. 29 

Barker, Henrietta, and Thomas Hill 1797 June 25 

Barrow, Deborah, aud Edward Muudy 1796 Mar. 5 

Barrow, Ellis, and Elizabeth Heard 1797 April 20 

Benbridge, Henry, and Sarah Truxton 1796 Aug. 14 

Bennet, John, and Joanna Navis 1797 Mar. 2 

Beyeu, John, and Mershon. 1797 Mar. 30 



63O NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Bishop, Elizabeth, and Gershoin Flatt 1799 

Bishop, Sarah, and Amos Penny 1797 

Blackney, Phebe, and Azariah Dunham 1798 

Bloomfield, William, and Rachel Enos 1796 

Bodine, James, and Gittee Wicoff 1798 

Bodine, Vincent, and Elizabeth Brotherton 1799 

I> tudeu, William, and Lucia Reynolds 1797 

Brackner, John, and Charity Stephenson 1798 

Breese, Catherine, and John Pullen 1799 

.Breese, Euphemia, and Francis Pullen 1799 

Breese, Isaac, and Mary Robbins 1799 

Breese, Mary, and William Hutchinson 1799 

Btennan, Mr., and Mrs. Dandy 1799 

Brotherton, Elizabeth, and Vincent Bodine 1799 

Brown, Elizabeth, and Henry Smith 1797 

Brown, Israel, and Sarah Combs 1799 

Brown, John, and Margaret Rice 1798 

Brown, Mary, and Ebenezer Price ... 1798 

Buckalew, Obadiah, and Abigail Denton 1795 

Buckellew, John, and Rachel Ball .1798 

Burges, William, and Sarah Davis 1799 

Burlew, Samuel, and Sarah Campbel 1799 

Burlew, Samuel, and Hester French 1799 

Butcher, Thomas, and Anne Nutt 1 794 

c 

Campbel, Sarah, and Samuel Burlew 1799 

Campbell, Dugal, and Elizabeth Thornall 1796 

Carlisle, Catherine, and William Mouut 1795 

Carman, Francis, and Elizabeth Sutton 1798 

Carson, Elizabeth, and James Denton 1798 

Chamberliu, David, and Anne Holtou 1798 

Chambers, Elizabeth, and James Claypoole Copper 1799 

Cheesman, Lydia, and James Occurman 1797 

Cheesman, Prudence, and Cornelius de Hart 1797 

Clark, Samuel, and Sarah Cox 1795 

Combs, Elizabeth, and Benjamin Riggs 1796 

Combs, Mary, aud Samuel Ray 1796 

Combs, Sarah, and Israel Brown 1799 

Comptou, James, and Elizabeth Stivers. 1797 

Cornptou, Mary, aud Lewis Thixton. 1797 

Coneway, Hannah, and Jonathan Jones 1799 

Conover, Christian, aud William Tindall 1797 

Conover, Martha, and Peter Johnston 1797 

Conover, Tammy, and Aaron Kerr 1796 

Cook, Aarou, and Elizabeth Groom 1799 



Mar. 


9 


Nov. 


16 


Oct. 


6 


June 


21 


Jan. 


15 


Oct. 


— 


Jan. 


1 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


31 


Jan. 


6 


Feb. 


20 


Sept. 


22 


Oct. 


— 


June 


11 


April 


3 


Feb. 


22 


Mar. 


11 


Dec. 


30 


Jan. 


14 


May 


5 


June 


8 


May 


22 


April 


7 


June 


8 


June 


6 


Mar. 


12 


Nov. 


25 


May 


20 


Jan. 


18 


Sept. 


5 


Feb. 


17 


Dec. 


28 


Mar. 


11 


Oct. 


23 


Oct. 


10 


April 


3 


May 


31 


Jan. 


26 


Jan. 


17 


April 


27 


Aug. 


6 


Dec. 


28 


Jan. 


20 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 631 

Cook, Hannah, and Henry Axtoll, junior 1797 

Copper, James Claypoole, and Elizabeth Chambers 1799 

Corbet, Elizabeth, and James Read 1797 

Core, Timothy, and Luce Stout 17'.i6 

Couenhoveu, Francis, and Elizabeth Appleby 1798 

Covenhoveu, Mary, and William Post 1799 

Covenhoven, Mary, and Ezekiel Stout. ... 1799 

Covenhoveu, William, and Mary Grover 1798 

Cox, Anne, and James Suediker 1798 

Cox, Sarah, and John Davison 1791 

Cox, Sarah, and Samuel Clark 1795 

Crossgrove, Joseph, and Mary Wiley 1799 

( 'row, Mary, and Nathaniel F. R. Dunn 1797 

Cubberley, Amy, and John Hutchinson 1796 

Cull, Peter, and Mary Dye 1797 

D 

Dandy, Mrs., and Mr. Brennan 1799 

Danser, Jesse, and Sarah South 1797 

Davis, Hannah, and David Silver 1799 

Davis, Sarah, and William Burges 1799 

Davison, John,. and Sarah Cox. ... 1791 

Davison, Robert, and Margret Sutfin 1797 

de Hart, Cornelius, and Prudence Cheesman 1797 

Dennis, Garret, and Mary Lott 1795 

Dennistou, John, and Catharine Vauzaudt 1795 

Denton, Abigail, aud Obadiah Buckalew 1795 

Denton, James, and Elizabeth Carson ... 1798 

Dereemer, Catherine, and James Griggs . . . 1796 

Dews, Michael, aud Sarah Williams 1797 

Diliughast. Henry, and Margaret Perine 1798 

Disbrow, Ruth, and James Rickets 1791 

Disbrow, Samuel, and Sarah Groenendyke 1798 

Doughty, Mary, aud Richard Applegate 1799 

Drake, George, and Sarah Randolph . . 1798 

Drake, Gertrude, and Azariah Mundy 1793 

Drake, Ursula, and Cortland Kinsey . ... 1795 

Driskell, Catherine, and Daniel Morgan 1798 

Driskell, Susau, and Jouathau Alston 1797 

Drummond, Elizabeth, and Israel Soper 1797 

Duncan, Anna, and Peter Perrine. 1799 

Duncan, Thomas, aud Isabell McDowell. . 1 798 

Dunham, Azariah, aud Phebe Blackuey L798 

Dunham, Mary, and Richard Pangmau. ... ... 1798 

Dunham, Mercy, and Frauds Martiu. ... 1799 

Dunn, Auu, and Jouathau Lennox 1799 



April 


17 


Sept. 


5 


Oct. 


31 


Aug. 


31 


May 


27 


Jan. 


24 


Feb. 


19 


Dec. 


23 


Oct. 


11 


April 


13 


Mar. 


11 


Sept. 


4 


Feb. 


7 


Mar. 


9 


July 


24 


Sept. 


22 


July 


23 


Mar. 


13 


May 


5 


April 


13 


Nov. 


6 


Dec. 


28 


Dec. 


26 


Dec. 


24 


Dec. 


30 


May 


20 


Jan. 


13 


Dec. 


24 


Feb. 


1 


April 


2 


June 


25 


May 


25 


Feb. 


10 


Nov. 


2S 


Sept. 


20 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


15 


Jan. 


1 


Jan. 


9 


Nov. 


28 


Oct. 


6 


July 


9 


Feb. 


23 


Jan. 


9 



632 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Dunn, Nathaniel F. R., and Mary Crow 1797 Feb. 7 

Dye, Daniel, and Edith Groom. . 1797 Feb. 9 

Dye, Isaac, and Martha Perrine 1794 Feb. i;6 

Dye, Joseph, and Phebe Hance. . . 1795 Mar. 8 

Dye, Lydia, and Lawrence Hessenger 1797 June 8 

Dye, Mary, and Peter Cull 1797 July 24 

Dye, Sarah, and Ezekiel Page 1798 Sept. 20 

Dye, William, and Luissina Groom 1797 Dec. 21 

E 

EatoD, Micajah, and Mary Shaw 1797 April 10 

Eldridge, John, and Mary Rulong 1799 Dec. 18 

Ellis, William, and William Titus (girl) 1798 Oct. 4 

Elstel, Samuel, and Elizabeth Laiug 1798 Dec. 30 

Elstone, Isaac, and Rachel Frazer 1797 April 1 

Enos, Rachel, and William Bloomfield 1796 June 21 

F 

Fagan, Abel, and Catherine Hulfish 1798 Nov. 22 

Fall, Mary, and John Smock 

Field, Jeremiah, and Rachel Sharp 1798 May 31 

Fisher, Elizabeth, and Aaron Formau 1798 Sept. 6 

Fisher, John, and Mary Taylor 1799 June 11 

Fitz Randolph, David, and Mary Martini 1796 Jan. 6 

Fitz Randolph, Ruuey, and Jane Runyon 1796 Mar. 5 

Flatt, Gershom, and Elizabeth Bishop 1799 Mar. 9 

Ford, Charles, and Elizabeth Watkins 1798 Oct. 18 

Forman, Aaron, and Elizabeth Fisher 1798 Sept. 6 

Forman, Elizabeth, and William Robins 1793 April 17 

Frazer, Rachel, and Isaac Elstone 1797 April 1 

French, Hester, and Samuel Burlew 1799 May 22 

Funk, John, and Elizabeth Simonson 1795 Sept. 9 

G 

Griggs, James, and Catharine Dereemer 1796 Jan. 13 

Groenendyke, Sarah, and Samuel Disbrow 1798 June 25 

Groom, Edith, and Daniel Dye .. . .: 1797 Feb. 9 

Groom, Elizabeth, and Aaron Cook 1799 Jan. 20 

Groom, Luissina. and William Dye 1797 Dec. 21 

Grover, Mary, and William Covenhoven 1798 Dec. 23 

Groves, Samuel, and Elizabeth Sylvester 1799 Sept. ]8 

Gulick, Barnt, and Sarah Nixon . . 1797 Feb. 12 

1 This marriage performed by Rev. Henry Cook, is entered a second time, as of 
January 11. L796. 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 633 



H 

Hall, Elizabeth, and Isaac Silloocka 1788? 

Hance, Phebe, and Joseph Dye 1795 

Hankins, Catharine, and Daniel Hutchinson. 1800 

Handley, Elizabeth, and Gideon Wheelock" 1800 

Hause, Abigail, and Vanhise 1796 

Hart, Mary, and Nathaniel Walker 1798 

Hart, Nette, and Thomas Vanduzer 1800 

Hartman, Benjamin, and Permelia Vaughn 1800 

Hartuiau, Margaret, and Abraham Molat 1800 

Hartman, Sarah, and Richard Ely 1800 

Hartson, Dinah, and Simon Cortelyovi. 1800 

Hartnpee, Catharine, and Andrew van Kirk . . 1799 

Heard, Elizabeth, and Ellis Barrow 1797 

Hendrickson, Samuel, and Lucia Imlay 1800 

Herbert, Daniel, and Susannah Potts 1798 

Hessenger, Lawrence, and Lydia Dye 1797 

Higbe, Philip, and Mary Thomas 1796 

Higgins, James, and Mary Warn 1797 

Hill, Thomas, and Henrietta Barker 1797 

Hogliu, Margaret, and Johu Miller 1800 

Hollmau, Anne, and William Morse 1799 

Hollmau, Elenor, and John Jemson 1797 

Holton, Anue, and David Chauiberlin ... 1798 

Hooper, Johu, and Catherine Morrison 1799 

Hopkins. George, aud Frances Lupp 1797 

Howell, Thomas, and Mary Savage 1800 

Hulet, Mary, and George Miller 1800 

HuMsh, Catharine, and Abel Fagan 1798 

Hull, James, and Ann Ker ... 1799 

Hutchinson, Benjamin, aud Jane Taylor 1800 

Hutchiuson, Daniel, aud Catharine Haukius 1800 

Hutchinson, Elizabeth, and Abraham Rogers 1799 

Hutchinson, Elizabeth, and Isaac Wilson 1799 

Hutchinson, Jesse, aud Mary Fisher 1800 

Hutchinson, Johu, and Amy Cnbberley 1796 

Hutchiuson, Jonathan, aud Elizabeth Tindall 1 793 

Hutchinson, Joseph, and Catharine Snediker 1800 

Hutchiu-on, Rachel, and Joseph Smith 1798 

Hutchiuson, S unuel. and Rachel Mount 1797 

Hutchiuson, Sylvanus, aud Elizabeth Barber 1797 

Hutchiuson, Thomas, and Elizabeth Taylor 1800 

Hutchinson, William, aud Mary Breese 1799 

49 



Feb. 5 

Mar. 8 

Dec. 18 

July 19 

Feb. — 

Feb. 15 

Oct. 5 

Aug. 25 

May 7 

Aug. 13 

Nov. 23 

Sept. 20 

April 20 

Dec. 24 

Dec. 20 

June 8 

May 10 

May 28 

June 25 

May 17 

May 6 

Sept. 5 

Jan. 18 

April 22 

Dec. 2 

July 30 

Oct. 30 

Nov. 22 

Feb. 18 

Dec. 10 

Dec. 18 

Feb. 6 

Dec. 11 

Dec. 31 

Mar. 9 

Dec. 26 

Aug. 10 

Nov. 18 

Nov. 23 

Sept. 3 

June 1 2 

Feb. 20 



634 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

I 

Irnlay, Lucia, and Samuel Hendriekson . . . , 1800 Dec. 24 

Ireland, Hannah, and Isaac Webbs 179G Jan. 13 

J 

Jackson, W., and Matilda Barker 1800 May 18 

Jaques, Sarah, and Hendrick van Brunt 1796 Aug. 27 

Jerason, John, and Elenor Hollman 1797 Sept. 5 

Johnson, Catherine, and George Rollar 1797 Dec. 12 

Johnson, Catherine, and Hugh Taylor Mount 1798 June 25 

Johnston, David, and Elizabeth Cule 1800 May 24 

Johnston, Jane, and Samuel Applegate 1797 June 1 

Johnston, Peter, and Martha Conover 1797 Aug. 6 

Johnston, William, and Patience Fagan 1800 Jan. 20 

Jones, Jonathan, and Hannah Coueway 1799 Jan. 17 

Jones, William, and Mary Ann Eastburn, by Benji Lindsay 1800 Dec. 30 

Jorney, Catherine, and Stephen Applegate 1799 Dec. 31 

K 

Kelly, Lewis, and Rhoda Ayers 1795 Dec. 8 

Kelly, Susannah, and Runyon Soper . . 1796 May 7 

Kelsey, Johu, and Nelly Roache 1800 July 2 1 

Kenney, Simon, and Catherine Snediker 1798 May 6 

Ker, Ann, and James Hull. 1799 Feb. 18 

Kerr, Aaron, and Tammy Conover 1796 Dec. 28 

Kinuan, Deborah, and Joseph Cox 1800 Jan. 9 

Kinsey, Cortland, and Ursula Drake 1795 Sept. 20 

Knight, Lucas, and Jane Suidam 1800 Jan. 4 

L 

Laid (Lard?) William, and Sarah Voorhies 1799 April 4 

Laing, Elizabeth, and Samuel Elstel 1798 Dec. 30 

Lake, Mary, and John Letts 1797 Dec. 17 

Lamberson, Cornelius, and Ester Morgan 1799 April 26 

Lane, Maria, and Humphrey Buderow 1800 Oct. 20 

Lanning, Daniel, and Esther Moore 1798 Oct. 8 

Leamon, Ruth, aud James Mitchell ' 1799 Nov. 17 

Lennox, Jonathan, and Anna Darin ,-.... 1799 Jan. 9 

Letts, Ezekiel, and Margret Slover 1799 April 27 

Letts, Hannah, and Philipp Noltz 1795 Sept. 19 

Letts, John, and Mary Lake 1797 Dec. 17 

Lewis, Sarah, and Samuel Moffett 1798 Mar. 4 

Light, Eliza, and Edwin Mathews 1800 Oct. 20 

Longstreet, Anne, and John Bastedo 1800 Aug. 28 

Lott, Frauces, and James Manshan ... 1798 Nov. 25 

Lott, Mary, and Garret Dennis. 1795 Dec. 26 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 635 

Ludwick, Simeon, and Susannah Prior 1797 

Lupp, Frances, and George Hopkins 1797 

M 

Macartney, Hugh, and Mary McLaughlin 1799 

McChesney, Lydia, and Samuel Dean 1800 

McCoy, William, and Anne Price 1800 

McDowell, Andrew, and Anne Wetherill 1795 

McDowell, Isabel], and Thomas Duncan. . 1798 

McDowell, Mary, and David Akermau 1798 

McKilds, Richard, and Catherine Allen 1795 

McLaughlin, Mary, and Hugh Macartney 1799 

Man, Elizabeth, and David Taylor . . 1796 

Manshan, James, and Frauces Lott 1798 

Marsh, Elizabeth, and David Ogden 1799 

Martin, Ann, and Daniel Molison 1794 

Martin, Francis, and Mercy Dunham . . 1799 

Martin, Martha, and James Ross 1796 

Martin, Mary, and David Fitz Randolph 1796 Mar. 6, 1 1 

Masler, Abraham, and Lydia Ogden 1800 

Matthews, Edwin, and Eliza Light 1800 

Mede, William, and Sarah Vreeland 1798 

Mence, Elizabeth, and William Ball 1800 

Mershon, , and John Beyen 1797 

Mershon, Anne, and David Slayback 1798 

Mershon, Robert, and Hannah Perrine 1795 

Miller, Frederik, and Anne Rogers 1799 

Miller, George, and Mary Hulet 1800 

Miller, John, and Margaret Hoglin 1800 

Miller, Vincent, and Mary Newton 1800 

Minor, Anne, and John Barkelow 1797 

Mitchell, James, and Ruth Leamon 1799 

Moffett, Samuel, and Sarah Lewis 1798 

Molat, Abraham, and Margaret Hartman 1800 

Molison, Daniel, and Anna Martin 1 795 

Moore, Britton, and Rebecca Mouut 1795 

Moore, Esther, and Daniel Lanning. . . 1798 

Morgan, Daniel, and Catherine Driskell 1798 

Morgan, Ester, and Cornelius Lamberson 1799 

Morgan, Margret, and Amos Stout 1795 

Morris, Elisha, to Deborah Burges, by Rev. Peter Wilson 1800 

Morris, Elizabetb, and Ephraim Thomall 1797 

Morris, Gitty, and Samuel Morris 1797 

Morris, Nancy, and Alexander Myers 1798 

Morris, Samuel, and Gitty Morris 1797 

Morrison, Catherine, and John Hooper 1799 April 22 



Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


2 


July 





Jan. 


29 


Aug. 


7 


Dec. 


22 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


25 


Sept. 


28 


July 


— 


Dec. 


19 


Nov. 


25 


June 


29 


April 


20 


Feb. 


23 


April 


24 


Mar. 6. 


11 


Sept. 


19 


Oct. 


20 


Dec. 


15 


Jan. 


27 


Mar. 


30 


April 


8 


Mar. 


18 


Feb. 


7 


Oct. 


30 


May 


17 


Nov. 


1 


Nov. 


29 


Nov. 


17 


Mar. 


4 


May 


7 


April 


20 


Mar. 


11 


Oct. 


8 


Dec. 


31 


April 


26 


Nov. 


25 


Dec. 


31 


Jan. 


1 


May 


31 


May 


28 


May 


31 



636 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Morse, William, ami Anne Hollman 1799 May 6 

Mount, Hugh Taylor, aud Catherine Johnson ... 1798 June 25 

Mount, Achsa, and John Ely 1800 Nov. 2(5 

Mount, Elijah, and Mary Mount 1800 Jan. 1 

Mount, Hannah, and John Mount 1 800 April 24 

Mount, John, and Rebecca Perrine 1796 Dec. 28 

Mount, John, and Hannah Mount 1800 April 24 

Mount, Mary, and Elijah Mount 1800 Jan. 1 

Mount, Rachel, and Samuel Hutchinson 1797 Nov. 23 

Mount, Rebecca, and Britton Moore 1795 Mar. 1 1 

Mount, Rebecca, and Alias Cowenhoven 1800 Feb. 19 

Mount, William, and Catherine Carlisle 1795 Mar. 12 

Muudy, Abraham, and Huldah Mundy 1798 Mar. 5 

Mundy, Azariah, and Gertrude Drake 1795 Nov. 28 

Muudy, Edward, and Deborah Barrow 1 796 Mar. 5 

Mundy, Ezekiel, and Lovice Mundy 1796 April 16 

Mundy, Huldah, and Abraham Mundy 1 798 Mar. 5 

Mundy, Lovice, aud Ezekiel Mundy 1796 April 16 

Myers, Alexander, and Nancy Morris 1798 May 28 

N 

Navis, Joanna, and John Bennet 1797 Mar. 2 

Neppa, Garret, and Persilla Sutten, by Heury Lafferty 1800 Feb. 1 

Newton, Catharine, and Jonathan Ruuyon 1800 April 22 

Newton, Mary, and Vincent Miller 1800 Nov. 1 

Nixon, Sarah, and Bamt Gulick 1797 Feb. 12 

Noltz, Philipp, and Hauuah Letts 1795 Sept. 19 

Norman, Joseph, and Susannah Scott 1800 Aug. 1 2 

Nutt, Anne,, aud Thomas Butcher 1794 April 7 

Nutt, Jane, and Silas Cooke 1800 Nov. 9 

o 

Ockaman.i Abraham, and Tempe- Talmage 1797 Mar. 15 

Occurman.l James, and Lydia Cheesman . . 1797 Feb. 17 

Ogden, David, aud Elizabeth Marsh 1799 June 29 

Ogden, Lydia, aud Abraham Masler 1800 Sept. 19 

Ogden, Mercy, and Peter Overt 1798 Oct. 27 

Osburn, Samuel, and Sarah Robins 1797 July 6 

Overt, Mary, and John Sarvice 1798 July 1 

Overt, Peter, aud Mary Ogden 1798 Oct. 27 

P 

Page, Ezekiel, and Sarah Dye 1798 Sept. 20 

Pangman, Richard, aud Mary Dunham 1798 July 9 

1 Ackermau. 2 Temperance. 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 637 

P axton. John , and Theodosia Tindall 1798 

Pa xton, Marg ret, and William Tindall 1797 

Pereton, John, and Anne Provost 1795 

Penuy, Amos, and Sarah Bishop IT' 1 ? 

Periue, Margaret, ami Henry Dilinghast 1798 

Perine, Peter, and Hannah Dye 1800 

Perine, Sarah, aud John Rue 1800 

Perrine, Catharine, and Samuel Perrine 1798 

Perrine, Hannah, and Robert Mershon ... 1795 

Perrine, John, aud Elizabeth Riggs 1799 

Perrine, Lydia, and Alexander Snediker 1799 

Perrine, Margaret, and James Cook 1800 

Perrine, Martha, and Isaac Dye 179-4 

Perrine, Rebecca, aud John Mount 1796 

Perrine, Peter, aud Auue Duncan 1799 

Perrine, Samuel, and Catherine Perrine 1798 

Phillips, Thomas, and Margaret Atchley 1799 

Post, William, aud Mary Coveuhoven 1799 

Poter, Mary, and Ephraim Soper 1796 

Potter, Mary, and Joseph Thorn 1797 

Potts, Susannah, aud Daniel Herbert 1798 

Prendergrast, James, and Martha Stevenson 1798 

Price, Auue, and William McCoy . 1800 

Price, Ebeuezer, and Mary Brown 1798 

Prior, Susannah, and Simeon Ludwick 1797 

Provost, Anne, and John Pereton 1795 

Pullen, Francis, aud Euphemia Breese 1799 

Pulleu, Johu, aud Catherine Breese 1799 

Pullen, Lydia, and Jacob Blakely 1800 

R 

Randolph, Sarah, and George Drake 1798 

Ray, Samuel, aud Mary Combs 1796 

Read, James, and Elizabeth Corbet • 1797 

Reed, Lucretia, and Richard Skillhoru 1797 

Reynolds, Elizabeth, and Napthali Streeter 1798 

Reynolds, Johu, and Anne Cole 1800 

Reynolds, Lucia, and William Boudeu 1797 

Rice, Margaret, aud John Brown 1798 

Richmond, John, and Mary Wiser 1798 

Rickets, James, aud Ruth Disbrow 1794 

Riggs, Benjamin, and Elizabeth Combs. . 1796 

Riggs, Elizabeth, aud Johu Perrine IV 99 

Roache, Nelly, and John Kelsey 1800 

Robtius, Mary, and Isaac Breese 1799 

Robins, Sarah, and Samuel Osburu 1797 



Dec. 


26 


Feb. 


15 


Dec 


24 


Nov. 


16 


Feb. 


1 


April 


2 


Dec. 


28 


Jan. 


24 


Mar. 


18 


Oct. 


2 


Jau. 


9 


Sept. 


18 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


28 


Jan. 


9 


Jan. 


24 


Sq.t. 


15 


Jan. 


24 


Nov. 


28 


Nov. 


22 


Dec. 


20 


Jan. 


18 


Aug. 


7 


Mar. 


11 


Dec. 


5 


Dec. 


24 


Jan. 


31 


Jau. 


31 


Feb. 


16 


Feb. 


10 


Oct. 


10 


Oct. 


31 


Sept 


. 10 


Feb. 


18 


Dec. 


17 


Jan. 


1 


Feb. 


22 


JUU€ 


! 6 


April 2 


Oct. 


23 


Oct. 


2 


) July 


21 


1 Jau. 


6 


' July 


6 



638 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Robins, William, arid Elizabeth Forman 1798 April 17 

Rogers, Abraham, and Elizabeth Hutchinson 1799 Feb. 6 

Rogers, Anne, and Frederik Miller 1799 Feb. 7 

Rogers, Britton, and Sarah Applegate 1799 Dec. 26 

Rollar, George, and Catherine Johnson 1797 Dec. 12 

Rose, Betsey, and Henry Bottle 1800 Dec. 30 

Ross, James, and Martha Martin 1786 April 24 

Rue, John, and Sarah Perine 1800 Dec. 28 

Rue, Wm., and Margaret Avvin 1800 April 10 

Rulong, Mary, and John Eldridge 1799 Dec. 18 

Ruunion, Joseph, and Elizabeth Sutton. 1795 Nov. 22 

Ruuyon, Anne, and Okey Van-hise 1800 Feb. 17 

Runyon, Jane, and Runey Fitz Randolph 1796 Mar. 5 

Ruuyon, Jonathan, and Catharine Newton 1800 April 22 

Ryder, William, and Jane Sarvice 1797 June 4 

Ryneer, Joseph, and Hannah Disbrow 1800 Mar. 4 

s 

Sanders, Catherine, and Alexander Woods 1798 April 30 

Sarvice, Jane, and William Ryder 1797 June 4 

Sarvice, John, and Mary Overt 1798 July 1 

Savage, Mary, and Thomas Howell 1800 July 30 

Schenk, Abraham, and Sarah Schenk 1797 Mar. 22 

Schenck, John, and Elizabeth Tomas 1800 Nov. 20 

Schenk, Sarah, and Abraham Schenck 1797 Mar. 22 

Schenck, William, and Sarah Wetherill 1798 April 3 

Schuremau, Thomas, and Catharine Applegate, by David Comfort.. . .1800 Sept. 2 

Scott, Susannah, and Joseph Norman 1800 Aug. 12 

Seamon, Deborah, and Cornelius Compton 1800 April 6 

Shardlow, William, and Margaret Williams 1800 May 22 

Sharp, Rachel, and Jeremiah Field 1798 May 31 

Shaw, Mary, and Micajah Eaton 1797 April 10 

Shotwell, Nancy, and Lewis Thornall. 1796 Mar. 29 

Silcocks, James, and Ann Willson 1800 Sept. 18 

Sillcocks, Isaac, and Elizabeth Hall 1788? Feb. 5 

Silver, David, and Hannah Davis. 1799 Mar. 13 

Silvers, Theodosia, and Jesse Brown 1800 Mar. 11 

Siiuonson, Elizabeth, and John Funk 1795 Sept. 9 

Skill horn, Richard, and Lucretia Reed 1797 Sept. 10 

Slayback, David, and Anne Mershou 1798 April 8 

Slover, Luke, and Eleanor Solomon 1798 April 9 

Slover, Margret, and Ezekiel Letts 1799 April 27 

Smith, Henry, and Elizabeth Brown 1797 June 11 

Smith, Joseph, and Rachel Hutchinson 1798 Nov. 18 

Smith, Samuel H , of Philadelphia, and Margaret Bayard 1800 Sept. 29 

Smock, John, and Mary Fall 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 639 

Snediker, Alexander, and Lydia Perrine 1799 

Snediker, Catherine, and Simon Kinney 1708 

Snediker, Catharine, and Joseph Hutchinson 1800 

Snediker, James, and Anne Cox 1798 

Snowden, David, and Eliza Ashmore, by John Van Dike, Justice 1800 

Snyder, Mary, and John Disbrow 1800 

Solomon, Eleanor, and Luke Slover 1798 

Soper, Ephraim, and Mary Poter 1796 

Soper, Eunice, and Nathaniel Soper 1796 

Soper, Israel, and Elizabeth Dnunmond , 1797 

Soper, Nathaniel, and Eunice Soper ... 1796 

Soper, Runyon, and Susannah Kelly 1796 

Sott, Jane, and George Foster 1800 

South, Ezekiel, and Mary Covenhoven 1799 

South, Sarah, and Jesse Dauser 1797 

Sowdeu, Jonathan, and Lydia Applegate 1791 

Staudley, Richard, and Elizabeth Stolts 1799 

Stephenson, Charity, and John Brackner 1798 

Stephenson, Martin, and Joanna Stryker 1797 

Stevenson, Martha, and James Prendergrast. 1798 

Stiles, Aaron, and Sarah Blakely.. 1800 

Stillwell, Rebeckah, and Davis Blackley 1800 

Stivers, Elizabeth, and James Compton 1797 

Stolts, Elizabeth, and Richard Standley . . 1799 

Stout, Amos, and Margret Morgan 1795 

Stout, Charity, and Asher Vaughan 1799 

Stout, Luce, and Timothy Core 1796 

Streeter, Napthali, and Elizabeth Reynolds 1798 

Stryker, Joanna, and Martin Stephenson 1797 

Stults. William, and Anne Sylvester 1800 

Suidam, Jane, and Lucas Knight 1800 

Sutrin, Margret, and Robert Davison 1797 

Sutten, Persilla, and Garret Neppa 1800 

Sutton, Catherine, and Garret Wilson 1795 

Sutton, Elizabeth, and Joseph Rnnuion 1795 

Sutton, Elizabeth, and Francis Carman 1798 

Suydam, Jarol, and Anne Doyle 1800 

Sylvester, Anne, and William Stults 1800 

Sylvester, Elizabeth, and Samuel Groves 1799 



Talmage, Susannah, and Cornelius van de Vender 1797 

Talmage, Tempe, 1 and Abraham Ockaman .... 1797 

Taylor, David, and Elizabeth Man 1796 

1 T< mperance Tallmage, wife of Abraham Ackerman, joined the New Brunswick church. 
March 8, 1801, 



Jan. 


9 


May 


6 


Aug. 


10 


Oct. 


14 


Mar. 


2 


Mar. 


13 


April 


9 


Nov. 


28 


May 


7 


Jan. 


1 


May 


7 


May 


7 


Feb. 


20 


Feb. 


19 


July 


23 


Dec. 


30 


Jan. 


25 


Jan. 


11 


May 


1 


Jan. 


18 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


19 


May 


31 


Jan. 


25 


Nov. 


25 


Sept. 


1 


Aug. 


31 


Feb. 


18 


May 


1 


Jan. 


30 


Jan. 


4 


Nov. 


6 


Feb. 


1 


Dec. 


24 


Nov. 


22 


Nov. 


25 


Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


30 


Sept. 


18 


Jan. 


16 


Mar. 


15 


Dec. 


19 



640 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Taylor, Elizabeth, and Thomas Hutchinson 1800 June 12 

Taylor, Jane, and Benjamin Hutchinson 1800 Dec. 10 

Taylor, Joseph, and Elizabeth Yard 1800 Jan. 5 

Taylor, Mary, and John Fisher 1799 June 1 1 

Thixton, Lewis, and Mary Compton 1797 Jan. 26 

Thomas, Mary, aud Philipp Higbe 1796 May 10 

Thomson, Mary, and Peter Bennet 1800 July 23 

Thorn, Joseph, and Mary Potter 1797 Nov. 22 

Thornall, Elizabeth, and Dugal Campbell 1796 June 6 

Thoruall, Ephraim, and Elizabeth Morris 17y7 Jan. 1 

Thornall, Lewis, aud Nancy Shot well 1796 Mar. 29 

Thorp, David, and Charlotte Arnold 1795 Oct. 25 

Tindall, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Hutchinson 1798 Dec. 26 

Tindall, Theodosia, and John Paxton 1 798 Dec. 26 

Tindall, William, and Margret Paxton ; 1797 Feb. 15 

Tindall, William, aud Christian Conover 1797 April 27 

Titus, William (girl), and William Ellis 1798 Oct. 4 

Tomas, Elizabeth, and John Schenck 1800 Nov. 20 

Truxton, Sarah, and Henry Benbridge 1796 Aug. 11 

u 

Updike, Samuel, and Helena Grover 1800 Feb. 4 

V 

Van, John, aud Catharine van Horn 1796 Dec. 10 

van Brunt, Hendrick, aud Sarah Jaques 1796 Aug. 27 

van de Vender, Cornelius, and Susannah Talmage 1797 Jan. 16 

Vanduzer, Thomas, and Nette Hart 1800 Oct. 5 

Vanhise, , and Abigail Hanse 1796 Feb. 

Van-hise, Okey, and Anne Runyon 1800 Feb. 17 

van Horn, Catherine, and John Van 1796 Dec. 10 

van Kirk, Andrew, and Catherine Hartupee 1799 Sept. 20 

van Pelt, Elizabeth, and John Anderson ....1799 Feb. 25 

Vauzandt, Catharine, and John Denniston 1795 Dec. 24 

Vaughan, Anne, aud William Williams 1800 Dec. 25 

Vaughan, Asher, and Charity Stout 1799 Sept. I 

Vaughan, Sarah, aud Ambrose Green 1800 Oct. 18 

Vaughn, Permelia, and Benjamin Hartman 1800 Aug. 25 

Voorhies, Sarah, and William Laid (Lard?) 1799 April 4 

Voorhees, William, and Haunah Fisher 1800 Oct. 15 

Voorhees, , and Ilartshorue Willet 1800 Mar. 16 

Vreeland, Sarah, and William Mede 1798 Dec. 15 

w 

Walker, Nathaniel, and Mary Hart 1798 Feb. 15 

Warn, Mary, and James Higgins 1797 May 28 



MIDDLESEX COUNTY CLERK'S MARRIAGE RECORDS. 641 

Watkins, Elizabeth, ;iud Charles Ford 179S Oct. 18 

Webbs, Isaac, and Hannah Inland 1796 Jan. 13 

Wetherill, Anne, and Andrew McDowell 1795 Dec. 22 

Wetherill, Sarah, and William Schenck 1798 April :s 

Wheelock, Gideon, aud Elizabeth Handley 1800 July 19 

Wicoff, I rittee, and James Bodiue. ... 1798 Jan. 15 

Wiley, Mary, and Joseph Crossgrpve 1799 Sept. 4 

Willet, Hartshorne, and Voorhees 1800 Mar. 16 

Williams, Margaret, and William Shardlow .-. . 1800 May 22 

Williams, Sarah, and Michael Dews 1797 Dec. 24 

Williams, William, and Anne Vaughan 180J Dec. 25 

Williamson, Mary, and John Christopber Cox 1800 May 25 

Willson, Ann, and James Silcocks 1800 Sept. 18 

Wilson, Garret, and Catharine Sutton 1795 Dec. 24 

Wilson, Isaac, and Elizabeth Hutchinson 1799 Dec. 11 

Wiser, Mary, aud John Richmond T 1798 June 6 

Woods, Alexander, and Catharine Sanders 1798 April 30 

Wright, Jesse, and Catherine Applegate 1798 Sept. 2 

Y 

Yard, Elizabeth, and Joseph Taylor 1S0O Jan. 5 

Young, Josephus, and Elizabeth Brown 1800 June 29 

Youngs, John, aud Marey Dokes 1800 June 15 



Additional Marriages, for 1800. 



A 

Applegate, Catherine, and Thomas Schureman 1800 Sept. 2 

Ashmore, Eliza, and David Suowden 1800 Mar. 2 

Avvin, Margaret, and Wm. Rue 18U0 April 10 

B 

Ball, William, aud Elizabeth Mence 1800 

Barker, Matilda, aud W. Jackson 1800 

Bastedo, John, aud Aune Longstreet 1800 

Bayard, Margaret, and Samuel H. Smith 1800 

Beuuet, Peter, and Mary Thomson 1800 

Blakely, Jacob, and Lydia Pullen 1800 

Blakely, Sarah, and Aaron Stiles 1800 

Blackley, Davis, of New York, and Rebeckah Stillwell 1800 

Bottle, Henry, and Betsey Rose, by Joseph Clark, V. D. M 1800 

Browu, Elizabeth, and Josephus Young 1800 

Brown, Jesse, and Theodosia Silvers 1800 

50 



Jan. 


27 


May 


18 


Aug. 


28 


Sept. 


29 


July 


23 


Feb. 


6 


Feb. 


4 


Oct. 


19 


Dec. 


30 


June 


29 


Mar. 


11 



642 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Brown, Lydia, and James Clark 1800 June 8 

Buderow, Humphrey, and Maria Lane 1800 Oct. 20 

Burges, Deborah, and Elisha Morris 1800 Dec. 31 

C 

Cavillier, Henry, and Sally Gramo 1800 July 17 

Clark, James, and Lydia Brown 1800 June 8 

Cole, Anne, and John Reynolds 1800 Dec. 17 

Compton, Cornelius, and Deborah Seamon 1800 April 6 

Conover, Davis, and Miss Ghulick, by Samuel Suowdeu 1800 Feb. 10 

Cook. James, and Margaret Perrine 1800 Sept. 18 

Cooke, Silas, and Jane Nutt 1800 Nov. 9 

Cortelyou, Simon, and Dinah Hartson, by Rev. Ira Coudict 1800 Nov. 23 

Cowenhoven, Alias, and Rebecca Mount . . 1800 Feb. 19 

Cowenhoven, John, and Lydia Duucau 1800 Aug. 27 

Cox, John Christopher, and Mary Williamson .... 1800 May 25 

Cox, Joseph, and Deborah Kinnan 1800 Jan. 9 

Cule, Elizabeth, and David Johnston 1800 May 24 

D 

Dean, Samuel, and Lydia McChesney 1800 Jan. 29 

Disbrow, Hannah, and Joseph Ryneer 1800 Mar. 4 

Disbrow, John, and Mary Snyder . . 1800 Mar. 13 

Dokes, Marey, and John Youngs 1800 June 15 

Doyle, Anne, and Jarol Suydam 1800 Nov. 23 

Duncan, Lydia, and John Cowenhoven , 1800 Aug. 27 

Dye, Hannah, and Peter Perine. . 1800 April 2 



Eastburn, Mary Ann, and William Jones 1800 Dec. 30 

Ely, John, and Achsa Mount 7 1800 Nov. 26 

Ely, Richard, and Sarah Hartman 1800 Aug. 13 



Fagan, Patience, and William Johnston . . 1800 

Fisher, Hannah, and William Voorhees 1800 

Fisher, Mary, and Jesse Hutchinson 1800 

Forbs, Cleveland A., of Essex Co., N. J., and Susan Foster 1800 

Foster, George, and Jane Sott 1800 

Foster, Susan, and Cleveland A. Forbs 1800 



Ghulick, Miss, aud Davis Conover 1800 Feb. 10 

Gramo, Sally, and Henry Cavillier 1800 July 17 

Green, Ambrose, and Sarah Vaughan 1800 Oct. 18 

Grover, Helena, and Samuel Updike 1800 Feb. 4 



Jan. 


20 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


31 


May 


12 


Feb. 


20 


May 


12 



Piseataway Seventh Day Baptist dwell Marriage Records, 

1745-1776. 



About 1700 or 1701 a number of the members of the Piscataqua Baptist Church, 
in Piscataqua township, Middlesex county, withdrew from that church and formed a 
separate congregation, observing the seventh day of the week as the Sabbath. They 
chose a minister and deacon, October 11, 1705, and in the fourth month, 1707, organ- 
ized a Seventh Day Baptist Church, with eighteen members. Edmond Dunham, one 
of the originators of the church, having been ordained at Westerly, E. I., in 1705, 
was the first pastor; he had been a lay preacher in the Piscataqua Church since 1689. 
He continued pastor of the new church until his death, March 7, 1734, in his 73d 
year. He was succeeded in 1745 by his son, the Kev. Jonathan Dunham, who had 
preached to the congregation as a licentiate for many years. He occupied the pulpit 
until March 11, 1777, when he died of the smallpox. The next pastor was the Rev. 
Nathan Rogers, ordained March 12, 1787, at Westerly, R. I., and who the same year as- 
sumed charge of the Piscataway church. The early records of the church have not 
been preserved. Some years ago Mr. Oliver B. Leonard, now of Perth Amboy, found 
in Western Pennsylvania the marriage records which had been kept by the Rev. Jona- 
than Dunham, during his pastorate, 1745 to 1776. He made a careful copy of the 
records, and has kindly placed the same at the disposal of the editor for publication 
in this volume. 

A 

Arnold, John, and Hannah Corinson 1765 Dec. 8 

Ashton, Moses, and Susannah Blackford 1746 Feb. 27 

Ayers, Ann, and John Dunn 1764 Jan. 15 

Ayers, Esther, and Jarman Davis 1751 Oct. 15 

B 

Bagger, Mary, and Nicholas Mundy 1768 Jan. 17 

Bagger, Samuel, and Siscel Thomas 1748 Jan. 2 

Barto, James, and Catharine Marlat 1746 May 6 

Berrien, Martha, and Eli Dunham 1761 Mar. 18 

Blackford, Mary, and Benjamin Laing 1746 May 19 

Blackford, Susannah, and Moses Ashton 1746 Feb. 27 

Bloomfield, Kozia, and Abraham Lufbery 1759 Nov. 28 

Bloomfield, Mary, and Robert Martin 1758 Nov. 30 

Bonham, Hezekiah, and Mary Bouham 1762 Mar. 17 

Bonham, Mary, and Hezekiah Bonham 1762 Mar. 17 

Bonham, Sarah, and Malachi Fitz Randolph 1746 Oct. 7 

Burgess, Anna, and Phineas Dunn . . 1767 Oct. 11 



Oct. 


23 


Sept. 


30 


July 


30 


Feb. 


1 


Feb. 


25 


Mar. 


30 


Feb. 


26 


Dec. 


8 


May 


23 


Dec. 


31 


Oct. 


15 


April 


9 



644 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

C 

Clawson, Zachariah, and Johanna Whitehead 1751 

Collins, Patience, and Ebenezer Giles. 1768 

Combs, Mary, and Jobn Dowdeu 1747 

Compton. Jobn, and Sarah Morgan 1763 

Conger, Dorcas, and Daniel Waldron 1750 

Cougar, John, and Mary Dunham. 1768 

Coriel, Agnes, and Andrew Smalley 1746 

Corinson, Hannah, aud Johu Arnold 1765 

D 

Davis, Esther, and Isaac Fourat 1768 

Davis, Isaac, and Jane Dunham 1771 

Davis, Jarman, and Esther Ayres 1751 

Dayton, Jonathan, and Elizabeth Hull 1746 

Denuis, Joseph, and Anna Drake. 1750 

Dowden, Johu, aud Mary Combs 1747 July 30 

Doyle, Elizabeth, aud William Smith 1 779 

Drake, Andrew, and Rebecca Dunham 1764 Feb. 7 

Drake, Anna, and Joseph Dennis. 1750 

Drake, Elizabeth, and David Pound 1760 

Drake, Reuben, and Sarah F. Randolph 1768 

Duud, Benjamin, aud Mary Roy 1758 

Dunu. Daniel, and Sarah F. Randolph 1775 

Dunu, Elizabeth, and Thomas Filz Randolph 1755 

Dunn, Ephraiui, and Isabel Dunn 1766 

Dunn, Eunice, and Jonathan Dunham, Jr .... 1774 

Dunu, Francis, aud Sarah Dunn 1765 

Dunn, Hugh, and Rachel Moore 1758 

Dunn, Isabel, and Epbraim Dunn 1766 

Dunn, Jane, and Joseph Runyon. 1765 

Dunn, Jeremiah, Jr., aud Mary Fitz Randolph 1765 

Dunu, John, aud Ann Ayers 1764 

Dunn, Joseph, and Dinah Dunham 1746 

Dunn, Justus, and Experience Stelle 17(!0 

Duun, Mary, aud David Dunham 1766 

Dunn, Phineas, and Anna Burgess 1767 

Dunn, Sarah, and Frances Duun 1765 

Dunham, Benajah, and Hannah Martin 1746 

Dunham, Benew, and Mary Heath 1757 

Dunham, Daniel, and Elizabeth Martin 1749 

Dunham, David, and Mary Dunn .... 1766 

Dunham, Dinah, and Joseph Dunn 1746 

Dunham, Eli, and Martha Berrien 1761 

Dunham, Elijah, and Mary Sharp 1751 

Dunham, Hepzibali, and Samuel Walker 1769 April 25 



Mar. 


18 


July 


7 


Dec. 


28 


Nov. 


5 


May 


27 


Oct. 


15 


Mar. 


1 


Aug. 


18 


Oct. 


15 


Dec. 


25 


April 


23 


Jan. 


15 


Dec. 


10 


Oct, 


5 


Dec. 


17 


Oct, 


11 


Feb. 


5 


Aug. 


2 


Dec. 




Dec, 


17 


Dec. 


10 


Mar. 


18 


April 


14 



PISCATAWAY BAPTIST CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 64- 

Dunham, Jane, and Isaac 1 >avis 1771 

Dunham, Jonathan, Jr., and Eunice Dunn 1774 

Dunham, Jonathan, and Sarah Lenox 1776 

Dunham, Mary, and John Congar 1768 

Dunham, Mercy, and Richard Lenox 1746 

1 Mmham, Rebecca, and Andrew Drake 1764 

Dunham, Ruth, and James Martin 1746 

Dunham, Samuel, ami Mary Lucas 1750 

Dunham, Susannah, and Benjamin Prigmore 1752 

Dunham, Tabitha, and Lambert Merrell 1763 

F 

Fisher, John, and Anna Hartwick 1766 

Fitz Randolph, Catharine, and Israel Thornell 1753 

Fitz Randolph, Jacob, and Catharine Smalley 1747 

Fitz Randolph, James, and Mary Moore 1765 

Fitz Randolph, Malachi, and Sarah Bonham 1746 

Fitz Randolph, Margaret, and Samuel Fitz Randolph 1761 

Fitz Randolph, Mary, and Jeremiah Dunn, Jr 1765 

Fitz Randolph, Mary, and Gabriel Laboyteux 1772 

Fitz Randolph, Samuel, and Margaret F. Randolph 1761 

Fitz Randolph, Sarah, and Reuben Drake 1768 

Fitz Randolph, Sarah, and Daniel Dunu 1775 

Fitz Randolph, Thomas, and Elizabeth Dunu . . 1755 

Fourat, Isaac, and Esther Davis 1768 

Freeland, Mary, and Robert Stewart 1768 

G 

Giles, Ebenezer, and Patience Collins 1768 

Giles, Mary, and Hopewell Wilson 1771 

H 

Hall, Elizabeth, and Jonathan Dayton 1746 

Hartwick, Anna, and John Fisher 1766 

Heath, Mary, and Benew Dunham 1757 

Hempseed, Jeremiah, and Martha McMichel 1750 

L 

Laboyteux, Gabriel, and Mary F. Randolph 1772 

Ladner, Anna, and Peter Martin 1748 

Laing, Benjamin, and Mary Blackford 1746 

Lenox, James, and Ruth Manuing 1748 

Lenox, Richard, and Mercy Dunham 1746 

Lenox, Sarah, and Jonathan Dunham 1776 

Lucas, Elizabeth, and John Olephant. 1760 

Lucas, Mary, and Samuel Dunham 1750 

Lufbery, Abraham, and Kezia Bloomrield . 1759 



Dec. 


31 


Mar. 


1 


Jan. 


24 


Mar. 


30 


Feb. 


12 


Feb. 


7 


Feb. 


25 


May 


8 


Jan. 


8 


Nov. 


29 


Sept. 


14 


Jan. 


2 


Nov. 


12 


April 


21 


Oct. 


7 


Mar. 


25 


April 


23 


Dec. 


31 


Mar. 


25 


July 


7 


Nov. 


5 


May 


27 


May 


23 


Nov. 


12 


Sept. 


30 


Sept. 


26 


April 


9 


Sept. 


14 


Aug. 


2 


May 


10 


Dec. 


31 


Dec. 




May 


19 


Feb. 


25 


Jau. 


24 


Oct. 


21 


May 


8 


Nov. 


28 



646 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

M 

Marlat, Catharine, and James Barto 1746 May 6 

Manning, Eutb, and James Lenox 1748 

Martin, Catharine, and William Shreeve 1755 Nov. 12 

Martin, Elizabeth, and Daniel Dunham 1749 Dec. 

Martin, Elizabeth, and Ephraim Soper 1768 June 9 

Martin Hannah, and Benajah Dunham 1746 Feb. 5 

Martin, Jacob, and Elizabeth 1764 Feb. 22 

Martin, James, and Ruth Dunham 1746 Feb. 25 

Martin, Peter, and Anna Ladner 1748 Dec. 

Martin, Robert, and Mary Bloomfield 1758 Nov. 30 

McMichel, Martha, and Jeremiah Hempseed 1750 May 10 

Merrell, Lambert, and Tabitha Dunham 1763 Nov. 29 

Moore, Mary, and James Fitz Randolph 1765 April 21 

Moore, Rachel, and Hugh Dunn 1758 Aug. 18 

Morgan, Sarah, and John Compton 1763 Feb. 1 

Mnndy, Nicholas, and Mary Bagger 1768 Jan. 17 

o 

Olephant, John, and Elizabeth Lucas 1760 Oct. 21 

Osmun, Catharine, and Peter Sutton 1762 Dec. 21 

P 

Pound, David, and Elizabeth Drake. 1760 Mar. 18 

Preston, Sarah, and Edward Robertson 1764 Nov. 27 

Prigmore, Benjamin, and Susannah Dunham 1752 Jan. 8 

R 

Robertson, Edward, and Sarah Preston 1764 Nov. 27 

Roy, Mary, and Benjamin Dunn. 1758 Dec. 28 

Runyon, Elizabeth, and Jonas Sutton 1764 Sept. 27 

Runyon, Joseph, and Jane Dunn 1765 Dec. 25 

Ruth, Lawrence, and Elizabeth Smalley 1745 Sept. 19 

s 

Sharp, Mary, and Elijah Dunham 1751 April 14 

Shreeve, William, and Anna Smalley 1747 Jan. 6 

Shreeve, William, and Catharine Martin 1755 Nov. 12 

Smalley, Andrew, and Agnes Coriell 1746 Feb. 26 

Smalley, Anna, and William Shreeve 1747 -Jan. 6 

Smalley, Catharine, and Jacob Fitz Randolph 1747 Nov. 12 

Smalley, Elizabeth, and Lawrence Ruth . . . 1745 Sept. 19 

Smith, William, and Elizabeth Doyle 1769 

Soper, Ephraim, and Elizabeth Martin 1768 June 9 

Stelle, Experience, and Justus Punn 1760 Oct. 5 

Stewart, Robert, and Mary F Iceland 1768 Nov. 12 



PISCATAWAY BAPTIST CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 647 

Sutton, Jonas, and Elizabeth Itunyon 1764 Sept. -11 

SuttoD, Peter, and Catharine Osmuu 1762 Dec. 21 

T 

Thomas, Siscel, and Samuel Bagger 1 7 is Jan. 2 

Thornell, Israel, and Catharine Fitz Randolph. 1753 Jan. 2 

w 

Waldron, Daniel, and Dorcas Conger 1750 Feb. 25 

Walker, Samuel, aud Hepzibah Dunham 1769 April "25 

Whitehead, Johanna, and Zachariah Clawson 1751 Oct. 23 

Wilson, Hopewell, and Mary Giles 1771 Sept. 26 



Seoteh Plains Baptist Church Marriage Records, 



1758-1761. 



The Scotch Plains Baptist Church was constituted September 8, 1747, by fifteen 
members from the Piscataqua Church. A building had been erected five years earlier, 
which was enlarged in 1759. The Rev. Benjamin Miller was the pastor from Febru- 
ary 13. 1748, until his death, November 14, 1781. He was succeeded by the Rev. 
William Vanhorn, in 1785. The early records of the church are quite imperfect. 
The following list of marriages performed by the Rev. Benjamin Miller was taken 
from the first book of church minutes by Mr. O. B. Leonard, of Perth Amboy : 

A 

Ackley, Zeakel, and Penelope Stephens 1759 

B 

Bedell, Ann, and William Darby 1761 Aug. 20 

Bishop, Jacob, and Esther Connet 1 701 July 28 

Blackford, Nathaniel, and Mary Daniels 1759 Aug. 20 

Butinhous, Daniel, aud Zeruiah Martin 1759 July 8 



Mar. 


14 


April 


6 


April 


14 


July 


29 


Dec. 


12 


July 


28 


Mar. 


15 


May 


10 


Aug. 


20 


Feb. 


19 


Feb. 


15 


Aug. 


20 


Mar. 


7 


Jan. 


7 



648 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

C 

Campbell, Hauuah, and Josepb Laing 1759 

Campbell, Neil, and Jenet McDaniel 1760 

Chandler, Stephen, and Susannah Martin 1759 

Cole, William, and Elizabeth Williamson 1761 

Compton, Jemima, and Thomas Squier 1759 

Connet, Esther, and Jacob Bishop 176 1 

Connet, Rebecca, and Jacob Winans 1759 

Cook, Alexander, and Elizabeth Sickles 1759 

D 

Daniels, Mary, and Nathaniel Blackford. . . . 1759 

Darby, Abigail, and John Wolverton 1759 

Darby, John and Rachel Squier 1759 

Darby, William, and Ann Bedell 176 1 

DeCamp, Aaron, and Mary Frazee , 1759 

Doty, Rachel, and Daniel Jones 1761 

E 

Estil, Unis, and John Johnson 1759 Nov. 6 

F 

Frazee, Mary, and Aaron DeCamp 1759 Mar. 7 

Frazee, Sarah, and John Sears 1759 Mar. 7 

H 

Hutchins, Samuel, and Anna Rains 1760 Oct. 12 

J 

Jennings, Jonathan, and Mary Tucker 1759 Aug. 20 

Johnson, John, and Unis Estil. . . 1759 Nov. 6 

Jones, Daniel, and Rachel Doty. . . 1761 Jan. 7 

Jones, Sarah, and Benjamin Osborn 176 L April 6 



Laing, Joseph, and Hannah Campbell 1759 Mar. 1 4 

Layton, Margaret, and Jonathan Parker 1758 Dec. 20 

Littell, James, and Rhoda Valentine 1761 Feb. 25 

M 

Macfield, Esther, and John Sears 1761 

Manning, John, and Rhoda Wooden 1758 

Marks, Phebe, and Ephraim Sutton. . : 1759 

Martin, Susannah, and Stephen Chandler. . . 1759 

Martin, Zeruiah, and Daniel Butinhous 1759 

McDaniel, Jenet, and Neil Campbell 1760 



Sept. 


15 


Dec. 


6 


Sept. 




April 


11 


July 


8 


April 


6 



SCOTCH PLAINS BAPTIST CHURCH MARRIAGE RECORDS. 649 

Moore, Rhoda, and William Pool. 1759 May 17 

Mundy, Hope, and John Mundy 1759 Mar. 30 

Mundy, John, and Hope Mundy 1759 Mar. 30 

o 

Osborn. Benjamin, and Sarah Jones 1701 April 6 

P 

Pangborn, Mary, arid Charles Roulsou 17(50 Jan. 28 

Pangborn, Richard, and Ruth 1761 May 2 

Parker, Jonathan, and Margaret Lay ton ... 1758 Dec. 20 

Pool, William, and Rhoda Moore . 1759 May 17 

R 

Rains, Anna, and Samuel Hutchins 1760 Oct. 12 

Roulson, Charles, and Mary Pangborn ... 1760 Jan. 28 

S 

Sears, John, and Sarah Frazee 1759 Mar. 7 

Seirs, John, and Esther Macfield 1761 Sept. 15 

Shotwell, Rachel, and Thomas Thompson 1769 Jan. 9 

Sickles. Elizabeth, and Alexander Ccok 1759 May 10 

Squier, Rachel, and John Darby .'... 1759 Feb. 15 

Squier, Thomas, and Jemima Compton 1759 Dec. 12 

Stephens, Penelope, and Zeakel Ackley 1759 

Sutton, Ephraiin, and Phebe Marks ... 1759 Sept. 

T 

Tucker, Mary, and Jonathan Jenniugs 1759 Aug. 20 

Thompson, Thomas, and Rachel Shotwell 1760 Jan. 9 

V 

Valentine, Rhoda, and James Littell 1761 Feb. 25 

w 

Williamson, Elizabeth, and William Cole 1761 July 29 

Winans, Jacob, and Rebecca Connet 1759 Mar. 15 

WolvertoD, John, and Abigal Darby 1759 Feb. 19 

Wooden, Rhoda, and John Manning 1758 Dec. 6 



51 



CHESTERFIELD (BURLINGTON COUNTY) FRIENDS' 
MONTHLY MEETING 

Marriage Records, 1686-1800. 



Note.— The following records were transcribed in 1881 for the New Jersey His- 
torical Society, by John P. Hutchinson, Esq., of Bordentown, from the original man- 
uscript volumes of Chesterfield Monthly Meeting. The manuscript gives all the facts 
in the records, but does not name all the witnesses at each marriage. The place 
where the marriage took place is given before the date. 

MALES. 
A 

Abbott, John, of Nottingham, Burlington county, husbandman, and Anne Man- 
leverer, of Chesterfield, spinster, dan. of Edmund and Anne, at the house of 

Matthew Watson 26th 3d mo. 1696 

Wituesses— Matthew Watson, Anne Watson, Matthew WatsoD, Jr., Marma- 
duke Watson, Mahlon Stacy, William Emley, Susan Farnsworth aud others. 
Abbott, John, of Nottingham (son of Timothy and Ann), aud Susannah Bullock, of 
New Hanover Township, dau. of Joseph and Elizabeth, at Upper Freehold 

Meeting 17th 9th mo. 1778 

Witnesses— William, Marmaduke, Samuel aud Lucy Abbott, Joseph, Eliz- 
abeth, George, Edith, Jemima, Elizabeth, Jr., John, Sarah, Rebecca and Amos 
Bullock, Abuer Wright and others. 
Abbott, William, of Nottingham (son of Timothy and Ann), and Helena Lawrie, of 
Nottingham, dau. of Thomas and Ann, at Chesterfield Meeting. 

13th 3d mo. 1783 

Witnesses— Samuel, Lucy, John, Jr., and Timothy Abbott, Thomas, Anne, 

James, Mary, Joseph M., William, Amelia, John and Achsah Lawrie, Benjamin 

and Hannah Lawtou aud others. 

Abbott, William, of Chesterfield (son of Timothy and Ann), aud Rebecca Holloway, 

of same place, dau. of James and Rebekah, at Chesterfield Meeting. 

11th 1st mo. 1787 
Witnesses — John, Susannah, Samuel, Abel aud David Abbott, Rebekah 
Nois, Benjamin and James Holloway, Joseph M. Lawrie, Joshua Wright, 
Thomas Newbold, Michael Taylor, William Harrison and others. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 65 I 

Allen, Ralph, of Shrewsbury, Monmouth Co. (son of Judiah and ), and Ann 

Wright, of New Hanover, dau. of Mahlon and Mary, at Upper Freehold Meet- 

ing 21st 10th mo. J 762 

Witnesses— Miriam and William Alien, Mahlon, Mary, David, Sarah, Isaac-, 
Jonathan, John, Stacey, Thomas, Jr., Robert, Joseph, Theodosia and Amos 
Wright, Joseph Borden, Win. Lawrie and others. 
Allen, Samuel, of Nottingham (son of Samuel and Ann), and Margaret Borden, of 

Upper Freehold, dau of , at Robin's Meeting House. 

6th 4th mo. 1785 
Witnesses— Mary, Lydia, Henry, Michael and Nathan Allen, Frances, 
Lydia, Sarah, Asher, William, Nathan and Joseph Borden, Isaac Antrum, Rob- 
ert Wright and others. 
Arney, Daniel, of Chesterfield (son of Joseph and Margaret), and Elizabeth Wright, 
of Bordentown, dau. of Israel and Alice, at Bordentown Meeting. 

3d 12th mo. 179-1 
Witnesses— Elizabeth Arney, Mary Arney, Sarah, John, Hannah, Fret w. 11 
and Isaac Wright, Stacy Potts, Jos. Kirkbride, Isaac Thorn, Marinaduke Wat- 
son, Jr., and others. 

B 

Barber, William, of Chesterfield Township, and Ann Burtice, of Nottingham, at Ches- 
terfield 7th 10th mo. 1784 

Witnesses — Isaac and Isaac Barber, Jr., James Lawrie, Anthony Bullock, 
Joseph Thorn, Joshua W. Satterthwait, Amos Wright and others. 

Beaumont, John, of Falls Township, Bucks Co., Peuna.. and Sarah Pancoast, of 
Mansfield Township, dan. of William, at Chesterfield. 17th 3d mo. 1741 

Witnesses — Hannah, William, Joseph, Joseph, Jr., Samuel, John, Seth, 
Elizabeth Mary, Abigail Mary and Mary Pancoast, Isaac Horner, Joseph Bor- 
den, Jr., Joseph Curtis and others. 
Black, John, of Chesterfield, and Sarah Rockhill, of Chesterfield, at Chesterfield. 

4ih 10th mo. 1706 
Witnesses— Edward, Mary, John and Mary Rockhill, Jr., Thomas Folkes, 
John Abbott, Daniel Farnsworth, Ambrose Field, Joseph Reckless, Samuel 
Taylor and others. 

Borden, Joseph, of Nottingham, and Rebekah Middleton, of Nottingham, at Chester- 
field 15th 2d mo. 1759 

Witnesses— Francis, Lydia, Mary and Francis Borden, Jr., Preserve Brown, 
Anthony Woodward, John Lawrie, David Kelley, James Lawrie and others. 

Brannin, John, of Chesterfield, and Rachel Vanderbeck, of Chesterfield, at Borden- 
town 5th 10th mo. 1791 

Witnesses — John, Sarah, Samuel and Sarah Brannin, Jr., Peter and Sarah 
Vanderbeck, John Curtis, Isaac Homer, Marmaduke Watson, Jr., Joshua Fen- 
nimore, Jr., and others. 

Brown, Preserve, of Philadelphia, Peuna., and Mary Sykes, of Chesterfield, dau. of 
John and Joanna, at Upper Springfield 21st 8th mo. 1 717 



652 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Witnesses — Thomas, John, Richard and Sarah Brown, John, Joanna, An- 
thony, Benjamin, Samuel and Joanna Sykes, Michael Newbold and John Kirk- 
bride, Jr., and others. 
Brown, Preserve, Jr., of Mansfield, and Mary French, of Mansfield, dau. of Richard 
and , at Chesterfield. . . 15th 8th mo. 1724 

Witnesses — Preserve, Abraham and Abraham Brown, Jr., Richard, Thomas, 
Richard, Jr., Thomas, Jr., French, Thomas Newbold, Joseph Newbold, Joshua 
Shreve, John Abbott and others. 
Brown, Richard, of Nottingham, and Sarah Taylor, of Chesterfield, at Chesterfield. 

15th 5th mo. 1755 

Witnesses— Mary, Mary, Jr., Preserve and William Brown, Samuel, Jr., 

John, Achsah, George, Anthony, Benjamin, Samuel, Medius 1 and Mary Taylor, 

John Sykes, Caleb Shreve and others. 

Bullock, George, of New Hanover (son of Joseph and Elizabeth), and Edith Wood, of 

Chesterfield, dau. of William and Hannah, at Springfield . . . 7th 2d mo. 1776 

Witnesses — Joseph, Elizabeth, Elizabeth, Jr., Susannah, Jemima and Re- 
bekah Bullock, William, Hannah, Polly, Ann and John Wood, Anthony and 
Margaret Bullock, Joseph Newbokl, Cleayton Newbold and others. 
Bullock, Joseph. Jr., of New Hanover (son of Joseph and Elizabeth), and Lydia Law- 
rie, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth Co., dau. of James and Mary, 
at Chesterfield 16th 3d mo. 1780 

Witnesses— Joseph, Elizabeth, Amos, George, Edith, Jemima, Rebecca, 
Elizabeth, Jr., and Anthony Bullock, James, Mary, Thomas, Joseph, Thomas 
Lawrie, Jr., John Abbott, Joseph Borden, William Abbott, Michael Rogers, 
Jr., and others. 

Bullock, Anthony, of New Hanover (son of Joseph and Elizabeth, dec'd), and Hannah 
Wood, of Chesterfield, dau. of William and Hannah, deed, at Chesterfield. 

10th 5th mo. 1798 
Witnesses — George, Sarah, David, Isaac, Margaret, John, Jr., and Eliza- 
beth Bullock, Margaret, Elizabeth and Thomas N. Wood, Thomas and Joseph 
M. Lawrie and others. 

Bunting, Samuel, of Chesterfield, and Mary Folkes, of Chesterfield, dau. of Thomas 

Folkes, at Francis Davenport's house - .... 18th 9th mo. 1684 

Witnesses — Thomas S. and Thomas, Jr., Foulks, Francis Davenport, Pe- 
ter Fretwell, Robert Murfiu, Samuel Sykes and others. 

Bunting, William, of Chesterfield, and Abigail Horseman, of Monmouth county, dau. 

of Marmaduke and 11th 8th mo. 1716 

Witnesses — John, Sr., Sarah, Sr., Samuel, Mary, Anthony and Phebe 
Bunting, John Bunting, Jr , Marmaduke, Sarah and Susannah Horseman, Wm. 
Wood, Joseph Reckless and others. 

Bunting, Joshua, of Chesterfield, and Mary Large, of Nottingham, at Chesterfield. 

17th 11th mo. 1785 

1 Medius. in the sense of junior, or second ? 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 653 

Witnesses— Amy, Samuel, Elizabeth, Mary, Rebecca Bunting, Amos, Lydia, 
Elizabeth, Hannah, Anne and Nathan Middleton, John Large, Joseph M. Law- 
rie and others. 
Bunting, Samuel, of Chesterfield (son of Joshua and Amy his former wife), and 
Deborah Middleton, dau. of Jacob and Hannah, at Chesterfield. 

8th 5th mo. 1800 
Witnesses — Joshua, Mary, Elizabeth, Newberry, Amos and Hannah Bunt- 
ing, Jacob, Hannah, Jediah, Miriam, Ann, Aaron, Jacob, Jr., Samuel, Jr., Na- 
than, Lydia, Jr., Abigail, Increase, Hannah, Jr., Sarah, Jr., George, Jr., Amos, 
Lydia, Elizabeth and Sarah Middleton and others. 
Btjkr, Joseph, of Northampton Township (son of Henry and Elizabeth), and Jane 
Abbot, of Nottingham, dau. of John and Anne, at Chesterfield. 

16th 12th mo. 1726 
Witnesses — Henry, Elizabeth, John and Rebecca Burr, John, Anne, John, 
Jr. , Abbott, Joseph Reckless, Richard French, John Sykes and others. 
Burton, Charles, of Bordentown (son of David and Catharine, dee'd,), and Lydia 
Moore, widow, of Bordentown, dau. of John Taylor and Hannah, at Borden- 
town 8th 10th mo. 1800 

Witnesses — William and David Burton, John and Anthony Taylor, David 
Arney, John Wright, Isaac Thorn, Joseph Kirkbride and others. 

c 

Cathrall, Benjamin, of Burlington (son of Edward and Rachel, dee'd), and Sarah 
Parker, of New Hanover, dau. of Samuel and Elizabeth, at Upper Freehold. 

14th 1st mo. 1779 
Witnesses— Samuel, Elizabeth, Elizabeth, Edward and Anne Parker, 
Thomas Earl, Thomas Harrison, Alexauder Howard, John Lawrie, Richard 
Walen, Amos Bullock, Fretwell Wright and others. 
Clark, Benjamin, of Middlesex county (son of Benjamin, dee'd), and Hannah Law- 
rie, of Monmouth county, dau. of William, at Upper Freehold. 

13th 12th mo. 1761 

Witnesses — James, William, Caleb and Isaac Clark, William, Thomas, 

Annie, James, Mary, James, John, Achsah, Jacob and Mary Lawrie, Jr., John 

Bullock, Joseph Newbold, and others. 

Clark, Isaac, of Windsor (son of James), and Mary Lawrie, of Upper Freehold, 

Monmouth county, dau. of William, at Chesterfield 19th 11th mo. 1767 

Witnesses— James, Hannah, Ann, Hannah, Rachel, Benjamin and Caleb 
Clark, William Lawrie, Miriam, James, Mary, Elizabeth and Lucy Lawrie, 
Alexander Howard, John Black and others. 

Clark, Enoch, of Windsor (son of Beujamin and Hannah), and Elizabeth Wood, of 

Chesterfield, dau. of William and Hannah, at Stony Brook. . 15th 2d mo. 1792 

Witnesses— Benjamin, Hannah, Elisha, Mary, Joseph, Caleb, Thomas, 

David, Phebe, William and Julia Clark, Hannah and Susannah Wood, Anthony 

Bullock, Job and Joseph Olden and others. 



654 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Clark, Elisba, of Somerset county (son of Benjamin and Hannah Clark), and Ann 

Olden, of Middlesex county, dau. of Joseph and Ann 9th 1st mo. 1793 

Witnesses — Benjamin, Hannah, Enoch, Elizabeth, Jr., David, Phebe, 
Esther, Rachel, Charles, Thomas, William, Hannah, Jr., and Caleb Clark, 
Anne, Joseph, Mary, Jr., Giles W., Samuel, Mary, James, Jr., Catharine, Sam- 
uel, Jr., Elibu, Job, Hart and Nathaniel Olden and others. 

Clark, Charles, of Middlesex county (son of Johu), and Mary Shinn, of Somerset 

county, dau. of Abraham, at Stony Brook 5th 3d mo. 1794 

Witnesses— Hannah, William, Edna, Julia, Hannah 3d, Esther, Joseph, 
William, Jr., Sarah, Elizabeth, Benjamin, Mary, Rachel, Thomas, Elisha and 
Benjamin Clark, Jr., Joseph Shinn, Job Olden, Robert White and others. 

Ci.atson, Cornelius, of Chesterfield, aud Anne Burcham, of the same place, at Ches- 
terfield 21st 9th mo. 1728 

Witnesses — Abraham Farrington, Richard French, Ralph Cowgill, Sam'l 
Woodward, Joseph Reckless, Wm. Wood, Sam'l Satterthwait and others. 

Collings, Joseph, of Burlington county, and Katharine Huddleston, of Mansfield 

township, at Burlington 8th 7th mo. 1698 

Witnesses — Francis Collings, Elizabeth Collings, Joseph Kirkbride, George 
Deacon, Daniel Smith, Thos. Biddle, Peter Fretwell, John Hogg, Jr., John Gos- 
lin and others. 

Combs, John, Jr., of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth county, and Mary Ash- 
ton, of the same place, at Upper Freehold 4th 11th mo. 1795 

Witnesses— John, Sr., Rebekah, Thos., Isaac, Stephen, Benjamin, Ezekiel, 
Rebecca, Jr., Abigail, Euphamia aud Hannah Combs, George Craft, Joel 
Cheshire, Joshua Wright, Richard Potts and others. 

Combs, Benjamin, of Upper Freehold, Monmouth county (son of Johu and Rebekah), 
and Charity Craft, of the same place, dau. of George and Mary, at Robbins 

Meeting House 12th 12th mo. 1798 

Witnesses— John, Rebekah, Thomas, Hannah, John, Jr., Isaac, Euphemia, 
Stephen, Abigail, Rebekah, Ezekiel, Rachel and Nancy C^mbs, George, Mary, 
Grace and Samuel Craft and others. 

Coopee, John, of Gloucester county, and Anne Clark, of Somerset county, dau. of 
Benjamin and Anne, at the house of Joseph Worth. . . . 18th 1st mo. 1712-13 
Witnesses — William, Joseph and Lydia Cooper, Benjamin, Anne, Elizabeth, 
Sarah and James Clark, Samuel Bunting, Johu Olden, Jos. Reckless, Joseph 
Worth aud others. 
Curtis, John, Jr., of Mansfield Township (son of John aud Patience), and Sarah Tay- 
lor, of Nottingham, dau. of Johu and Sarah, at Chesterfield. 

10th 3d mo. 1785 
Witnesses — Rachel Curtis, John, Sarah, Johu, Jr., Joel, Ann and Stacy Tay- 
lor, Joseph, Isaac and Samuel DeCou, Joseph M. Lawrie, Benjamin Linton and 
others. 
Crues, James, of Chesterfield, and Sarah Forsyth, of the same place, dau. of Matthew 
and Rebecca, at Chesterfield 23d 3d mo. 1734 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 655 

Witnesses— John, Matthew, Susannah and Rebecca Forsyth, John Bacon, 

I. Decow, Mid.,' Win. French, John Abbott, Win. Murfin, Mich. Newbold and 

Joseph Reckless. 

Curtis, Thomas, of Ogston (son of John), and Elizabeth Ellis, of Burlington, dan. of 

Tlu. mas, dec'd, at the house of John Brown . . 21st 9th mo. 1694 

Witnesses— John and David Curtis, Thos. Revell, John Warren, Michael 
Newbold, Win. Wood, Michael Baffin, Richard French and others. 

D 

Danfokd, Samuel, of Burlington county, and Mary Wright, widow of Joseph, at Ches- 

terfield 5th 9th mo. 1717 

Witnesses— Joshua, Thomas, Rebecca and Samuel Wright, John Bunting, 
Wm. Wood, Thomas Harrison, Isaac Ivins, Jos. Reckless and others. 
Davenport, Francis, of Chesterfield (widower), and Rebecca Decou, of Burlington, 

relict of Isaac, at Burlington 12th 8th mo. 1692 

Witnesses— Jacob and John Decow, Daniel Smith, Mahlon Stacy, Thomas 
Olive, John Woolston, Thos. Folkes, John Curtis, John Bunting, Samuel Jen- 
nings and others. 
DeCow, Isaac, of Burlington, and Anne Davenport, of Chesterfield, at Chesterfield. 

24th 2d mo. 1705 
Witnesses— Jacob and Elizabeth Decow, Rebecca, Francis, Jr., Isaac, Abi- 
gail, Esther and Rebecca Davenport, Jr., 'lhos. Folkes, John Black, John 
Bacon, Isaac Horner, Richard French, Joseph Reckless and others. 
DeCow, Joseph, of Burlington county (sou of Eber), and Achsah Taylor, of same 

place, dau. of John, at Chesterfield 15th 10th mo. 1778 

Witnesses— Eber, John, John, Isaac and Mary DeCow, Sarah, Joel, Mercy, 
Edith, Ann, Stacy, Daniel, John Taylor, Jr., James Lawrie, Thomas Lawrie, 
Wm. Abbott, James Holloway and others. 
DeCow, Samuel, of Nottingham (son of Isaac, dec'd, and Mary), and Mary Lawrie, of 
the same place, dau. of Thomas, dec'd, and Anne, at Chesterfield. 

8th 12th mo. 1796 
Witnesses — Mary, Achsah, Stacy, Isaac, Mary, Jr., and Eber DeCow, Anne, 
Mary, Joseph M., Ann, Thomas, Jr., Mary Lawrie, Amos Middletou, Samuel 
Abbott, Joshua Bunting, Jacob Middletou and others. 

E 

Earl, Thomas, Jr., of Springfield Township (son of Tanton and Mary), and Edith 
Sykes, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Anthony and Mary, at Springfield 

15th 4th mo. 1778 
Witnesses— Tanton, Mary, John, Caleb, Joseph, Mercy, Mary, ' Samuel, 
Michael, Thomas and Elizabeth Earl, Anthony, Mary, Samuel, Thomas, Cath- 
arine, Mary, Jr., Benjamin, Benjamin, Jr., John and Anthony Sykes, Jr., and 
others. 

1 Query: Medius. See note on page 652, ante. 



656 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Ellis, Benjamin, of Philadelphia, Penua., and Mary Abbott, of Nottingham Town- 
ship, dan. of John and Aune, at Chesterfield. 24th 9th mo. 1720 

Witnesses — John, Anne and Aune Abbott, Jr., Richard French, Win. Sat- 
terthwait, Isaac Horn6r, Sani'l Farnsworth, John Bunting, Thos. Folkes, Mar- 
maduke and Matthew Watson and others. 

Ellis, John, of Burlington county (son of Francis), and Lucia Ridgway, of the same 

county, dau. of Richard, at Mansfield . . 12th 5th mo. 1762 

Witnesses — Peter Ellis, Jacob, Joseph, Hannah and Jacob Ridgway, Ben- 
jamin Gibbs, Job Harvey, John Lawrie, Philip Bowne, Joseph Talman, Jr., 
Joseph Imlay and others. 

Ellis, John, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth county, and Elizabeth Fow- 
ler, of New Hanover Township, at Upper Freehold 17th 10th mo. 1770 

Witnesses — Joseph and Phebe Ellis, Joseph, Meribah, Joseph, Jr., Barton, 
Meribah, Jr. and Mary Fowler, Alexander Howard, Amos Wright, John Bui 
lock, John Lawrie, Jos. Bullock and others. 

Ellis, Peter, of Mansfield Township, and Miriam Middleton, of Upper Freehold 

Township, Monmouth county, at Chesterfield 18th 4th mo. 1771 

Witnesses — John and Lucy Ellis, Amos, Thomas, Elizabeth, Jacob, Samuel, 
Anne, Abel, Jr., Margaret, Amos, Jr., Sarah, Joel, David, Abel, Mary, Rhoda, 
Phebe and Mary Middleton, Jr., Peter Harvey, Joseph Fowler, James Wooley 
and others. 

Ehlen, George, Jr., of Philadelphia (son of George), and Anne Reckless, of Chester- 
field Township, dau. of Joseph 25th 10th mo. 17-10 

Witnesses— Joseph and Joseph, Jr., Reckless, Anthony Sykes, Anthony 
Woodward, Joseph Arney, Judah Folke, Samuel Satterthwait, John Armit and 
others. 

English, Joseph, of Mansfield Township (sou of Joseph and Elizabeth), and Tri- 
phena Wilson, of the same place, dau. of William and Abigail, at Mansfield. 

16th 4th mo. 1780 
Witnesses — Joseph, Ann, Joseph, Jr., Joseph, Sr. , Mary, Alice and Elizabeth 
English, William, Abigail, Mary, Christian, Abigail, Jr., Wilson, George Dil- 
wvn, Isaac, Caleb and Caleb Jr., Shreve, and others. 



Farnsworth, Samuel, of Chesterfield Township, and Damans Howard, of Mansfield. 

19th 11th mo. 1709 
Witnesses— Susannah, John. Daniel and Henry Farnsworth, Aune Howard, 
Thos. Folkes, Sr., Wm. Wood, John Warren, Samuel Taylor, Matthew Wat- 
son, Isaac Horner, Jos. Reekle>s, Nathan Folwell and others. 
Fakrington, Abraham, of Somerset county, and Phebe Bunting, of Chesterfield, dau. 

of Samuel and Mary, at Chesterfield 1st 8th mo. 1725 

Witnesses — Mary, Anthony, Ruth, John, Alice, William, Abigail and Wil- 
liam Bunting, Richard French, John Warren, Joseph Worth, Isaac Horner, 
John Abbott, Daniel Bacon and others. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 657 

Field, Ambrose, of Chesterfield Township, and Susanna Decow, of the same place, 

at Chesterfield 24th 2d mo. 1705 

Witnesses— Nathaniel, Patience and Susannah Field, Jacob, Elizabeth and 
Anne DeCow, Peter Fretwell, Samuel Jennings, Wm. Wood, Mahlon Stacy, 
John Black, Joseph Reckless and others. 
Field Robert, of Burlington county, and Mary Taylor, of the same place, dan. of 

Samuel and Susannah, at Chesterfield 12th 2d mo. 1722 

Witnesses Benjamin, Ambrose and Susan Field, Samuel, Samuel, Jr., John, 
Robert and William Taylor, Isaac Horner, Joseph Borden, Samuel Farnsworth, 
John Black, Joseph Marriot and others. 
Field, Benjamin, of Chesterfield Township (son of Benjamin and Mary Barton), and 
Tabitha Rockhill, of the same place, dau. of Edward, at Mansfield. 

18th 11th mo. 1772 
Witnesses— Benjamin, Isaac, Mary and Eleanor Field, Edward, Edward, Jr., 
Achsah Rockhill, Joseph Shreve, Joseph Newbold and others. 
Folkes, Thomas, of Chesterfield (son of Thomas), and Elizabeth Curtis, of Mansfield 

Township, dau. of John, of Ogston, at Chesterfield 2lst 12th mo. 1688 

Witnesses— Thomas Folkes, Sr., Samuel Bunting, Thomas Curtis, John 
Banting, Peter Fretwell, Thomas Douglass, Robert Chapman, William Wat- 
son, Francis Davenport, John Bunting and others. 
Ftjbman, Barzillai, of Trenton (son of Josiah and Ruth), and Elizabeth Middleton, of 
Nottingham Township, dau. of George and Hannah, at Chesterfield. 

14th 9th mo. 1775 
Witnesses— Josiah, Ruth, Richard, Way, John, Theodosia, Furman, Hannah, 
Nathan, Lydia, Jacob, Phebe, Rhoda, Mary, Jr., Thomas and Patience Mid- 
dleton and others. 
Fubman, Richard W., of Trenton (son of Josiah), and Hannah Middleton, of Notting- 
ham, dau. of George and Hannah, at Chesterfield 2 1st 1st mo. 1773 

Witnesses— Josiah, Nathaniel, Barzillai, John and Elizabeth Furman, Han- 
nah, Nathan, Jacob, Rhoda, Phebe, Sarah, Maria, Thomas, Patience, Abel, 
Amos and Abel Middleton, James Lawrie, Thomas Borden and others. 
For.SYTH, Matthew, of Chesterfield Township, and Rebecca Odling, of the same place, 

at Chesterfield 15th 1st mo. 1696 

Witnesses —Thomas Folkes, Francis Davenport, Samuel Bunting, John 
Bunting, William Satterthwait, Thomas Miller, Martin Scott, Joseph Smith 
and others. 
Fobsyth, Joseph, of Chesterfield Township, and Margaret Middleton, of Upper Free- 
hold Township. Monmouth Co., at Chesterfield . . ........ 9th 4th mo. 1772 

Witnesses— Mercy, Mary, Rebeckah, Mercy and Matthew Forsyth, Amos, 
Elizabeth, Jr., Amos, Sr.. Samuel, Ann, Jacob, Elizabeth, Hannah, .Mary and 
Abel Middleton, William Lawrie, David Kelley and others. 

Fowleb, Joseph, of Hanover Township (son of John Fowler deed, and Elizabeth, 
now Reckless,), and Meribah Middleton, widow of Jonathan deed, at Chester- 
field 27th 8th mo. 17 is 

52 



658 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Witnesses— Elizabeth and Benjamin Fowler, Elizabeth Reckless, Tims. 
Black, Joseph Reckless, Joseph Steward, John Bunting, Marinaduke Watson 
aud others. 

French, Richard, of Mansfield Township, and Mary King, of Nottingham Township, 
dau. of Harmenus King, at the house of Harmenus King. . 13th 11th mo. 1701 
Witnesses— Charles, John and Lydia French, Harmenus King, Mary, John 
and Joseph King, John Bunting, Thomas Folkes, Thomas Scattergood, Thomas 
Brian and William Quicksall and others. 
French, Charles, of Philadelphia (sou of Uriah, deed, late of Haddoufielil). and Re- 
becca Taylor, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Jacob, at Bordentown. 

7th 4th mo. 1773 
Witnesses— Samuel and Mary French, Jacob, Abigail, Lewis, Charles, 
Elizabeth, Amos and Lydia Taylor, James Lawrie, Jonathan Wright, Joseph 
Borden, Jr., and others. 

G 

Ganet, Thomas, of Darby, Penna., and Rebecca Sykes, of Chesterfield Township, 

dau. of John and Hanna, at Springfield 25th 2d mo. 1744 

Witnesses— Samuel, Anne and John Ganet, John, Joanna, Samuel, An- 
thony, Benjamin, Mary, Katharine Sykes, Joshua Shreve, John Black, Caleb 
Newbold, Joseph Reckless, Thomas Black aud others. 
Garwood, Jacob, of Bordentown, aud Rhoda Rato, of Nottingham, at Chesterfield. 

10th 10th mo. 1776 

Witnesses— Alse Garwood, Tabitha Rato, David Rulon, Amos MiddletOD, 

James Lawrie, Thomas Thorn, Gideon Middleton, Daniel Tilton, Isaiah 

Robins and others. 

Gadntt, John, of Little Egg Harbor Township, Burlington county, and Jane Sat- 

terthwait, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Samuel and Jane, at Mansfield. 

24th 11th mo. 1750 
Witnesses — Ann Gaunt, Samuel, Richard, Elizabeth, Mary, Samuel, David, 
William and Hannah Satterthwait, Jacob Ridgway, Timothy Abbott, Michael 
Buffin, Peter Tallman and others. 

Gibbs, Richard, of Mansfield Township, son of Isaac and Rebecca Cowgill, of Ch< s- 

terfield, dau. of Ralph, at Chesterfield 17th 1st mo. 1725 

Witnesses— Isaac, Anna, Francis, Mary, Isaac, Jr., Gibbs, Ralph, Nehe- 
miab, Jane, Edmund, Isaac, Abraham Cowgill, Richard French, Isaac Horner, 
John Sykes, Joseph Reckless and others. 
Gibbs, Martin, of Mansfield Township (son of John), and Rebekah Forsyth, of Ches- 
terfield, dau. of Matthew and Rebeckah, at Mansfield 17th 10th mo. 1781 
Witnesses — Robert, Joel, Edward, Abel Gibbs, Joseph Forsyth, Matthias 
Kulin, Peter Harvey, Benjamin Lenton, Amos Middleton, John Lawrie, Peter 
Ellis an 1 others. 

II 

Haines, John, of Evesham (son of John), and Elizabeth Satterthwait, of Chesterfield 
Township, at Chesterfield 13th 9th mo. 17<>'J 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 659 

Witnesses— John, Sr., Jonathan, Isaac, Mary, Thomas and Joseph Hums, 
William, Joseph [saac, William, Jr., Sarah, Margaret and Dorothy Satterth- 
wait, Isaac Horner, Joseph Reckless, Richard French, John Bacon and others. 

Hallet, Richard, of New York City (son of Israel and Naomi), and Sarah Clarke, of 
Middlesex county, dan. of Isaac and Mary, at Stony Brook . -1th 5th mo. 1791 
Witnesses James Hallett, Isaac, Mary, Hannah, William, Elisha, Ben- 
jamin, Jr., William L., James, Aaron, Rachel, Benjamin, Hannah, Ezekiel, 
George, Enoch, Thomas and Caleb Clarke, Joseph Brearly, Joseph Olden and 
others. 

Harbison, Richard, of Chesterfield Township, and Ruth Buckman, of the same place, 

at the home of Joshua Wright 4th 3d mo. 1C87 

Witnesses — Peter Harrison, Joshua Wright, Wm. Emley, Mahlon Stacy, 
George Nicholson, Joshua Wright, Jr., Thomas Folkes, Robert Chapman, Eliz- 
abeth Wright, Ruth Emley aud others. 

Habtshobn, John, Jr., of Shrewsbury, Monmouth county (son of John and Lucy), 
aud Elizabeth Field of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth county, dau. of 

Elijah and Mary, at Robins' Meeting 5th 6th mo. 1799 

Witnesses— John, Robert, Sarah Hartshorn, Elijah, Mary, Benjamin. Sarah, 
Mary and Rebekah Field, John Lawrence, John Combs, George Craft, Thomas 
Lawrie and others. 

Harvey, Job, of Mansfield Township (son of John), and Mary Satterthwait, of Ches- 
terfield, dau. of Samuel, at Mansfield 25th 5th mo. 1768 

Witnesses -Peter, John aud Ann Harvey, Samuel, Ja ne. Samue L-Jnrrr-^Wil^"" 
Ham Satterthwait, John, Leonard, Joseph Newbold, Apollo Woodward, Isaac 
DeCow and others. 

Hendbickson, Joseph, of Nottingham Township and Elizabeth Forsyth, of Chester- 
field Township, at Chesterfield 10th 3d mo. 1796 

Witnesses -Daniel, Ann, David, Jr., Hendrickson, Ann, Joseph, Lydia, 
Samuel, Anne, Abigail, George, Increase, Rebekah, Nathan aud Lydia Middle- 
ton, Joseph M. Lawrie, Thomas Lawrie, Thomas Taylor, David Killey and 
others. 

Hill, John, of Buckingham, Bucks county, and Elizabeth Smith, of Windsor, Mid- 
dlesex Co., N. J, at Windsor 15th 12th mo. 1756 

Witnesses— Joseph, Benjamin, Martha, Moses, Aaron Hill, Ezekiel, Deb- 
orah, Ezekiel, Samuel Smith, Joseph Olden, William Clarke, Samuel Worth,. 
Joseph Palmer and others. 
Hodson, John, of Nottingham Township, and Anne Whittiker, of the same place, at 

Chesterfield 27th 7th mo. 1716 

Witnesses— Richard French, John Bud ting, Samuel Taylor, John Abbott 
Isaac Horner, Joseph Reckless, Thomas Scholey, Wm. Murfin, William Sat 
terthwait, Samuel Satterthwait and others. 
Holloway, George, of Hunterdon Co., N. J., aud Ruth Wood, of Burlington Coun- 
ty, N. J., at Springfield 10th 9th mo. 1731 

Witnesses— John and James Holloway, Mary Wood, Caleb Shreve, John 



660 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Warren, Joseph Arney, Samuel Satterthwait, Joseph Reckless, Richard French, 
Frances Scholey and others. 

Hoenee, Isaac, of Mansfield Township, and Elizabeth Sykes, .of Chesterfield, at Ches- 
terfield ..'..' 19th 3d mo. 1709 

Witnesses — John and Frances Homer, John, Joanna Sykes, Thomas Folkes, 
Peter Fretwell, John Bunting, Daniel Farnsworth, Joseph Reckless, John War- 
ren, Daniel Smith and others, 

Hoenee, Isaac, Jr., of Mansfield Township, and Mary Potts of Trenton, at Trenton. 

16th 11th mo. 1757 
Witnesses — Samuel, Joseph, Amy, Mary, Benjamin and Sarah Horner, 
Ruth, Sarah, Rebecca, Stacy Potts, Bowes Reed, Joseph Imlay, Benj. Mar- 
shall, Thomas Watson and others. 

Hutchin, Hugh, of Mansfield Township, and Rebecca Underbill, of the same place, 

at Chesterfield 3d 1st mo. 1707-8 

Witnesses — Hugh Hutchiu, Jr., Michael Buffin, John Bacon, Joseph Reck- 
less, John Aaronson, Caleb Shreeve, Richard French, Abraham Brown, Jr., 
Thomas Shreve, Joshua Shreve and others. 

Hunloke, Thomas, of Chesterfield Township, and Sarah Bunting of the same place, 

dau. of Samuel, at Chesterfield. 21st 4th mo. 1711 

Witnesses — Sarah Hunloke, Samuel, Mary, John, Sarah, Silence, Phebe 
and William Bunting, Wm. Murfin, Joseph Worth, Thomas Folkes, Joseph 
Steward and others. 

J 

Jones, John, of Meirion, Philadelphia Co., Penna. (son of Edward), and Mary Dough- 
ty, of Crosswicks, N. J., dau. of Jacob, at Crosswicks. . . 12th 9th mo. 1717 
Witnesses— Richard, Edward, Jonathan, Edward, Ewan, Elizabeth, Mary 
Jones, Jacob Arney, Daniel, Sarah, Amy, Deborah, Elizabeth and Francis 
Doughty, Jr., Samuel Bunting, Preserve Brown, Daniel' Smith, Matthew 
Watson and others. 

Jones, John, Jr., of Philadelphia, Pa., and Mary Brown, of Nottingham Township, 
dau. of Preserve Brown and Mary (French) at Chesterfield. 

12th 8th mo. 1756 
Witnesses — Preserve, Mary, Richard, Sarah, Sarah, Abia, William Brown, 
Mary and Rebecca Jones, Doughty Jones, John Sykes, Joseph Stockton, Amos 
Middleton, Ambrose Field, William Lawrie, Timothy Abbott and others. 

Justice, George, of Mount Holly (son of George and Mary), and Phebe Middleton, 
of Nottingham, dau. of George and Hannah, at Chesterfield. 

13th 11th mo. 1777. 
Witnesses— Mary, Justice, Hannah, Nathan, Jacob, Abel, Elizabeth, Gideon, 
Rhodii, Amos and Lydia Middleton. Benjamin Linton, James Lawrie, John Ab- 
bott, Thomas Lawrie, Richard W. Furman and others. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 66 I 

K 
kv\, Josiah, of Gloucester County, and Rebecca Davenport, of Burlington County, at 

Chesterfield 14th 8d ma L713 

Witnesses— John, Elizabeth, Joseph, John, Jr., Benjamin, Sarahand Sarah 
Kay, Jr., Francis, Isaac, Martha, Abigail Davenport, Samuel Taylor, John Ab- 
bott, Joseph Reckless, Isaac Decow and others. 
Killey, David, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth Co. (son of Joseph and 
Sarah (Tilton), and Hannah Middleton, at Chesterfield. . . .14th 2d mo. 1771 
Witnesses— Samuel Killey, Amos, Margaret, Amos, Jr., Abel, Jr., Elizabeth, 
Jr., Elizabeth, Samuel, Sarah, Patience, Hannah, Mary and' Jacob Middleton, 
Gervas Pharo, Nathan Wright, Daniel Tilton and others. 
King, John, of Nottingham Township, and Elizabeth Woodward, of Freehold, Mon- 
mouth Co., at Chesterfield < 13th 9th mo. 1706 

Witnesses— Harmennis King, Mary, Joseph and Benjamin King, Anthony 
Woodward, Hannah Woodward, Wm. Wood, Joseph Steward, Ambrose Field, 
John Black. Thomas Folkes, Richard French, John Bunting and others. 
Kiiiby, Empson, of Upper Freehold, Monmouth Co., and Ann Allen, of the same 

place, at Upper Freehold Meeting 11th 1st mo. 1781 

Witnesses— Benjamin, Rachel Kirby, Miriam, Elizabeth and William 
Allen, John Bullock, Nathan Wright, John Lawrie, Joseph Bullock, Abner 
Wright, William Lawrie and others. 
Kiekbride, John, of Bucks county, Penna. (sou of Joseph and Mary), and Hannah 
Svkes, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of John and Joanna, at Springfield. 

16th 1st mo. 1730-31 
Witnesses— Mary, Joseph, Jr., Sarah, Jr., Robert Mahlon, Mary, Jr., 
Thomas Kirkbride, John, Joanna, Samuel and Mary Sykes, John and Sarah 
Hutchinson, Richard French, John Black, Isaac Homer, Michael Newbold, 
Joseph Reckless and others. 
Kiekbride, Jonathan, of Lower Makefield Township, Bucks county, Penna. (son of 
Mahlon), and Elizabeth Curtis, of Burlington county, dau. of Joseph, at Bor- 

dentown 18th 11th mo. 1767 

Witnesses— Mahlon Stacy, Frances, Mahlon, Jr., Sarah, Mary and Joseph 
Kirkbride, Ann and Joseph Curtis, Marmaduke Watson, Isaac Horner, John 
Chapman and others. 
Kotts, Conrad, of Trenton, and Margaret Plaskett, of the same place, daughter of 

William, at Trenton 27th 7th mo. 1757 

Witnesses— Margaret and Mary Plaskett, Michael and Ann Hutchinson, 
William Morris, Wm. Pidgeou, Preserve Crown and others. 

L 
Lambert, Thomas, of Nottingham Township, and Amu- Wood, of Chesterfield Town- 
ship, dau. of William, at Chesterfield 31st 11th mo. 1710 

Witnesses— John and Ruth Lambert, William, John and William Wood. Jr., 
Peter Frettwell, Joseph Kirkbride, William Biddle, Joseph Reckless, John 
Biles, Thomas Hooten and others. 



662 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Large, Jacob, of Monmouth county, and Elizabeth Field, of Burlington count}', at 

Chesterfield 11th 4th mo. 1719 

Witnesses — Elizabeth, Samuel and Rebecca Large, Robert, Benjamin and 
Susannah Field, John Bunting, John Abbott, Richard French, Isaac Homer* 
William Murfin, Joseph Reckless, Nathan Allen, Isaac Pennington and others. 

Large, Ebenezer, Jr., of Chesterfield Township, and Anne Field, of the same place, 

dau. of Nathaniel and Patience, at Chesttrfield 14th 8th mo. 1742 

Witnesses — Joseph Large, Jr., Steven, Benjamin, Margaret, Charity B. , Jo- 
seph, Susanna, Elizabeth, Elizabeth and Miriam Field, John Bunting, Mat- 
thew Watson, Patience Betts, Thomas Betts. 

Large, Samuel, Jr., of Hunterdon county (son of Samuel and Rebecca), and Mary 
Murfin of Nottingham, dau. of William and Sarah, at Chesterfield. 

24th 3d mo. 1744 

Witnesses — Samuel, John, Ebenezer, Jacob and Jane Large, Sarah, Robert, 

William, Mary and Amarylis Murfin, John Sykes, Timothy Abbott, Joseph 

Reckless, John Emley, John Bunting and others. 

Lawrence, Joseph, of Monmouth county, and Rachel Curtis, of Burlington county, 

at Chesterfield 18th 10th mo. 1712 

Witnesses — Elisha, James, Hannah and Elizabeth Lawrence, Thomas 
Folkes, Sr., John Bunting, William Wood, Richard Harrison, Samuel Taylor, 
Joseph Reckless, Joseph Steward and others. 
Lawrence, Thomas, of Bordentowu, and Hannah Bunting, of the same place. 

8th 10th mo. 1788 

Witnesses — Samuel Lawrence, Timothy, Elizabeth, Ezra, Elizabeth, Lydia 

and Sarah Bunting, Isaac Horner, Jr., John Taylor, Frettwell Wright, William 

Abbott and others. 

Lawrie, James, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth county, and Mary Borden, 

of Nottingham Township, at Chesterfield, 15th 11th mo. 1759 

Witnesses — William, Mary, Mary, Jr., Jacob, Hannah and John Lawrie, 
Francis and Mary Borden, John Lawrence, Benjamin Field, George and George 
Middleton, Jr., and others. 
Lawrie, Thomas, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth county, and Ann Murfin, 

of Nottingham, at Chesterfield. 19th 6th mo. 1760 

Witnesses — William, Mary, John, James, Joseph, Mary, Hannah and Jacob 
Lawrie, William, Mary and John Murfin, Benjamin Field, William Bunting 
and others. 

Lighifoot, Thomas, of Pikeland Township, Chester Co., Penna. (son of Samuel and 

Mary, deed), and Rachel Hunt, of Windsor Township, Middlesex Co., dau of 

Elijah and Esther, deed, a t Stony Brook. 5th 1st mo. 1785 

Witnesses— Joseph Field, Charles and Enoch Clarke, James Lawrie, Samuel 

Worth, Samuel Olden, Peter Gordon, Joseph Horner and others. 

Linton, Benjamin, of Bucks county, Penna., and Jane Cowgill, of Chesterfield, dau. 

of Ralph, at Chesterfield 19th 2d mo. 1733 

Witnesses— Joseph and Mary Linton, Ralph, Nehemiah, Isaac, Jacob and 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 663 

Rachel Cowgill, Wm. Murfiu, Preserve Brown, William Chapman. Joseph 
Reckless, Joseph Pancoast, Isaac Bolton and others. 
Linton, Benjamin, of Lower Makefiekl, Rucks Co., Peuua. (son of Benjamin), and 
Hannah Satterthwait, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Samuel, at Mansfield. 

21st 11th mo. 17G4 
Witnesses — Martha, Jane and Jonathan Linton, Samuel, Samuel, Jr., Eliza- 
beth, Mary Satterthwait, John Antrum, Samuel Black, John Newbold, John 
Abbott, Jr., and others. 

Lord, James, of Gloucester county, and Elizabeth Clark, of Somerset county, dau. of 
Benjamin and Anne, at the house of Joseph Worth. . . .24th 1st mo. 1714-15 
Witnesses— Joshua and Alice Lord, Benjamin, Anne, James, Benjamin, 
Jr., Sarah, Mary, Esther, Joseph, Matthew Clark, Joseph Worth, Samuel Bunt- 
ing, Wm. Murfin and others. 

Lucas, Edward, of Bucks county, Penna., and Bridget Scott of the Province of West 

Jerssy, at the house of Thomas Lambert 3d 7th mo. 1700 

Witnesses — Elizabeth, Giles and Robert Lucas, John and Martin Scott, 
Mahlon Stacy, Wm. Biles, Thos. Folkes, Matthew Watson, John Abbott, Phin- 
eas Pemberton and others. 

M 

Maksh, Samuel, of Woodbridge Township, Middlesex county, and Ann Middletou, of 

Nottingham Township, at Chesterfield 6th 10th mo. 1785 

Witnesses— Mary Marsh, Thomas, Mercy, Samuel, Aune, Patience, Lydia, 
Miriam, Elizabeth, James, Nathan, Lydia, Jr., Middleton, Joseph M. Lawrie, 
Benjamin Holloway, James Holloway, Thomas Lawrie and others. 

Middleton, Thomas, of Nottingham Township, and Patience Tilton, of Middletown, 

Monmouth county, at Shrewsbury 15th 11th mo. 1735 

Witnesses — Naomi, Jonathan, John Middleton, Samuel, Patience, Sarah, 
Abraham, Daniel, Samuel, Jr., Robert, John and Hannah Tilton, Isaac Hance, 
Thomas Woolley and others. 

Middleton, Jonathan, of Nottingham (son of John and Esther), and Meribah Barton, 
of Mansfield, dau. of Edward and Sarah, deed, at Chesterfield. 

15th 2d mo. 1742 
Witnesses — Esther, Thomas, John, Abel, Amos, Sarah, Patience and George 
Middleton, Margaret, David, Mary and Aaron Barton, Joseph Steward, Isaac 
Homer and Joseph Reckless and others. 
Middleton, George, of Nottingham (son of John, dec c i, and .Esther), and Hannah 
Fowler, of Chesterfield, dau. of John, dec'"', and Elizabeth Reckless, at Ches- 
terfield 29th 10th mo. 1743 

Witnesses — Esther, Thomas, John, Abel and Amos Middleton, Elizabeth 
Reckless, Joseph and Joseph Reckless, Jr., Elizabeth and Joseph Fowler, 
Marmaduke Watson, John Bunting, Josiah Steward and others. 

Middleton, Abel, of Nottingham Township, and Mary Hewes, f Stony Brook at . 

18th 12th mo. 1751 



664 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Witnesses— Esther, Amos Middleton, Providence, Josiab, Daniel, Aaron 
and Mary Hewes, Joseph Steward, Richard Stockton, Giles Worth, James 
Leonard and others. 

Middleton, Nathan, of Nottingham Township (son of George and Hannah), and 
Lydia Allen, of Burlington Co., dau. of Samuel and Mary, at Chesterfield. 

14th 5th mo. 1767 

Witnesses— George, Hannah, Elizabeth, Samuel, Esther, Amos, Thomas, 

Abel, Patience and Mary Middleton, Samuel, Mary, Gabriel, William, Sarah, 

Ralph and Ann Allen, William Lawrie, Nathan Wright and others. 

Middleton, Jacob, of Nottingham Township, and Hannah Tiltou. of Chesterfield 

Township, at Chesterfield 1st 2d mo. 1779 

Witnesses— Hauuab, Natban, Lydia, Jr., and George Middleton, James 
Taylor, Nathan Robbins, William Abbott, Anthony Woodward, James Lawrie, 
Joseph Bullock and others. 
Middleton, Thomas, of Nottingham Township, and Mary Forsyth, of Hanover, at 

Chesterfield.. 14th 12th mo. 1780 

Witnesses— Amos, Lydia, Hannah, Mary, Ann, Jr., Samuel Middleton, Alice, 
Joseph and Rebeckah Forsyth, Emanuel Davenport, Nathan Tilton, Benjamin 
Linton, John Lawrie, Joseph Bullock and others. 
Middleton, Josepb, of Chesterfield Township (son of Nathan and Lydia), and Avis 
Holloway, of the same place, dau. of James, dec 11 , and Rebecca, at Chester- 
field 17th 4th mo. 1794 

Witnesses — Nathan, Lydia, Hannah, Gabriel, Samuel, George, Hannah, 
George and Thomas Middleton, Rebekah, Miriam and James Holloway, Sam- 
uel Abbott, Joseph M. Laurie, Isaac Thorn, Michael Taylor and others. 
Mooke, Thomas, of Bordentown (son of Mary Wright), and Lydia Taylor, dau. of John 

and Hannah, at Bordentown 4th 6th mo. 1783 

Witnesses— Mary Wright, John, Hannah, Anthony F., Amos, Samuel, Abi- 
gail, Anna, Charles Taylor, Fretwell Wright, Marmaduke Watson, Burgess 
Allison, John Edwards and others. 
Mukfin, William, of Nottingham, and Sarah Bunting, of Chesterfield, at Chesteifield. 

8th June. 1704 
Witnesses— Johanna and John Muifin, John, Sarah, Samuel and John 
Bunting, Jr., Daniel Smith, Thomas Folkes, Anthony Woodward, Thomas 
Ridgway, John Bacon, Jos. Reckless and others. 

N 

Newbuld, Thomas, of Mansfield Township (son of William and Susannah), and Mary 
Taylor, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Anthony and Ann, at 

19th 2d mo, 1789 
Witnesses— William Clayton, Barzillai, Euphemia, Edith, Caleb, Samuel, 
William, Jr., Sarah. Jr., Susannah, Jr., Elizabeth, Mary, Charles, John, Wil- 
liam, Samuel and Thomas Newbold, Ann, Sarah, Michael, Anthony, Ann, Jr., 
Robert and Thomas Taylor and others. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 665 

O 
Ogbobn, John, of Burlington county, and Sarah Shreve, dan. of Caleb, at Cbester- 

,„i,i 19th 1st mo. 1723-24 

Witnesses— Elizabeth, Hannah and Mary Ogborn, Caleb, Joshua, Joseph 
and Benjamin Shreeve, Isaac Gibbs, Samuel Banting, Richard French, John 
Abbott, Marmaduke Watson and others. 



Page, Edward, of North Wales, Peuna., and Rebecca Vanhagen, of Nottingham 

Township, at Chesterfield 19th 3d mo. 1726 

Witnesses— John, William, Elizabeth, Joanna, Mary and Margaret Page, 
John Warren. John Abbott, Richard French, John Sykes, William Mnrfin, Jo- 
seph Reckless and others. 
Pakcoast, William, of Mansfield Township, and Meribah Allen, of Nottingham Town- 
ship, at Chesterfield 12th 6th mo. 1760 

Witnesses— Hannah and Caleb Pancoast, Samuel and Mary Allen, John 

Sykes, Joseph Borden, Thomas Folks, Abel Field, Benjamin Middletou and 

others 

Pancoast, James, of Mansfield Township (son of Samuel and Sarah), and Sarah 

Wright, of Bordentowu, dan. of Israel, deed, and Alice (uow Alice Merritt), at 

Bordentowu 13th 12th mo. 1797 

Witnesses -Samuel, Hannah, Joseph, Sarah, Abigail and John Pancoast, 
Jr., Alice and Samuel Merritt, Daniel Arney, John Abbott, Cleaytou Newbold, 
William Allinson and others. 
Pancoast, John, of Chesterfield Township (son of Joseph and Sarah), and Ann Abbott, 

of Nottingham, dan. of Samuel and Lucy, at Trenton 3d 1st mo. 1798 

Witnesses -Joseph, Sarah, Hannah, Abigail, Sarah, Jr., William, George, 
James and Sarah Pancoast, Samuel, Lucy, William, George L., John, Susan- 
nah, Ann, Jr., Helena, Joseph, Timothy, Jr., Timothy Abbott. Mahlon Kirk- 
bride, Joseph M. Lawrie and otheis. 
Paxton, James, of Buckingham, Perma., and Mary Horseman, of Monmouth county, 

dau. ( f Marmaduke, at Chesterfield 28th 3d mo. 1724 

Witnesses— Thomas, Elizabeth and William Paxton, Marmaduke, Sarah and 

Sarah Horseman, Jr., John Wood, Richard French, Joseph Reckless, Richard 

Hairison, John Abbott, John Sykes, Thos. Folkes, Jr., and others. 

Plumbsted, Clement, of Philadelphia, Penna., and Sarah Righton, dau. of William 

and Sarah Riddle, of Mount Hope, Burlington Co., at the house of Wm. Biddle. 

3d 1st mo. 1703 
Witnesses — William, Sarah, William, Jr., Lvdia and Thomas Biddle, Joseph 
Kirkbride, Samuel Jennings, Wm. Penn., Jr., and others. 
Potts, Thomas, Jr., of Mansfield Township, and Sarah Reakes, of Chester Township, 

at Meeting House in Chester Township 29th 8th mo. 1730 

Witnesses— Thomas, Mary, Jr., Nathaniel Potts, Samuel, Edmund, Wil- 
liam Stacy and Nathan Beake?, Thomas Januey, Mahlon Kirkbride and others. 
53 



666 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Potts, Stacy, of Trenton, N. J., and Esther Pancoast, of Mansfield, at Lower Spring- 
field r 13th 4th ino. 1758 

Witnesses — Nathaniel, William, Richard, Ruth, Sarah, Amy Potts, Ann, 
Johu and Hannah Pancoast, Isaac Autrain, Isaac Horner, Jr., Joseph Imlay, 
Peter Harvey, Jacob Ridgway and others. 

R 

Reckless, Joseph, of Chesterfield, and Margaret Satterlhwaite, of Burlington, at Bur- 
lington 8th 9th mo. 1716 

Witnesses — Anne, George, James, Dorothy, Mary, Deborah, William, Mar- 
tha, William and Samuel Satterthwaite, Joseph Kirkbride, Daniel Smith, 
Nathan Lovet and others. 

Reckless, Joseph, of Chesterfield, and Elizabeth Fowler, of New Hanover, at Ches- 
terfield 26th 12th mo. 1740 

Witnesses— Benjamin, Joseph, Hannah and Miriam Fowler, Joseph Arney, 
John Sybes, John Warren, Joseph Borden, Anthony Woodward, John Steward, 
Joseph Steward and others. 

Robins, Isaiah, of Burlington county (son of Benjamin, Jr.,), and Sarah Large, of the 

same place, dan. of Samuel, at Chesterfield 15th 12th mo. 17G3 

Witnesses — Benjamin, Joseph, Ann, Mary, Amy and Vauroom Robins, Mary 
Large, George Middleton, Isaac Field, John Abbott, John Lawrie and others. 

Robins, Nathan, of Upper Freehold Township, Monmouth Co., and Joice Burnett, of 

the same place, at Chesterfield 13th 5th mo. 1779 

Witnesses— Nathan Middleton, Jacob Middleton, John Antrum, Amos 
Wright, Joshua Bunting, James Lawrie and others. 

Rogers, Michael, Jr., of Nottingham Township (son of Michael and Ann), and Ann 
Shreve, of Mansfield Township, dau. of Caleb and Grace, at Upper Spring- 
field 20th 3d mo. 1782 

Witnesses — Michael, Ann, Joseph, Rebeccah Rogers, Caleb, Grace, Benja- 
min, Rebecca, Amy, Caleb, Jr., Reuben, Ann and Richard Shreve, Caleb New- 
bold, Benjamin Holloway, Robert Emley and others. 

Rogers, John Staples, of Burlington Township (son of Thomas and Ann), and Mercy 
Taylor, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Samuel, at Chesterfield. 

12th 10th mo. 1780 

Witnesses— Thomas, Ann, Thomas, Jr., Sarah, Phebe, Joseph P., Samuel 

and Ann Rogers, Samuel, Amos, Ann, John, Sarah, Edith and Stacy Taylor, 

Benjamin Linton, William Abbott, Joseph Cooper, Jnmes Lawrie, George Dill- 

wyu and others. 

Rogers, Johu, of Nottingham Township (son of Isaac and Ann), and Susannah For- 
syth, of the same place, dau. of John and Lucretia, at Chesterfield. 

14th 1st mo. 1782 
Witnesses— Joseph Forsyth, Stacy Decow, Joseph M. Lawrie, Thomas Law- 
iie, Jacob Brown, Joshua Bunting, Benjamin Linton ami others. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 667 

S 

Satterthwait, William, of Chesterfield Township, and Martha Marriofc; of the same 

place, at Chesterfield ... 17th 3d mo. 171 1 

Witnesses — William Satterthwait, Jr., John Abbott, Thos. Folkes, Sr., 
John Hunting, \Vm. Wood, Samuel Taylor, Richard French, Joseph Reckless, 
Joseph Steward and others. 

Sattebthwait, Samuel, of Chesterfield (sou of William), and Jane Osborn, dau. of 

Richard, at Chesterfield 18th 9th mo. 1725 

Witnesses— William, William, Jr., Mary and Sarah Satterthwait, Martha 
Osborn, John Abbott, Joseph Reckless, Richard French, John Sykes, .John 
Bunting, Isaac Decow, Robert Murfin and others. 

Satterthwait, Samuel, of Chesterfield Township, and Susannah Forsyth, of the 

same place, at Mansfield 22d 3d mo. 1745 

Witnesses— Richard, Elizabeth, Anne and Mary Satterthwaite, John, Mat- 
thew, Rebecca, Mercy Forsyth, Richard French, John Sykes, Eber Decow, 
Thomas Tallman and others. 

Sattebthwait, Samuel, Jr., of Chesterfield Township, and Mary Cripps, of North- 
ampton Township, dau. of John, deed, and Mary, at Mansfield. 

14th 12th mo. 1757 
Witnesses — Samuel, Susannah, William, Elizabeth, Mary and Hannah Sat- 
terthwaite, Samuel, Hannah and Mary Cripps, John Sykes, John Newbold, 
Peter Tallman, Isaac Field and others. 

Satterthwait, Joshua W., of Chester Township (son of Richard and Elizabeth, dec<l), 
and Ann Middleton, of Chesterfield Township, dau. of Nathan and Lydia, at 

Chesterfield 17th 3d mo. 1785 

Witnesses — John Satterthwait, Nathan, Lydia, Hannah, Jacob, Gideon, 
Mary, Joseph, Gabriel. Samuel, George, Jr., and Lydia Middleton, Benjamin 
Linton, Benjamin Field, Joseph M. Lawrie, Samuel Allen and others. 

Scholey, Thomas, Jr., of Burlington county (son of Thomas and Sarah), and Han- 
nah Fowler, of Monmouth county, dau. of John and Rose, at Chesterfield. 

26th Ed mo. 1720 
Witnesses — Thomas, Sarah, William and Elizabeth Scholey, John, William , 
Francis, John, Jr., and Jeremiah Fowler, Wm. Wood, Richard French, An- 
thony W T oodward, Jr., Joseph Reckless and others. 
Scholey, Samuel, of Chesterfield Township, and Avis Holloway, of the same place, at 

Chesterfield 27th 3d mo. 1725 

Witnesses— Sarah, Thomas, John, Elizabeth, Hannah Scholey, Mary, 
George and James Holloway, Richard French, John Abbott, John Bunting, 
John Sykes and others. 
Scholey, Joseph, of Nottingham Township, and Sarah Brown, of the same place, dau. 

of Preserve Brown, at Chesterfield 1 lth 11th mo. 175G 

Witnesses — Preserve, Mary, Richard, Sarah, William, Abia Brown, James 
Holloway, John Sykes, John Abbott, Timothy Abbott, John Murfin. 



668 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Scholet, James, of Nottingham Township, and Mary Rogers, of Windsor Township, 
Middlesex county, dau. of Isaac and Anu, at Chesterfield . 7th 9th mo. 1786 
Witnesses — Sarah Scholey, Isaac, Ann, Rachel and Elizabeth Rogers, James 
Holloway, John Earl, Joel Taylor, Benjamin Liuton, William Linton, Jr., Jo- 
seph Decow and others. 
Scoit, John, of Willingboro Township, and Hannah Lambert, of Nottingham, at the 

house of Thomas Lambert 7th 3d mo. 1695 

Witnesses — Martin Scott, Thomas, John, John, Jr., Samuel, Margaret, 
Mary and Rebecca Lambert, Mahlon Stacy, Samuel Jennings, Matthew Wat- 
son, Samuel Bunting, Daniel Smith, William Emley and others. 
Silver, Archibald, of Burlington couuty, and Mary Cowgill, of the same place, dau. 

of Ralph and Susannah, at Chesterfield ... 14th 2d mo. 1720 

Witnesses— Ralph, Susannah, Nehemiah, Abraham, Isaac and Joyce Cow- 
gill, Samuel Bunting, William Wood, John Bunting, John Warren, Joseph 
Reckless and others. 
Skirm, Abraham, of Trenton (son of Richard, deed, aD a Elizabeth), and Elizabeth 
Fowler, of New Hanover, dau. of John, deed, and Eliza th , at Chesterfield. 

24th 3d mo. 1750 

Witnesses — Elizabeth and Mary Skirm, Elizabeth Reckless, Joseph and 

Benjamin Fowler, Joseph Steward, Joseph Reckless, George Middleton, John 

Bunting, Wm. Imlay, Joseph Borden, Jr., and others. 

Smith, Daniel, of Burlington, and Mary Murfin, of Nottingham Township, at Francis 

Davenport's house 2d 5th mo. 1695 

Witnesses— Joseph, Emanuel and Samuel Smith, John, William, Anne and 
Joanna Murfin, Joshua Wright, Mahlon Stacy, John Curtis, Matthew Watson 
and others. 

Stevenson, John, of Chesterfield Township, and Amelia Lawrie, of Nottingham, at 

Chesterfield 23d 11th mo. 1786 

Witnesses— William, Mary, Susannah, Margaret, Samuel, Jr., William and 
James Stevenson, Anne, Joseph M., Mary, James, Mary, William, Mary and 
Elizabeth Lawrie, Samuel Bunting, Anthony Taylor, John Earl and others. 
Steward, W T illiam, of New Hanover Township (son of John and Elizabeth), and Re- 
becca Taylor, of Chesterfield, dau. of Samuel and Anne, at Chesterfield. 

28th 9th mo. 1751 

Witnesses— Susannah Steward, Robert, Samuel, Thomas, William, John, 

Benjamin, George, Achsah and Sarah Taylor, Abraham Skirm, Godfrey Beck, 

William Cook and others. 

Steward, Thomas, of Hanover Township (son of Joseph, deed, and Bridget), and 

Mary Allen, of Nottingham, dau. of Samuel, deed, at Chesterfield. 

11th 3d mo. 1784 
Witnesses— Abner, Jonathan, Susannah, Mary, Lydia and Samuel Steward, 
Mary, Henry, Michael, Samuel, Nathan and Lydia Allen, James Lawrie, Ben- 
jamin Linton and others. 

Stockton, Samuel, of Somerset county, and Amy Doughty, of Chesterfield, dau. of 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 669 

Jacob, at Chesterfield 18th 4th mo. 1719 

Witnesses- Jacob, Amy, Sarah and Elizabeth Doughty, Wm. Wood, Rich- 
ard French. Thomas Folkes, Preserve Brown, John Bunting, Win. Montgom- 
ery, Anthony Woodward, Joseph Reckless, John Leonard, Richard Stockton, 
Joseph, Robert and John Stockton. 
Stokes, Jacob, of Newton Township, Gloucester Co., and Hannah Haines, of Ches- 
terfield Township, at Mansfield 2Sth 4th mo. 1779 

Witnesses— Abigail Stokes, Mary, John and Josiah Haines, Joseph Haines, 
Joshua Newbold, John Reckless, Samuel Allinson, Peter Ellis, Job Harvey, Jo- 
seph Pancoast and others. 
Sykes, John, of Chesterfield, and Joanna Murfin, of Nottingham, at Chesterfield. 

19th 8th mo. 1704 
Witnesses— Elizabeth Sykes, William, Sarah and John Murfin, Frances 
Davenport, Thos. Folkes, Edward Rockhill, Wm. Wood, Isaac Horner, Joseph 
Reckless, John Warren, Daniel Smith and others. 



Tanttjm, John, of Nottingham, and Elizabeth Bacon, of Chesterfield, dau. of 

and Elizabeth, at Chesterfield 25th 9th mo. 1702 

Witnesses— Elizabeth Bacon, John Bacon, Thomas Folkes, Francis Daven- 
port, Richard French, Isaac Horner, Samuel Taylor, William Wood and 
©thers. 

Tanttjm, Hartshorn, of Nottingham (son of Joseph and Mary), and Miriam Kelley, of 

Chesterfield, dau. of David and Hannah, at Chesterfield . . ..10th 9th mo. 1795 

Witnesses— Mary, Joseph and Samuel Tantum, David, Hannah, Sarah, 

Hannah, Jr., Margaret, David, Jr., Killey, Benjamin Linton, Thomas Lawrie, 

Amos Middleton and others. 

Tantum, Joseph, of Nottingham (son of Joseph, dec'd, and Mary), and Sarah Killey, of 

Chesterfield, dau. of David and Hannah, at Chesterfield 5th 11th mo. 1795 

Witnesses— Mary and Hartshorn Tantum, David, Hannah, Margaret. Han- 
nah, Jr., Killey, Amos Middleton, Benjamin Linton, John Wright, Tbornas 
Thorn and others. 

Taylor, Samuel, and Susanna Horseman, at the house of William Black. 

14th 2d mo. 1686 

Witnesses— Marmaduke Horseman, Anthony Woodhouse, William Black, 

John Bainbridge, Jehu Horner, Daniel Bacon, John Hooten, Samuel Hunter 

and others. 

Taylor, Samuel, Jr. of Chesterfield (son of Samuel), and Annie Folkes, of the same 

place, dau. of Thomas and Elizabeth, at Chesterfield. . . . 29th 9th mo. 1716 

Witnesses-Susanna, Susanna, Jr., and John Taylor, Mary Folkes, Robert 

Hunter, George Deacon, Isaac Davenport, Joseph Reckless, John Harrison, 

John Kinsey, Daniel Smith, Thomas Curtis, Wm. Murfin and others, 

Taylor, John, of Chesterfield, and Lydia Wright, of the same place, dau. of Thomas 

and Elizabeth, at Springfield 16th 12th mo. 1736 



67O NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Witnesses— Charles, Rachel, Jacob and Jonathan Taylor, Thomas, Eliza- 
beth, Amos, Thomas, Jr., Deborah, Margaret, Abigail Wright, John Cheshire, 
Richard French, John Sykes, Caleb Shreve, Paul Merchant, Joseph Reckless 
arid othei-. 

Taylor, Mahlon, of Hunterdon county (son of Bernard), and Mary Homer, of Middle- 
sex county, dan. of Joseph, at Stony Brook 12th 11th mo. 1777 

Witnesses— Bernard, Mary, Benjamin, Jr., Elizabeth and Mary Taylor, Jr., 
Joseph and Sarah Homer, Benjamin Clarke, Jonathan Kirkbride, Joseph Field, 
Henry Clifton and others. 12th 11th mo. 1777 

Taylor, John, Sr., of Bordentown, and Ann Thorn, of Burlington county, dan. of 

Thomas and Susannah, at Chesterfield 6th 11th mo. 1800 

Wituesses^Anthony, Ann, John, Jr., Ann, Jr., Sarah, Michael and Phebe 
Taylor, Susannah, George, Enoch, William, Thomas, Susannah, Isaac and De- 
odemia Thorn, Amos Middleton, Joseph Bullock, Michael Taylor, Robert 
Field and others. 

Thorn, Isaac, of Chesterfield (sou of John), and Mary Schooler, of Nottingham, dau. of 

Joseph, dec'd, at Chesterfield 12th 10th mo. 1780 

Witnesses— John, Deodemia, Daniel, John, Joseph and Ann Thorn, Sarah 
and James Scholey, Joseph M. Lawrie, Amos Middleton, George Dilwyn, James 
Lawrie and others. 

Tilton, William, of Middletown, Monmouth county, and Esther Middleton, of Not- 
tingham, at Chesterfield 1st 3d mo., 1770 

Witnesses— Nathan, Increase, Daniel and Sarah Tilton, Thomas, Patience, 
Amos, Elizabeth, Margaret and Hannah Middleton, Joseph Borden, David 
Killey, Peter Ellis, Clayton Newbold, John Gardner and others. 
Tilton, Jediah, of Nottingham, and Hannah Allen, of the same place, at Chesterfield. 

9th 11th mo. 1775 
Witnesses— Daniel Tilton, Samuel, Mary, Patience, Mary, Jr., Gabriel, 
Michael, Henry, William, Samuel, Jr., and Nathan Allen, James Taylor, An- 
thony Woodward, Benjamin Linton, William Abbott, John Abbott, Caleb Og- 
born and others. 

V 
Yandbrbeck, Benjamin, of Nottingham, and Rachel Curtis, of Chesterfield, at Borden- 
town .. 8th 11th mo. 1786 

Witnesses— Ann, Sarah, Peter, William, Peter Yanderbeck, Patience, John 
and Sarah Curtis, Timothy Hance, Israel Kirby, William Cook, Fretwell 
Wright, Isaac Horner, Thomas Paine, 1 Marmaduke Watson and others. 

w 

Walling, Thomas, of Chesterfield, and Anua Lippincott, of the same place, at Ches- 
terfield 4th 12th mo. 1783 

1 Tom Pain.- resided for some time in Bordentown. If it seems strange that he should 
be a guest at a Quaker wedding, it should be remembered that this was five or six years 
before the publication of his ''Rights of Man," and seven years before the appearance of 
his •• Age "t Reason." 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 67 I 

Witnesses Joseph Walling, James Woolley, Amos Wright, Benjamin Lin- 
ton, Amos Miililh'ton, James Lawrie, Joseph M. Lawrie, William Abbott, Jo- 
Beph Forsyth and others. 
Wabdell, Joseph, Jr., of Shrewsbury, Monmouth county (son of Joseph), and Hannah 
Bunting, of Chesterfield, clan, of John, at Chesterfield . . .26th 11th mo. 1761 
Witnesses Elizabeth, Meribah, Margaret and William Wardell, Samuel, 
Margaret, -Joshua, Aaron and Alice Bunting, Benjamin Sykes, Abel Middle- 
ton, John Howard, William Parker and others. 
Wabe, John, Jr., of Burlington county, and Catharine Titus, of the same place, at 

Upper Springfield 16th 6th mo. 1779 

Witnesses- John, Andrew, Edith, Ada, Sarah and Mary Ware, Robert Em- 
ley, Cleayton Newbold, Samuel Hough, Joseph Newbold, Michael Earl, An- 
thony Sykes, Anthony Taylor, Samuel Gauntt and others. 
Wabben, John, of Oniconnickon, Burlington county, and Joan Sykes, of the sane 

place, widow of Samuel Sykes 9th 1 1th mo. 1689 

Witnesses— George Hutchinson, John Tomlinson, Percival Towle, William 
Wood, Thomas Scholey, Joseph Hutchinson, William Parker, Matthew Cham- 
pion, Joseph Burgin, William Satterthwait and John Curtis and others. 
Wethekil, Thomas, Jr., of Burlington (son of Thomas and Anne), and Katharine 
Sykes, of Chesterfield, dau. of John and Joanna, at Chesterfield. 

16th 3d mo. 1744 
Witnesses— Thomas, Anne, Christopher and Mary Wetheril, John, Joanna, 
Samuel, Elizabeth, Anthony, Benjamin and Joanna Sykes. Jr., Richard 
French, Joshua Shreve, John Black, Joseph Reckless, Joseph Woodward, John 
Kirkbride, Joseph Allinson and others. 
Wheatley, Caleb, of Nottingham, and Sarah Scholey, of the same place, at Chester- 
field 10th 10th mo. 169fi 

Witnesses — William, Robert, Mary and Sarah Scholey, Francis Davenport, 
Matthew Watson, John Bunting, Thomas Folkes, John Mm fin, Joseph Smith 
and ethers. 
Williams, George, of Shrewsbury, Monmouth county, and Mary Ellis, widow, of Not- 
tingham, dau. of John and Anne Abbott, at Chesterfield. . 12th 9th mo. 1730 
Witnesses— John, Judah and Katharine Williams, John, Anne, Rachel, Eliz- 
abeth, John, Jr., Abbott, Isaac Horner, William Murfin, John Cheshire, Wm. 
Satterthwait, Joseph Reckless, Matthew Watson, Joseph Burr, Anthony Wood- 
ward and others. 
Williams, George, Jr., of Shrewsbury, Monmouth county (son of George), and Eliz- 
abeth Abbott, of Nottingham, dau. of John and Anne, at Chesterfield. 

18th 3d mo. 1738 
Witnesses— Mary and John Williams, John, Anne, Timothy. Rachel, Sarah, 
John, Jr. , and Samuel Abbott, Wm. Murfin, Joseph Reckless, Joseph Killer, 
Matthew Watson, Joseph Burr, Benj. Talman and othi rs. 
Williams, Hezekiah, of Shrewsbury, Monmouth county (son of George), and S 
Abbott, of Nottingham, dan. of John and Anne, at Chi st< rfield. 

22d 3d mo. 1740 



672 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Witnesses — George, Jr., Williams, Rachel and Samuel Abbott, Anthony 
Woodward, Marmadiike Watson, Joseph Killey, Joseph Burr, Joseph Curtis, 
Wm. Murfiu, Joseph Borden, Jr., Isaac Arey and others. 

Williams, Joseph, of Hanover, and Sarah Woodward, of Cnesterfield, at . 

Cth 4th mo. 1786 
Witnesses— Elizabeth and John Williams, Elizabeth, Increase, Mary, Jo- 
seph, Phebe, Susannah, Abner, Jethro, Josiah, Benjamin, Valerian, George 
and Margaret Woodward, Amos Wright, Wm. Lawrie, Joseph Holmes, An- 
thony lieckless, Benjamin Suitor and others. 
Wiilets, Richard, of Monmouth county, and Sarah Overton, of Burlington county, 

dau. of Samuel, deed, and Haunab, at Chesterfield 28th 7th mo. 1732 

Witnesses— Richard, Jr., and Mary Willets, Hannah and Joseph Overton, 
Richard French, Isaac Horner, Wm. Murfin, Joseph Reckless, George Snow, 
Paruel Clayton and others. 
W t illitts, Joseph, Jr., of Chesterfield, and Mary Holloway. of the same place, at Cross- 
wicks 2Gth5thmo. 1768 

Witnesses— Joseph Willits, Rebecca, Benjamin, John, Margaret, George, 
Ruth, Samuel, Ann, Kebecca, Isaac, Margaret, Avis and Asa Holloway, Thomas 
Harrison, Joseph Reckless, William Lawrie, Joseph Newbold, Apollo Wood- 
ward, Samuel Taylor, Jos. Bullock and others. 
Wilson, Isaac, of Philadelphia, Penua.. and Phebe Middletou, of Nottingham, at 

Chesterfield 10th 10th mo. 1793 

Witnesses — Samuel, Aune, Thomas, Mercy, Dinah, Amos, Lydia, David, 
Elizabeth, Asa, Nathan, George, William, Patience, Hannah, Jacob, Increase, 
Rebecca, Sarah, Thomas, Thomas, John, Elizabeth, Joseph, Miriam and Gid- 
eon Middletou, Thos. M. Potter. Joseph M. Lawrie, Aaron Ivius, Benjamin 
Linton and others. 
Wistau, John, of Upper Alloways C;eek, Salem county (son of Richard and Sarah 

dec<l), and Charlotte Newbold, of Mansfield, dan. of Clayton and Mary, at . 

17ihl0thmo. 1781 
Witnesses — Mary B., Richard, Caspar, Jr., Thomas, Elizabeth, Sarah 
Wistar, Cleayton, Mary, Jose[ h, Tolly, Lydia, Edith, Edith, Jr., Nancy, 
Peggy, William, Hannah and Martha, Sarah, William, Jr., Elizabeth, Charles, 
Barzillai, Samuel, Rachel, Suky, Rebecca, Caleb, Thomas and Caleb Newbold, 
Thomas Earl, Joseph Wood, Anthony Taylor and others. 
Woling, Thomas, of Chesterfield, and Elizabeth Bevis, of the same place, at Chester- 
field .... 10th 7th mo. 17fi0 

Witnesses— Essacher and Demnou Bevis, John Sykes, Samuel Satterthwait, 
George Middleton, Benjamin Taylor, James Holloway and others. 
Woodward, Anthony, late of Long Island, now of West New Jersey, and Hannah 

Folkes, dau. of Thoma? 14th 12th mo. 1686 

Witnesses —Thomas, Thomas, Jr., Folkes, Samuel Bunting, John Bunting, 
Wm. Wood, William Biddle, John Curtis, Joseph Hutchinson and others. 

WboLLEY, Janus, of Ch isterfield, and Abigail Middleton, of Nottingham, at Chester- 
field 13th 12th mo. 1770 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 673 

Witnesses— Stephen Woolley, Thomas, Patience, Hannah, George, Dinah, 
Samuel, Gideon, David, Elizabeth, Amos, Hannah, Sarah, Hannah and Jacob 
Middleton, Joseph Borden, Benjamin Field, Samuel Abbott, Peter Ellis and 
others. 
Wciolley. James, of Nottingham, and Huldah Skirm, of the same place, at the house 
of'Abram Skirm 18th 12th mo. 1776. 

Witnesses — Samuel and Ruth Woolley, Abram, Elizabeth and Tacey Skim, 
Isaiah Robbius. Joseph Scholey, Barzillai Furman, David Middleton, James 
Coolman, Job Scott and others. 

Worth, Giles, of Stony Brook, Middlesex county (son of Joseph and Sarah), and 
Elizabeth Tantum, of Nottingham, dau. of John and Elizabeth, at Chesterfield. 

22d 8th mo. 1724 
Witnesses -Joseph, Joseph, Jr., Sarah, Jr., Providence and Anne Worth, 
John and Elizabeth Tantum, Joseph Chapman, Benjamin Clark, Daniel Bacon, 
Joseph Burleigh, Isaac Horner, William Murfin, John Cheshire and others. 

Weight, Samuel, of Nottingham, and Jane Allen, of Bensalem, Bucks Co., Penna., 

dau. of William, at Bristol 15th 1 1 th mo. 1768 

Witnesses— Ann, Sarab, Ann, Jr., Wright, William, Mary, Joseph, Samuel, 
Mary, Jr., Sarab, Abigail, Margaret. William, Jr., Elizabeth, Sarah, Samuel 
Allen, Phineas Buckley, Joseph Baldwin, Ebenezer Large, James Thornton, 
John Church, Joseph Rodman and others. 
Weight, Abner, of New Hanover (son of Amos and Ann, deed), and Sarah Hamson, 
of the same place, dau. of Thomas, deed, and Sarah, at Upper Freehold. 

19th l'2th mo. 1776 
Witnesses— Amos, Nathan, Samuel, David, Thomas, Mary, Sarah and 
Sarah Wright, Jr., Joseph, Ann and Thomas Harrison, Jr., John Bullock, Egb- 
ert Kirby, Michael Rogers, Joseph Fowler, John Ellis, Alexander Howard, 
Aaron Bunting, Amos Bullock and others. 
Weight, Ebenezer, of Hanover, and Elizabeth Steward, of the same place, at Upper 

Freehold 8th 6th mo. 17S0 

Witnesses— Fretwell, Mary, Ellis, Rebekah, Nathan, Mahlou, Mary, Sam- 
uel, Joel and Robert Wright, Joseph, Aun, Abner, Mary, Jonathan, Susannah, 
Thoma=, Aaron, Hannah, Elizabeth, Lydia, Aaron, Hannah, Lydia, Elizabeth 
Steward, Joseph Bullock, John Stevenson, Alexander Howard, Amos Middle- 
ton and others. 
Weight, Robert, of Hanover (son of David and Sarah), and Ann Harrison, dau. of 

Thomas and Sarah, of Hanover, at Upper Freehold 13th 2d mo. 1783 

Witnesses— David, Elizabeth, David, Jr., Abner, Sarah, Nathan, Elizabeth, 

Ebenezer and Elizabeth Wright, Tacey Harrison, John Bullock, Benjamin 

Holloway, Richard Waler, Caleb Ivius, William Cook, Joseph Rogers and 

others. 

Weight, Isaac, Jr., of Chesterfield, and Mary Arney, of the same place, at Borden- 

t 0wn 9th 3d mo. 1796 

Witnesses— John, Hannah, Mary, Jr., Hannah, Jr., Joseph, Henry, Israel, 
54 



674 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Sarah, Jr., Mary Wright, Margaret, Daniel, Joseph, Elizabeth Arney, Nathan 
Middleton, William Salterthwait, Benjamin Linton, Marmaduke Watson, Isaac 
Ivius, John Taylor and others. 



Yaedley, Joseph, of Philadelphia, Penna. (son of William and Sarah, both deed, late 
of Lower Makefield, Bucks Co., Penna.), and Sarah Field, of Chesterfield, 

dan. of Isaac and Mary, at 8th 11th mo. 1798 

Witnesses — 

FEMALES. 
• A 



Abbot, Jane, to Joseph Burr 16th 12th mo. 

Abbott, Ann, to John Pancoast 3d 1st mo. 

Abbott, Elizabeth, to George Williams, Jr 18th 3d mo. 

Abbott, Mary, to Benjamin Ellis 24th 9th mo. 

Abbott, Sarah, to Hezekiah Williams 22d 3d mo. 

Allen, Ann, to Empson Kirby 11th 1st mo. 

Allen, Hannah, to Jediah Tilton 9th 11th mo. 

Allen, Jane, to Samuel Wright , . 15th 11th mo. 

Allen, Lydia, to Nathan Middleton 14th 5th mo. 

Allen, Mary, to Thomas Steward 11th 3d mo. 

Allen, Meribah. to William Pancoast - . . . . 1 2th 6th mo. 

Arney, Mary, to Isaac Wright, Jr 9th 3d mo. 

Ashton, Mary, to John Combs, Jr 4th 11th mo. 

B 

Bacon, Elizabeth, to John Tantum 25th 9th mo. 

Barton, Meribah, to Jonathan Middleton 15th 2d mo. 

Beakes, Sarah, to Thomas Potts, Jr 29th 8th mo. 

Bevis, Elizabeth, to Thomas Woling ' 10th 7th mo. 

Borden, Margaret, to Samuel Allen 6th 4th mo. 

Borden, Mary, to James Lawrie 15th 11th mo. 

J trown, Mary, to John Jones, Jr 12th 8th mo. 

Brown, Sarah, to Joseph Scholey . . 11th 11th mo. 

Backman, Ruth, to Richard Harrison 4th 3d mo. 

Bullock, Susannah, to John Abbott 17th '9th mo. 

Bunting, Anne, to t 'ornelius Clauson 21st 9th mo. 

Bunting, Hannah, to Joseph Wardell, Jr 26th 11th mo. 

Bunting, Hannah, to Thomas Lawrence 8th 10th mo. 

Bunting, Phebe, to Abraham Farringtou 1st 8th mo. 

Bunting, Sarah, to Thomas Huuloke 21st 4th mo. 

Bunting, Sarah, to William Murfin.. . 8th June. 

Burnett, Joice, to Nathan Robins 13th 5th mo. 

Burtice, Ann, to William Barber 7th 10th mo. 



726 

798 
738 
720 
740 
781 
775 
768 
767 
784 
760 
796 
795 



702 
742 
730 
760 
785 
759 
756 
756 
C'87 
778 
728 
761 
788 
725 
711 
704 
779 
784 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 675 

C 

( lark. Aunt', to John Cooper 18th 1st mo. 1712 13 

Clark, Elizabeth, to Jam,. Lord 24th 1st mo. 171 I 5 

Clarke, Sarah, to Richard Hallet 4th 5th mo. 1791 

Cowgill, Jaue, to Benjamin Linton 19th 2d mo. 1733 

Cowgill, Mary, to Archibald Silver 11th 2d mo. 1720 

Cow-ill, Rebecca, to Richard Gibbs 17th 1st mo. 1725 

Craft, Charity, to Benjamin Combs 12th 12th mo. 1798 

Cripps, Mary, to Samnel Satterthwait, Jr 14th 12th mo. 1757 

Curtis. Elizabeth, to Jonathan Kirkbride 18th 11th mo. 1767 

Curtis, Elizabeth, to Thomas Folkes 21st 12th mo. 1688 

Curtis, Rachel, to Benjamin Vanderbeck 8th 11th mo. 1 786 

Curtis, Rachel, to Joseph Lawrence 18th 10th mo. 1712 

D 

Davenport, Anne, to Isaac DeCow 24th 2d mo. 1705 

Davenport, Rebecca, to Josiah Kay 14th 3d mo. 1713 

Decou, Rebecca, to Francis Davenport 12th 8th mo. 1692 

Decow, Susanna, to Ambrose Field 24th 2d mo. 1705 

Doughty, Amy, to Samuel Stockton 18th 4th mo. 1719 

Doughty, Mary, to John Jones 12th 9th mo. 1717 

E 

Ellis, Elizabeth, to Thomas Curtis 21st 9th mo. 1694 

Ellis, Mary, to George Williams 12th 9th mo. 1730 

F 

Field, Anne, to Ebenezer Large, Jr 14th 8th mo, 17 12 

Field, Elizabeth, to Jacob Large 11th 14th mo. J 719 

Field, Elizabeth, to John Hartshorn, Jr : 5th 6th mo. 1799 

Field, Sarah, to Joseph Yardley 8th 11th mo. 1798 

Folkes, Annie, to Samuel Taylor, Jr 29th 9th mo. 1 716 

Folkes, Hannah, to Anthony Woodward 14th 12th mo. 1686 

Folkes, Mary, to Samuel Bunting 18th 9th mo. 1684 

Forsyth, Elizabeth, to Joseph Hendrickson 10th 3d mo. 1796 

Forsyth, Mary, to Thomas Middleton 11th 12th mo. 1709 

Forsyth, Rebekah, to Martin Gibbs 17th 10th mo. 1781 

Forsyth, Susannah, to Samuel Satterthwait 22d 3d mo. 1 745 

Forsyth, Susannah, to John Rogers 14th 1st mo. 1782 

Forsyth, Sarah, to James Crues 23d 3d mo. 1734 

Fowler, Elizabeth, to Joseph Reckless 26th 12th mo. 1740 

Fowler, Elizabeth, to Abraham Skirm 24th 3d mo. 1750 

Fowler, Elizabeth, to John Ellis 17th 10th mo. L770 

Fowler, Hannah, to Thomas Scholey, Jr 29th 3d mo. 1720 

Fowler, Hannah, to George Middleton 29th 10th mo. 1743 

French, Mary, to Preserve Brown, Jr 15th 8th mo. 1 7 2 1 



6y6 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

H 

Haines, Hannah, to Jacob Stokes 28th 4th ino. 

Hamson, Sarah, to Abner Wright 19th 12th ino. 

\ Harrison, Ann, to Robert Wright 13th 2d ino. 

^ Hewes, Mary, to Abel Middleton 18th 12th mo. 

Hulloway, Avis, to Samuel Scholey 27th 3d mo. 

Holloway, Avis, to Joseph Middleton 17th 4th mo. 

Holloway, Mary, to Joseph Willitts, Jr 26th 5th mo. 

Holloway, Rebecca, to William Abbott 11th 1st mo. 

Homer, Mary, to Mahlon Taylor 12th 11th mo. 

Horseman, Abigail, to William Banting 11th 8th mo. 

Horseman, Mary, to James Paxton 28th 3d mo. 

Horseman, Susanna, to Samuel Taylor 14th 2d mo. 

Howard, Damaris, to Samuel Farnsworth 19th 11th mo. 

Huddleston, Katharice, to Joseph Collings ... 8th 7th mo. 

Hunt, Rachel, to Thomas Lightfoot. 5th 1st mo. 

K 

Kelley, Miriam, to Hartshorn Tautum 10th 9th mo. 

Killey, Sarah, to Joseph Tautum 5th 11th mo. 

King, Mary, to Richard French 13th 11th mo. 

L 

Lambert, Hannah, to John Scott 7th 3d mo. 

Large, Mary, to Joshua Bunting 17th 1 1th mo. 

Large, Sarah, to Isaiah Robins 15th 12th mo. 

Lawrie, Amelia, to John Stevenson 23d 11th mo. 

Lawrie, Haunah, to Benjamin Clark ... 13th 12th mo. 

L iwrie, Helena, to William Abbott 13th 3d mo. 

Lawrie, Lydia, to Joseph Bullock, Jr 16th 3d mo. 

Lawrie, Mary, to Isaac Clark 19th 1 1th mo. 

Lawrie, Mary, to Samuel DeCow ... 8th 12th mo. 

Lippincott, Anna, to Thomas Walling 4th 12th mo. 

M 

Mauleverer, Anne, to John Abbott 26th 3d mo. 

Harriot, Martini, to William Satterthwait. 17th 3d mo. 

Middletou, Abigail, to James Woolley 13th 12th mo. 

Middleton, Aun, to Joshua W. Satterthwait 17th 3d mo 

Middleton, Aun, to Samuel Marsh 6th 10th mo. 

Middleton, Deborah, to Samuel Bunting 8th 5th mo. 

Middleton, Elizabeth, to Barzillai Furman 14th 9th mo. 

Middleton, Esther, to William Tiltou. 1st 3d mo. 

Middleton, Haunah, to David Killey.. 14th 2d mo. 

Middletou, Hannah, to Richard W. Furman 21st 1st mo. 

Middleton, Margaret, to Joseph Forsyth 9th 4th mo. 



CHESTERFIELD FRIENDS' MARRIAGE RECORDS. 677 

Middleton, Meribah, to Joseph Fowler 27th 8th mo. 1748 

Middletou, Miriam, to Peter Ellis 18th 4th mo. 1771 

Middleton, Phebe, to George Justice 13th 11th mo. 1777 

Middleton, Phebe, to Isaac Wilson 10th 10th mo. 1793 

Middletou, Rebekah, to Joseph Borden 15th 2d mo. 1759 

Moore, Lydia, to Charles Burton 8th 10th mo. 1800 

Murfin, Anu, to Thomas Lawrie 19th 6th mo. ] 760 

Murfin, Joanna, to John Sykes 19th 8th mo. 1704 

Murfin, Mary, to Daniel Smith 2d 5th mo. 1695 

Murfin, Mary, to Samuel Large, Jr 24th 3d mo. 1744 

N 

Newbold, Charlotte, to John Wistar ... - 17th 10th mo. 1781 

o 

Odling, Rebecca, to Matthew Forsyth 15th 1st mo. 1696 

Oldeu, Ann, to Elisha Clark 9th 1st mo. 1793 

Osborn, Jane, to Samuel Satterthwait 18th 9th mo. 1725 

Overtou, Sarah, to Richard Willets 28th 7th mo. 1732 

P 

Pancoast, Esther, to Stacy Potts 13th 4th mo. 1758 

Pancoast, Sarah, to John Beaumont 17th 3d mo. 1744 

Parker, Sarah, to Benjamin Cathrall 14th 1st mo. 1779 

Plaskett, Margaret, to Conrad Kotts 27th 7th mo. 1757 

Potts, Mary, to Isaac Horner, Jr 16th 11th mo. 1757 

R 

Rato, Rhoda, to Jacob Garwood 10th 10th mo. 1776 

Reckless, Anne, to George Emlen, Jr 25th 10th mo. 1740 

Ridgway, Lucia, to John Ellis 12th 5th mo. 1762 

Righton, Sarah, to Clement Plumsted 3d 1st mo. 1703 

Rockhill, Sarah, to John Black ,-."'. 4th 10th n . 

Rockhill, Tabitha, to Beujamin Field 18th 11th mo. 

Rogers, Mary, to James Scholey 7th 9th mo. 1786 

S 

Satterthwait, Elizabeth, to John Haines 13th 9th mo. 1709 

Satterthwait, Hannah, to Benjamin Linton 21st 1 lth mo. 1764 

Satterthwait Jane, to John Gauutt 24th 11th mo. 1756 

Satterthwait, Mary, to Job Harvey ' 25th 5th mo. 1768 

Satterthwaite, Margaret, to Joseph Reckless 8th 9th mo. 1716 

Scholey, Sarah, to Caleb Wheatley 10th 10th mo. 1696 

Schooley, Mary, to Isaac Thorn 12th 10th mo. 1780 

Scott, Bridget, to Edward Lucas 3d 7th mo. 1VU0 

Shreve, Ann, to Michael Rogers. Jr 20th 3d mo. 1782 

Shreve, Sarah, to John Ogborn 19th 1st mo. 1723-24 



1706 
1772 



Lb 



678 NEW JERSEY COLONIAL DOCUMENTS. 

Shinn, Mary, to Charles Clark 5th 3d 1110. 1794 

Skirm, Huldah. to James Woolley 18th 12th mo. 1776 

Smith, Elizabeth, to John Hill 15th 12th mo. 1756 

Steward, Elizabeth, to Ebenezer Wright 8th Gth mo. 1780 

Syki . Edith, to Thomas Earl, Jr 15th 4th mo. 1778 

Sykes, Elizabeth, to Isaac Horner 19th 3d mo. 1709 

Sykes, Hannah, to John Kirkbride 16th 1st mo. 1730-31 

Sykes, Joan, to John Warren 9th 11th mo. 1G89 

Sykes, Katharine, to Thomas Wetheril, Jr 16th 3d mo. 1744 

Sykes, Mary,' to Preserve Brown . . , 21st 8th mo. 1747 

Sykes, Rebecca, to Thomas Ganet 25th 2d mo. 1744 

T 

Tantum, Elizabeth, to Giles Worth , 22d 8th mo. 1724 

Taylor, Achsah, to Joseph DeCow 15th 10th mo. 1778 

Taylor, Lydia, to Thomas Moore 4th Gth mo. 1783 

Taylor, Mary, to Robert Field 12th 2d mo. 1722 

Taylor, Mary, to Thomas Newbold 19th 2d mo. 1789 

Taylor, Merey, to John Staples Rogers 12th 10th mo. 1780 

Taylor, Rebecca, to William Steward . 28th 9th mo. 1751 

Taylor, Rebecca, to Charles French . . 7th 4th mo. 1773 

Taylor, Sarah, to Richard Brown 15th 5th mo. 1755 

Taylor, Sarah, to John Curtis, Jr 10th 3d mo. 3 785 

Tilton, Hannah, to Jacob Middleton 1st 2d mo. 1779 

Tilton, Patience, to Thomas Middleton 15th 11th mo. 1735 

Titus, Catharine, to John Ware, Jr 16th 6th mo. 1779 

u 

Underbill, Rebecca, to Hugh Hutchin 3d 1st mo. 1707-8 

V 

Vanderbeck, Rachel, to John Branniu 5th 10th mo. 1791 

Vanhagen, Rebecca, to Edward Page 19th 3d mo. 1726 

w 

Whittiker, Anne, to John Hodson 27th 7th mo. 1716 

Wilson, Triphena, to Joseph English . . , 16th 4th mo. 1780 

Wood, Anne, to Thomas Lfiinbert 31st 1 1th mo. 1710 

Wood, Edith, t« ( horge Bullock 7th 2d mo. 1776 

W01 id, Elizabeth, to Enoch Clark 15th 2d mo. 17U2 

Wood, Hannah, to Anthony Bullock 10th 5th mo. 1798 

Wood, Ruth, to George Holloway 10th 9th mo. 1731 

\ oodward, Elizabeth, to John King 13th 9th mo. 1706 

Woodward, Sarah, to Joseph Williams 6th 4th mo. 1786 

Wright, Ann, to Ralph Allen 21st 10th mo. 1762 

Wright, Elizabeth, to Daniel Arney 3d 12th mo. 1794 

Wright, Lydia, to John Taylor , 16th 12th mo. 1736 

Wright, Mary, to Samuel Danford 5th 9th mo. 1717 

Wright, Sarah, to James Paucoast 13th 12th mo. 1797 
















<- A ^ 




<0 < .A O I 



,4 •/-, 






• V 












>0O 









■"o o x 



y- v 






\\ - 



•£-. » 






•/•, 



V 












^ Xi 



%. ? 





'•%. 






/' 










**v 













■w* 









0. ■ r> /. 



'**c 









A 



> 


















ty X 



0\ -7*. 



O A> 






,A 
A i I 



%'$ 






c 









\- 












'<? v^ 










V v- 










x° ^ 












r 






M 







.£' ~*£ 



<!■ ,\\ 



A v 


^ \ 





































'"o o N 



A- 



* A 

.A 1 



* % 






\ V ^A 



-> ' -V' 



.*■* 






O s 



r 'r A^ 



**> 






oV 









V- - A- v 



v- y 1 



A 









*V 






^ 



*^ 



*> A 



A 
v c 



- 



0> 



- 
CA r > 

% A^ 









. AUG 68 

■^^■^ N MA.NCriESTER. 







A>^ 






h -n* 



5* ^ N 



