I 

 



f 



t '^kpillilSo 



T. 



\D 




Given By 



as,s 



^NTS 



"^ 



'5 



S^ 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLf COMMUNISM 



V 



. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MATUSOW CASE 

jt. 



HEARING 

BEFORE THE 

SUBCOMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE 

ADMINISTKATION OF THE INTERNAL SECURITY 

ACT AND OTHER INTERNAL SECURITY LAWS 

OF THE 

sllY' COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 

UNITED STATES SENATE 

EIGHTY-FOURTH CONGRESS 

FIRST SESSION 
PURSUANT TO S. RES. 58 



FEBRUARY 21, 1955 



PART 1 



Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary 




UNITED STATES 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
59886 WASHINGTON : 1955 






Boston Public Library 
Cuperintendp.nt of Documsnta 



COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 

HARLEY M. KILGORE, West Virginia, Chairman 

JAMES O. EASTLAND, Mississippi ALEXANDER WILEY, Wisconsin 

ESTES KEFAUVER, Tennessee WILLIAM LANGER, Nortli Dakota 

OLIN D. JOHNSTON, South Carolina WILLIAM E. JENNER, Indiana 

THOMAS C. HENNINGS, Jb., Missouri ARTHUR V. WATKINS, Utah 

JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas EVERETT McKINLEY DIRKSEN, Illinois 

PRICE DANIEL, Texas HERMAN WELKER, Idaho 

JOSEPH C. O'MAHONEY, Wyoming JOHN MARSHALL BUTLER, Maryland 



Subcommittee To Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security 
Act and Other Internal Security Laws 

JAMES O. EASTLAND, Mississippi, Chairman 
OLIN D. JOHNSTON, South Carolina WILLIAM E. JENNER, Indiana 

JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas ARTHUR V. WATKINS, Utah 

THOMAS C. HENNINGS, Jr., Missouri HERMAN WELKER, Idaho 

PRICE DANIEL, Texas JOHN MARSHALL BUTLER, Maryland 

J. G. SouEwiNE, Chief Counsel 

Richard Arens and Alva C. Carpenter, Associate Counsels 

Benjamin Mandel, Director of Research 

n 



TESTIMONY EELATING TO HAEYEY M. MATUSOW 



MONDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1955 

United States Senate, 
Subcommittee To Investigate the Adminis- 
tration OF the Internal Security Act and 

Other Internal Security Laws, 

OF the Committee on the Judiciary, 

Washington^ D. C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 : 05 p. m., in room 
318, Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastland (chairman of 
the subcommittee) presiding. 

Present: Senators Eastland, Johnston, McClellan, Daniel, Jenner, 
and Watkins. 

J. G. Sourwine, chief counsel ; Alva C. Carpenter, associate counsel ; 
Benjamin Mandel, director of research; and Robert C. McManus, 
professional staff member. 

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. 

Mr. Matusow, step around, please, sir. 

Mr. Matusoav. Pardon me, sir. 

The Chairman. Hold up your right hand. Do you solemnly swear 
the testimony you are about to give to the Internal Security Subcom- 
mittee of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate of the United 
States is the truth, the whole truth, and notliing but the truth? 

Mr. Matusow. I do. 

The Chairman. The witness before the Subcommittee on Internal 
Security today is Harvey M. Matusow. 

Mr. Matusow has previously appeared before us in executive session 
on February 13, March 5, and March 13, 1952, and in public sessions 
on February 13, 1952, March 5, 1952, March 13, 1952, and October 8, 
1952. In his previous appearances, he gave sworn testimony regard- 
ing the Institute of Pacific Relations, certain youth organizations and 
the International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers. Mr. 
Matusow has since made public statements recently to the effect that 
he lied when he testified before this subcommittee and on other oc- 
casions. The purpose of the hearing now commencing is to inquire 
into this whole matter. 

It is interesting to note that in regard to his testimony concerning 
Mr. Owen Lattimore, Mr. Matusow has misquoted himself and then 
recanted the misquotation. Actually, his testimony concerning Latti- 
more's book being pushed by Communist bookstores was only con- 
firmation of documentary evidence already in our record. 

As a result of testimony taken in this hearing, it may appear that 
Mr. Matusow told the truth in his original testimony before us and 
is now lying when he says that his original testimony was not the truth. 



2 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

It may appear that part of what he told us was true and part was im- 
true. It may appear that he never tells the truth by intent. It may 
appear that his recent conduct is designed simply to call attention to 
a book which is soon to be published under his signature, and that 
his motive for this shabby performance is merely low personal greed. 
It may appear that he has been the victim of pressure brought by 
Communists, as well as those who have a vested interest in concealing 
the Communist conspiracy, and he has finally broken under this pres- 
sure. Or there may be still another explanation. 

It must be clearly understood that Harvey Matusow does not come 
before us this morning merely as an individual. He is, or he says he is, 
a former member of the Communist Party who has made a previous 
confession of wrongdoing as a Communist and then given evidence to 
expose the Communist conspiracy. He is one of many ex-Communists 
who have given similar evidence. That is not to say that his self- 
incrimination of lying under oath automatically convicts others of the 
same offense, nor that the finger of scorn which he points at himself 
must be pointed also at those who heard his allegedly false testimony. 
In the centuries during which the petit jury and grand jury have been 
part of our legal tradition, neither has been discredited by the fact that 
there have been occasional appearances of liars before each. 

Those who seek to expose the Communist conspiracy and also those 
who struggle to conceal it are both fully aware of the importance of 
the ex-Communist in this worldwide struggle to preserve human free- 
dom. The informed enemy of communism knows that enormous quan- 
tities of priceless information have been provided by former Commu- 
nists who have repented and now seek to undo the wrongs they did in 
the past by active opposition to communism. The Communist, as well 
as those who have a vested interest in concealing the truth about the 
conspiracy, know this just as well as we do. That is the reason that 
the assault on the ex-Communist who is willing to tell what he knows 
has been conducted with such unbridled fury. 

We recall the vicious assault on Wliittaker Chambers and Elizabeth 
Bentley after they came forward with their stories of the Communist 
traitors who had been stealing documents from the United States 
Government and turning them over to Soviet agents during a period of 
almost 10 years. T^Hiittaker Chambers proved his case when he pro- 
duced his famous "pumpkin papers," which were a collection of ap- 
proximately 200 of these documents that he had obtained from the 
traitors in Government. Some of these documents were in the actual 
handwriting of Alger Hiss and Harry Dexter ^Vhite. Elizabeth 
Bentley told this subcommittee in detail the methods by which Com- 
munist agents penetrated the Government, rose in the Government, 
made policies in the Government, and protected one another when they 
were threatened with dismissal from the United States Government 
The subcommittee put her testimony through the crucible in our in- 
quiry into interlocking subversion in Government departments. We 
found hundreds upon hundreds of documents which showed that her 
description of the methods of the conspiracy had been flawlessly truth- 
ful. We are still finding documents which support the testimony she 
originally gave us at a time when she did not have access to a single 
one of them. 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMJVIUNISM 3 

At the first public session held by this subcommittee on July 25, 
1951, the then chairman, the late Senator Pat McCarran of Nevada, 
had said this, and I quote: 

lu such an investigation as this, where a possible conspiracy is being examined, 
very often the only evidence obtainable derives from persons who once partici- 
pated in the conspiracy. Only eyes that witnessed the deeds, and ears that heard 
the words of intrigue can attest thereto. Thus, ex-Communists, and agents of 
the Government who posed as Communists, often are the only sources of evi- 
dence of what transpired behind doors closed to the non-Communist world. 

This situation which Senator McCarran pointed out, with respect 
to communism, is not peculiar to the Communist conspiracy alone. 
It is a well-recognized principle of law that : 

Conspiracies need not be established by direct evidence of the act charged. 
They may, and generally must, be proved by a number of indefinite acts, condi- 
tions, and circumstances which vary according to the purposes to be accomplished. 
The very existence of a conspiracy is generally a matter of inference deduced 
from certain acts of the persons accused which are committed in pursuance of an 
apparently criminal or unlawful purpose in common to them. The existence of 
the agreement or assent of the minds need not be proved directly, but may be 
inferred by the jury from the facts proved.* 

The subcommittee in this series of hearings hopes to determine what 
is the truth. The subcommittee may be able to show, in some in- 
stances, what are lies. The subcommittee probably can and will try 
to make a record as to just what Mr. Matusow now says the truth is. 
The subcommittee also will seek to determine, from the testimony 
of this witness and others, all the facts surrounding this case, and to 
make as complete a record of those facts as possible. 

The subcommittee does not propose to be sidetracked into any 
examination or consideration of matters not involved with the testi- 
mony of Harvey Matusow, his public utterances, and the preparation 
and publication of the book soon to be published under his name. 

Now, Mr. Matusow, you are here under subpena of the Internal 
Security Subcommittee. "We have a number of questions that we 
desire to ask you, sir. We want your answers to be responsive to the 
questions and to be as short as possible to explain your point in detail. 

Before the hearing is over, if you desire to make a statement or 
volunteer information, you will certainly be given the opportunity 
to do so. 

Mr. Sourwine, you may proceed with the witness. 

TESTIMONY OF HARVEY M. MATUSOW, ACCOMPANIED BY 
STANLEY FAULKNER, HIS ATTORNEY 

Mr. SouRwixE. Mr. Matusow, did you bring any docmnents with you 
in response to the committee's subpena ? 

Mr. IVIatusow. I did. 

Mr. SouEwiNE. Would you bring those forward or send them for- 
ward one by one and identify them as you do so. 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

On that subject, I believe the documents called for in the subpena, 
manuscripts, contracts, and so forth, have been furnished the commit- 
tee by Mr. Cameron in executive session last week, and they are no 
longer in my possession. 



1 Am. Jur., Vol. II, Conspiracies, par. 38. 



4 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COM]MUNISM 

I was under a misapprehension. I thought the proofs or the copies 
of the documentation of the book had been delivered to the committee, 
and I was wrong on that. However, by tomorrow morning or in the 
afternoon I shall have the documentation for the book, which I did 
not bring. 

The Chairman. Now, Mr. Matusow, are you represented by counsel ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

The Chairman. Would you please identify your counsel for the 
record. 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir; Mr, Stanley Faulkner of New York. 

The Chairman. Proceed, Mr. Sourwine. 

Mr. Sourwine. Yes, sir. 

Mr. IVIatusow. I have here photostatic copies of the contracts of 
the book, False Witness. The original copies were used in evidence in 
the trial proceeding in New York City last week, and I have brought 
photostatic copies. 

The Chairman. Now, while counsel examines the documents, would 
you please, or would your counsel, give his address and name of the 
firm he represents. 

Mr. Faulkner. The firm is Stanley Faulkner, 9 East 40th, New 
York 16, N. Y. 

Mr. Sourwine. Mr. Matusow, the first of the two documents you 
have handed up is a letter addressed to you under date of October 
26, 1954, on the stationery of Cameron & Kahn, Inc., publishers. Is 
that a contract between you and your publisher ? 

Mr. Matusow. It is, sir. 

Mr, Sourwine. The second document is what purports to be a 
contract in 6 pages under date of February 1, 1955, between you and 
Cameron & Kahn. Inc. 

Is that also a valid and subsisting contract ? 

Mv. Matusow. It is a supplemental contract to the original con- 
tract of October 26, 1954. 

Mr. Sourwine. Now, you say "supplemental." Didn't it super- 
sede that earlier contract ? 

Mr. Matusow. In part, and not in part, sir; I can explain that 
very briefly for you. 

Mr. Sourwine. Go ahead. 

Mr, Matusow. The original letter contract called for certain ar- 
rangements as to royalties. The second contract was agreed to in the 
early part of January 1955, was not drawn up until early February 
because Mr. Cameron had been out of New York with his wife, who is 
sick. 

In this second contract, the publishers agreed to a slightly higher — it 
comes to about $800, if it is broken down — royalty rate on a cloth- 
bound edition because of the fact that the book is not what it was 
originally scheduled for, 80,000 words. It is approximately 55,000 
words, cutting down production costs, and the price of the book itself, 
and in that supplemental contract I also agreed to give the publishers 
certain riglits m relation to the book which I had previously retained. 

Mr. Sourwine. You have testified there to a great many facts beyond 
what was originally asked. Have you been thoughtful about it; that 
is, you want all of those statements to stand as part of your afiirmative 
testimony under oath? 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMlVfUNISM 5 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, to clear up the question of these contracts. 

Mr, SouRwiNE. Now, where these two contracts differ, the second 
contract controls, does it not ? 

Mr. JVIatusow. It does what, sir ? 

Mr. Sour WINE. Where these two contracts differ, the second con- 
tract controls ; does it not ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Chairman, I offer these two documents. I 
would like to have them marked and put in the record. 

The Chairman. They will be admitted into the records as exhibit 
1 of the witness' testimony. 

oNIr. SouRwiNE. Could they be 1-A and 1-B ? 

The Chairman. 1-A and 1-B. 

(The documents referred to were marked "Exhibits 1-A and 1-B," 
and appear below :) 

Exhibit No. 1-A 

Cameron & Kahn, Inc., Publishers, 
109 Greenwich Avenue New York, N. Y., October 26, 1954. 
Mr. Haevey Matusow, 

1491 Macomhs Road, Bronx, Neio York 

Dear Mr. Matusow : If this letter represents our general understanding about 
the publication of tbe book we discussed yesterday will you sign one copy and 
return it to us with the understanding that this document will represent our 
contract regarding our publication of a book by you. 

The book discussed is to be of an autobiographical nature and is to deal pri- 
marily with your life and activities during the past few years. One of the 
fundamental purposes of this book — as you have put it — is "to undo some of the 
harm done" to other individuals by your activity and testimony, much of which, 
as you have pointed out, was not a true and complete reflection of the actual 
facts. It is understood also that the book will seek to reveal the nature of the 
complex pressures and social forces which caugg an individual during these 
turbulent times to act as the author will describe his acts. It will be, thus, in 
short a commentary on the times in which we live and the effect of these times 
upon the life of one individual. 

The publishers agree to pay to you, as an advance against all monies eventually 
earned by the book under this contract, the sum of $900.00. Your signature to 
this contract will acknowledge the receipt of $350.00; the remaining $550.00 
will be paid by the publishers in weekly installments of $50.00 until the said 
remaining sum is reached. 

The author agrees to deliver a manuscript of approximately 80,000 words by 
February 1, 1955. It is understood that beginning November 15, the author will 
deliver approximately 5,500 words per week until the manuscript is concluded. 
It is imderstood that time is the essence of this agreement as both parties know 
the importance of this book being the first book of its kind to be published for 
the American market. 

The author agrees to assign to the publisher world rights for the book under 
the following terms : 

(1) The publisher will pay the author on the hard-backed edition of the book 
a royalty, based on the publisher's receipts, of 15 percent on the first 5,000 copies, 
20 percent on the next 10,000 copies, and 25 percent on all copies sold in excess 
of 15,000 copies. 

(2) The publisher will pay the author a royalty on the paper-backed edition 
based on the publishers receipts of 14 percent. 

(3) The publishers agree to pay the author 50 percent of the net receipts of 
the sale of the book abroad or from royalties received from the sale of the 
publishing rights to the book in foreign countries. 



6 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

The publishers agree to publish this book within eight weeks after receipt of 
the finished manuscript ready for the printer. 
Very truly yours, 

Albert E. Kahn, 
Angus Cameron, 

Publishers. 
Witnessed : 

Athene Ryan. 



Witnessed ; 



Harvey Marshall Matusow, 

Author. 

Harriet W. Kahn. 



Exhibit No. 1-B 

The Cameron & Kahn, Inc., of 100 West 23 Street, New York 11, N. Y. (the 
Publisher), and Harvey Marshal Matusow, of 1491 Macombs Road, Bronx 52, 
New York (the Author), in consideration of mutual covenants, on this 1st day 
of February 1955, agree as follows : 

I. The Author grants and assigns to the Publisher the exclusive right to world 
publication rights, subject to conditions contained hereinafter an autobiographi- 
cal book presently entitled "False Witness," and referred to as the AVork. 

II. The Publisher agrees simultaneously with the publication of the Work 
duly to copyright it in the name of the Author in the United States and Canada. 
The Publisher shall imprint in each copy of the title page or its reverse side, the 
notice "copyright 1955, by Harvey Marshal Matusow." Upon the expiration of 
this first term of copyright in the United States and providing this agreement 
is then in force the Author, if living, agrees to apply for renewal of such copy- 
right. 

III. The Author represents that he is the sole proprietor of the Work ; that 
it does not infringe any existing copyright ; that it has not heretofore been 
published in this form and that to the best of his knowledge it contains no libelous 
or other unlawful matter. The Author will hold harmless the publisher against 
any claim, demand, or recovery finally sustained in any proceedings brought 
against the Publisher by reason of any violation of the proprietary right or copy- 
right by, or any unlawful, libelous, or slanderous or any unlawful matter con- 
tained in the Work. The Publisher shall notify the Author of any such claim, 
demand, or action and give the Author such reasonable time as the exigencies of 
the situation will permit, to meet such claim or to undertake its defense. 

IV. The Author shall deliver to the Publisher on or before the first day of 
February 1955, a complete copy of the Work in proper shape for the press. If 
the Author fails to deliver the manuscript on or before the above prescribed date, 
the Publisher may correspondingly extend the time, or, upon thirty (30) days 
notice cancel this agreement. 

V. The Publisher shall submit galley and page proof of the Work which the 
Author shall read, correct, and return within ten days after receipt of said galley 
and page proof. Such proof shall conform to the Author's final manuscript except 
as altered by mutual agreement and shall have been proof read by the Publisher. 
Any additional expense incurred by reason of changes from or additions to the 
Author's final manuscript in excess of .$50.00 shall be charged against the first 
installments of royalties due hereinunder; provided that the Publisher shall 
promptly furnish an itemized statement of such additional expenses and make 
available at its office the corrected proofs for inspection. 

VI. The Publisher agrees to publish the Work without changes, additions, or 
eliminations in or from the text (except as mutually agreed upon) at his own 
expense in such format as the Publisher deems best suited to its sale, at a catalog 
price of not less than $3.00 per copy in hard-backed style and at a catalog price 
of not less than $1.00 in paper binding, on or before one hundred .-lud eighty (180) 
days after receipt of manuscript of the said Work ready for the printer. Should 
the Publisher fail to publish the Work by such date all rights granted to the 
Publisher hereinunder may be, after thirty (30) days notice to the Publisher, ter- 
min.Mted and shall revert to the Author. Such option may be exercised by posting 
a notice to that effect addressed to the Publisher, by registered mail, after such 
default. In the event of delay caused by strikes, fires, or other contingencies 
beyond the Publisher's control the publication may be postponed indefinitely. 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 7 

"VII. The Publisher shall pay the AtUIiov a royally on the hard-hacked .editiou 
■of 15 percent of the Publisher's receipts on the first 2500 copies sold ; 20 i>ercent 
of the Publisher's receipts on the next 5000 copies sold ; and then 25 percent of 
the Publisher's receipts on all copies sold above 7500 copies (except as in Articles 

VIII and IX hereinafter provided) not including copies given away (but not for 
resale) for the purpose of aiding the sale of the work and for i-eview. 

VIII. (a) The Publisher shall pay the Author 50 percent of the net cash re- 
ceived from the sale of foreign and translation volume publication rights. 

(b) On all copies sold in the Dominion of Canada, the Publisher shall pay the 
Author royalties at the rate of 10 percent of the net cash received by the Pub- 
lisher from such sale. 

(c) On all copies sold through the Union Book Club the royalty shall be the 
same as stipulated in Clause IX for cheap editions of the book. 

(d) The Publisher may license other recognized book clubs the right to pub- 
lish an edition of the Work for distribution to its members and shall pay to 
the Author 50 percent of the net proceeds of such sale. 

(e) Where the discount to the wholesale or retail distributors or booksellers 
in the United States is 48 percent or more on sales of 100 copies under contract 
or immediate sale, the Author shall receive a royalty of 2 percent less than the 
rate of royalty stated herein ; and with each additional 1 percent discount the 
royalties shall be further reduced by an additional % percent. In no case, how- 
ever, shall the royalties be less than one-half of those stipulated in clause VII or 

IX hereof. 

(f ) On all copies sold as remainders, that is at a discount of 70 percent or 
more from the original retail price as provided herein in clauses VII or IX, 
Vut above the actual cost of manufacture, the Author's royalties shall be based 
on the receipts by the Publisher ; no remaindering shall take place until one 
year after publication unless agreed upon by the Author in writing. 

(g) Neither the Author nor the Publisher shall grant permission to publish 
extracts from the Work without the consent of the other except as provided 
in Clause XII. 

(h) On copies sold direct to customers through the media of mail order, cou- 
pon advertising, or by mail circularization, the royalty shall be 8 percent of 
the Publisher's receipts or charges with no discount for bad debts. 

IX. On any paper-backed edition issued by the Publisher, the Publisher shall 
pay the Author a royalty of 14 percent of the Publisher's receipts. Should the 
right to issue such an edition be granted to another (reprint) Publisher, the 
Publisher shall endeavor to arrange terms with the other (reprint) Publisher 
that will permit a royalty payment to the Author of 10 percent of the retail 
price, and the royalty payment to the Author shall in no case be less than 10 
percent of the reprint Publisher's receipts. 

X. (a) The Publisher agrees to render semi-annual statements on the first 
days of June and of December in each year, showing an account of sales to the 
first day of the second month preceding said accounting dates. Payments then 
due the Author shall be simultaneously made. The statements shall show in 
detail the number of copies printed, the number bound, the number spoiled, the 
number given away, the number sold in each category and the number on hand. 

(b) If the Publisher shall default in delivery of statements or in making 
cash settlements as in (a) hereof required, and shall neglect or refuse to deliver 
such statements or to make such settlements by registered mail to the Author, 
this agreement may be terminated at the option of the Author upon the expira- 
tion of said fifteen (15) days. 

(c) The Publisher shall pay to the Author an advance payment against all 
monies which shall accrue under this contract the sum of $1500.00 receipt of 
which is hereby acknowledged by signature of this contract. In the event of 
over-payments other than unearned advances, the Publisher may deduct the 
amount of such over-payment from any further earnings accruing to the Author 
on account of the work. 

XL The Publisher agrees to present to the Author 10 free copies of the Work 
immediately upon publication and to permit the Author to purchase further 
copies for his personal use (but not for resale) at 60 percent of the retail price. 

XII. On the sale of serial, digest, condensation, radio, television and motion 
picture rights the Author agrees to grant and assign to the Publisher all serial, 
condensation, and digest rights and the Publisher agrees to pay the Author 
75 percent of the net cash received from his sale of such rights. 

59886—55 — pt. 1 2 



8 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD C0J\4MUNISM 

The Author agrees to grant and assign to the Publisher radio, motion picture 
and television rights and the Publisher agrees to pay to the Author 75 percent 
of the net cash received from the sale of such rights. 

XIII. (a) If the Publisher at any time during the existence of this agreement 
shall fail to comply with or fulfill any of the terms or conditions hereof, the 
Author may at his option tenninate this agreement by posting to the Publisher 
a notice of said termination by registered mail and thereupon all rights granted 
by the Author to the Publisher shall revert to him ; in such event all payments 
theretofore made to this Author shall remain his property, all, however, without 
prejudice to any other remedies which the Author may have against the Pub- 
lisher. The provisions hereof shall not apply to instances in which automatic 
terminations of this agreement are elsewhere herein provided. The provisions of 
this subdivision are subject, nevertheless, to other termination conditions pro- 
vided in article 10 (c) hereof. 

(b) Upon the termination of this agreement under any provision hereof, the 
Publisher shall return to the Author all property originally furnished by the 
Author and the Author shall have the right to purchase from the Publisher the 
plates of the Work at their metal value and any remaining copies or sheets at a 
price not to exceed 50 percent of the manufacturing costs. If the Author shall 
not have so acquired such plates, copies or sheets within sixty (60) days after 
the effective date of such terminations, the Publisher shall have the right to melt 
such plates, and to sell such remaining copies at cost or less without payment 
to the Author of royalties on such sales. No such sale by the Publisher, how- 
over, shall transfer the right of publication and sale of the Work to any pur- 
chaser of said remaining copies or sheets. In any event, however, the Publisher's 
privilege to sell such remaining copies shall expire six months after the effective 
termination date and thereupon all remaining copies shall be destroyed. 

(c) In the event that the Work is at any time out of print, except as a result 
of emergency conditions beyond the Publisher's control, the Author may give 
notice thereof to the Publisher and in such event, if the Publisher shall not 
within six months thereof bring out a new printing of the Work then all rights 
granted hereunder shall terminate and revert to the Author automatically and 
wathout notice. If, however, the Work is on sale in cheap edition, it shall not 
be considered to be out of print. 

XIV. If a petition in bankruptcy shall be filed by or against the Publisher, or 
if it shall be adjudged insolvent by any court, or if a trustee or a receiver of 
any property of the Publisher shall be appointed in any suit or proceeding by or 
against the Publisher, or if the Publisher shall make an assignment for the 
benefit of creditors or shall take the benefit of any bankruptcy or insolvency 
act, or if the Publisher shall liquidate its business for any cause whatsoever, 
the Author may, at his option, terminate this agreement, and such termina- 
tion shall thereupon be effective as of the date of the filing of such petition, 
adjudication, appointment, assignment or declaration or commencement of liqui- 
dation, and all rights granted herein shall thereupon revert to the Author. 
As a condition of making this agreement, the Author hereby acquires the right, 
upon such termination, to purchase at his option the plates, remaining copies 
and sheets, all as provided in Article Thirteen (b) hereof. In the event that the 
Author's option to purchase such properties is not exercised within thirty (30) 
days of the happening of the event herein referred to, the Publisher, trustee, 
receiver, assignee or other such official, may melt the plates and sell the copies 
or sheets remaining on hand subject only to payment to the Author of the roy- 
alties herein provided. In the event the Author desires to purchase the books and 
sheets aforesaid, and the trustee, receiver or other said named ofiicial deems 
the price fixed at .50 percent of the manufacturing costs to be below the fair 
market value thereof, then such value shall be determined by arbitration as in 
these Articles provided. 

XV. This agreement shall be binding on and inure to the benefit of the execu- 
tors, administrators and assigns of the Author and the successors and assignees 
of the Publisher; but no assignment, voluntary or by operation of law, shall 
be binding upon either of the parties without the written consent of the other 
party hereto ; provided, however, that the Author may assign or transfer any 
moneys due or to become due to him hereunder. 

XVI. A waiver of any breach of this agreement or of any of the terms or 
conditions thereof shall not be deemed a waiver of any repetition of such breach 
or in anywise affect any other term or condition hereof ; no waiver shall be valid 
or binding unless the same shall be in writing and signed by the Author. 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 9 

XVII. Any controversy or claim arising out of this agreement or the breach 
thereof shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the rules then obtain- 
ing of the American Arbitration Association, and judgment upon the award may 
be entered in the highest court of the forum, State or Federal, having jurisdic- 
tion. Arbitration shall be held in the City of New York unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties. The Author may at his option, in case of failure to pay royalties, 
refuse to arbitrate and pursue his remedies at law or in equity. 

XVIII. All notices required hereunder shall be directed to the respective parties 
at the addresses set forth above except as the same may from time to time be 
changed in writing. 

XIX. Regardless of place of its physical execution, this contract shall be 
interpreted under the laws of the State of New York and of the United States 
of America. 

In witness whereof the parties hereto have duly executed this agreement 
the day and year first above written. 
In the presence of : Cameron & Kahn, Inc., 

Sylvia Matusow By Angus Cameron, The Publisher. 

In the presence of: 

Jane Janis By Albert E. Kahn, The Publisher. 

In the presence of: 

Athene Ryan By Harvey M. Matusow, The Author. 

Mr. SouRWiKE. Are those the only documents you brought with 
you? 

Mr. Matusow. The other documents called for, sir, I do not have 
in my possession; they have either been turned over to the grand jury 
or to this committee. 

I have a copy of, I believe it was given to the committee, if you 
would like another, sir, galley proofs of the book. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. If you have a copy of the galley proofs that you 
can identif}', I would like to have it offered from your possession; yes, 
sir. 

Mr. ]SL\Tusow\ All right, sir. 

Excuse me, I will get it in proper order for you. 

This comes in two parts. They are galley proofs of the book False 
Witness. 

Part 1 is an introduction by Albert E. Kahn, and it says : 

The story behind the book. False Witness. 

It is in three pages, three large galley size pages. 

And in part 2, there is 52 — however, in collation there might have 
been one missing, I do not want to take the committee's time to count 
it ; if it is missing I will furnish it later — it should be 52 galley proof 
pages of the book False Witness. 

On the galley pages it is entitled "Informer." The title of the 
book is not here. I do not have, and was unable to obtain because 
they were not run off in galleys, the index of the book, the front mat- 
ter, that is, copyright, title sheet, and a foreword which I wrote con- 
sisting of about 12 lines. 

INIr. SouRwiNE. Are you, Mr. Matusow, familiar with the material 
in this book ? 

Mr. Matusow. I am, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. We will ask further questions about it and the writ- 
ing of it at a later time, but I would like to ask now, to save the time 
of the committee, whether it is your statement that the statements in 
this book are true and correct. 

Mr. Matusow. Outside of typographical errors ; yes. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Are you willing now under oath to say that every 
affirmative statement in this book, which is not indicated as on in- 



10 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

formation and belief, is true, and that those statements in the book 
which are indicated as on information and belief, are believed by you 
to be true ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. And you do so swear ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes ; I do. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. Have you testified, Mr. Matusow — I beg your par- 
don, Mr. Chairman; may this be offered as an exhibit and entered for 
the record, not to be printed in the record, sir. 

The Chairman. It is all right to offer it as an exhibit. It will be 
filed with the record. 

(The document referred to was marked "Exhibit 2," and is on file 
with the committee.) 

Mr. SouRW^NE. Have 3'ou, Mr. Matusow, testified that you kept a 
diary of events and activities beginning some time in 1948, and then 
with certain lapses of time up until 1952, in which you listed activities 
of members of the Communist Party ? 

Mr. Matusow. I don't believe in that diary I listed activities of 
members of the Communist Party. 

Mr. Sour WINE. You did keep such a diary ? 

Mr. Matusow. Taking the last statement out of j^our question, yes, 
I did. 

]Mr. SouRWiNE. Did you bring that diary with you ? 

Mr. IMatusow. I do not have a copy of it. It was offered in evidence 
in the trial proceeding in New York. I am endeavoring to obtain a 
copy at a later date. I will furnish it to the committee. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. It has not been returned to jou ? 

Mr. Matusow. It has not. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Have you requested that either it be returned or 
that you be given a photostatic copy ? 

]\Ir. Matusoav. I am getting photostatic copies ; I should have them 
by the end of the week. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. And will you produce either the original or the pho- 
tostatic copies as soon as you can for this committee ? 

Mr. Matusow. I will, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You testified, did you not, in Judge Dimock's ^ court 
that you had written diary entries during February of 1955 ? 

Mr. ^Iatus6w\ Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRAViNE. Did you give those to the grand jury also ? 

Mr. Matusow. No, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you have those with you ? 

!Mr. Matusow. No, sir. 

ISIr. SouRWiNE. "Will you produce them for this committee ? 

(Witness conferred with his counsel.) 

Mr. Matusow^ On that question, the diary that I referred to in 
Judge Dimock's court is a question of certain notes I have kept deal- 
ing with the relations that I have had with members of the Depart- 
ment of Justice, and the events that have taken place in the last few 
weeks. They are just recollections of mine, and I consider the ma- 
terial in them material which does not state in fact anything material 
to the issue involved here, sir. 

1 Judge Edwaifl J. Dlmock of the United States District Court, Southern District, New 
York. 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 11 

They Avere just my impressions of certain individuals, and mostly — 
I am not embarrassed by what I say about the individuals, but if they 
were made public it might emba.rrass other individuals, and I don't 
think — I will show them to you and get them to you, sir, and if you 
would like to go over them and want them in the record, I will have no 
objection. 

The Chairman. Well, that is a matter for the determination of the 
committee. We would like to have those records. 

]Mr. ]Matusow, Well, sir, it will take me a while to get them. They 
are under lock and key now, and not until I have a chance to return 
home will they be available, and at that time I will get an original or 
photostatic copy and furnish it to the committee. 

The Chairman. Now, when will that be ? 

Mr. Matusow. I return, with the committee's leave, to answer a 
Grand Jury subpoena on Wednesday, and I presume, sir, that I will 
be busy before the grand jury, and again in Judge Dimock's court. 

It will probably be Thursday or Friday before I can get to this, and 
the other matters involved, the other diary notations, which the com- 
mittee has requested. 

The Chairman. That will be all right, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Matusow, where are these diary pages locked 
up that you say are under lock and key ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir ; they are in my home or in my parents' home ; 
I believe I have part in part. 

Mr. SouRw^iNE. You have what ? 

Mr. Matusow. Part in my parents' home and part in my own. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Locked up in two different lock boxes, or strong 
boxes or 

Mr. :Matusow. Well, they are just locked up or unavailable to any- 
body, if they were to look for them. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. When you said "locked up," I wanted to find out 
where they are locked up. 

Mr. Matusow. In a box, 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you have the only key to that box ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Just one key ? 

Mr. Matusow. I have the only key. There are probably two keys, 
but I have the other key under lock and key somewhere else. 
[Laughter.] 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Now, are you talking about two keys to the same 
box? 
Mr. IVIatusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Well, there must be two boxes, though, must there 
not? 

Mr. Matusow. I didn't say they were two — they were both in boxes, 
sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Well, I am trying to find out where they are locked 
up. You said they were locked up in tw^o places. 

Mr. Matusow. One is locked in a box, and the other in a filing 
cabinet. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Filing cabinet is in your home ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Is there no one you can send for those ? 



12 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COAIMUNISM 

Mr. Matusow. They are in amonfr many documents which — letters, 
advertisements and miscellaneous material in there, and it would be — 
I mean nobody could find it. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You sent someone for a docmnent when you were 
in Judge Dimock's court, did you not ? 

Mr. Matusow. No, sir; I sent somebody for the documents — the 
documents were not under lock and key and not in the same place, 
put it that way, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You did send someone for documents, did you not ? 

]Mr, Matusow. Yes, but they were not in my home. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. You could not send the same person for these ? 

Mr. Matusow. Now, you wouldn't be able to find them, and I be- 
lieve he is before the grand jury, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. When you say they were not in your home or not 
in your room or apartment or they were not in your parents' home • 

Mr. Matusow. They were not in either home. I believe they were 
in the office of Cameron & Kahn at the time. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Are you sure about that ? 

Mr. Matusow. Well, if we spell out the documents, sir, I can tell 
you specifically where they were. 

Mr. SouRw^iNE. I am talking about the documents that you sent for 
while you were in Judge Dimock's court. 

Mr. Matusow. I did that on more than one occasion, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Didn't you, as a matter of fact, send for documents 
tliat you had testified were at your parents' home ? 

Mr. Matusow. I didn't send anybody for those, sir ; I picked those 
up. 

Mr. SouRWTNE. All right, sir. 

I have some documents here that I would like to ask you to examine 
and see if you can identify them. Will you look at this one, please? 
Can you identify that ? 

Mr. Matusow. Excuse me. Yes, I can, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. What is that ? 

Mr. Matusow. It was a sketched outline not in too much detail of 
the book which I have written, which was then entitled "Blacklisting 
Was My Business." 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Was this outline prepared by you ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiisrE. AVlien ? 

Mr. Matusow. I believe in October or early November 1953. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You are sure it was not prepared before that time? 

Mr. Matusow. I believe it was October or November. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. This was then prepared after you had had your first 
luncheon conference with Mr. Cameron and ]\Ir. Kahn ? 

Mr. Matusow. No, sir. I met them in 1954, 1 year later. 

Mr. SouRwi]srE. This was prepared then about a year before you had 
your first conference with your present publishers ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. May this be offered as an exhibit, sir ? 

The Chairman. This will be exhibit No. 3. 

(The document referred to was marked "Exhibit 3" and appears 
below:) 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 13 

Exhibit No. 3 
Outline : Blacklisting Was My Business 

1. Introduction . , . Should be written by someone other than myself. The 
introduction should attack the philosophical aspects of the book as a balance 
against the narrative style of the book. 

2. HoTSUOT WITH A TELEPHONE . . . Chapter opens in Roy Cohn's office in 
Washington. Roy has just asked his secretary to call Scott McLeod at the 
State Department, which he does and arranges to have Kagen fired the day 
prior to his testimony before the McCarthy committee. I further develop my 
association with Roy Cohn, Senator McCarthy and others with his committee. 

3. Sidewalks of new yokk ... I fade back to early background which started 
me on the road to McCarthy et al. This chapter deals briefly with my life during 
the 1930's and up to my going into the Army in World War II. 

4. Reds in khaki ... I deal here with the first contact made by American 
Communists in uniform to recruit me into the Communist Party. This chapter 
also includes story about communist arms smuggling ring operating within the 
U. S. Army and French communist party. Arms were being smuggled to anti- 
Franco forces in Spain. 

5. Comes the revolution ... In this chapter, I join the Communist Party in 
New York. Impressions of my first communist party meeting and brief back- 
ground of early period in communist party. 

6. Still a rebel . . . Events leading up to my first contact with the F. B. I. 
History of my activities in the Communist Party covered briefly. 

7. Red marriage . . . First marriage and only one within the Communist 
Party. How Communist Party treated marriage and reasons for divorce due 
to Communist Party leadership. 

8. Dude ranch for comrades ... I cover here Communist Party dude ranch 
in New Mexico near Los Alamos. Also request by the Czechoslovakian govern- 
ment to have me attempt to steal atomic and military secrets in New Mexico 
working through the ranch. 

9. Dishonorable discharge . . . Communist Party expels me (dishonorable 
discharge) from Party. I join the Air Force for Korean War and events leading 
up to my testimony before House Committee on Un-American activities. 

10. First taste of blood . . . Testimony before House Committee on Un- 
American Activities — people I meet and how they operate. I also cover here 
first meeting with Dr. J. B. Matthews and others with the Hearst newspapers, 
and Congressman Velde. 

11. Red buck-eye . . . Work for the Ohio Un-American Activities Commission, 
how they operate and people I meet in connection with the work. Black-listing 
organization in Dayton, Columbus and Canton, Ohio. 

12. My first trial . . . Called to New York for trial of fifteen Communist 
Party leaders. How testimony was prepared and work leading ui) to actual 
testimony. I also cover here my testimony for the Justice Department before 
the Subversive Activities Control Board in their case to outlaw the Communist 
Party. 

13. The Messiah from Nevada . . . Cover here testimony before the McCarran 
Committee, Owen Lattimore case and others. I describe the people I worked 
with — Bob Morris, Ben Mandel and other investigators for the Committee, the 
way they work, etc. 

14. Blacklist for dollars . . . My first introduction to counterattack and 
Red channels. Conversations held, work outlined and how I believed they 
operated then. 

15. Still blacklisting ... I become associate editor of counterattack. I de- 
scribe the operations here and show how they obtain their material in order to 
compile the blacklists. 

16. Case histories ... I deal with a few case histories which I worked on at 
counterattack, Little Brown, Bordens, Block Drug Co., and others. 

17. The boys from Syracuse ... I met Larry Johnson the grocer from 
Syracuse, describe him and his operation in relation to blacklisting. I also deal 
with a case history here. 

18. Don't tell anybody ... At the request of Larry Johnson, two New York 
advertising agencies employ me to set up blacklists for them. 

19. The price wasn't money ... I describe a case of John Gibbs, TV Pro- 
ducer and his fight to save the Schlitz Beer Program which he was producing. 



14 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

How he offered to buy scripts from me if I could get Johnson to write a letter to 
Schlitz, clearing his wife. 

20. Art, spelled drew . . . The little known facts of two sisters, Dorothy and 
Lorna Drew, and their attempts to create blacklists in the fine arts. 

21. I CAME HERE TO TALK FOR JOE ... I cover the Wlscousin election of 1952 
and my role in it for McCarthy. 

22. Salt lake had spice . . . McCarran committee hearing featuring J. B. 
Matthews and myself. I campaign for Senator Watkins. 

23. The potato that was egg-shaped ... I delivered two speeches in Poca- 
tello, Idaho, and create a storm with the clergy and the marines. 

24. Montana — the big lie ... I cover the role I played in the election in 
Montana and the now infamous story of 126 Communists on the New York Times. 

25. Acres of clams ... I campaign in the state of Washington for Senator 
Cain, while there McCarthy called and wanted me to go to Chicago for his 
"famous" speech against Stevenson. 

26. Wheels in motion ... I pan back to October 6th in Chicago where I was 
with McCarthy and started the ball rolling for the Anti-Stevenson speech. I 
describe where most of the money came from and Vi^ho supported the meeting. 

27. Drunk with victory ... I describe first meeting with Arvilla Bentley 
at a party in Washington on election day. I tell who was there, what was 
done, etc. 

28. A REAL thanksgiving . . . This chapter covers my trip to Nassau with 
Arvilla Bentley at Joe McCarthy's request. Reason being she had given him too 
much money and he wanted her out of the country so as not to be subpoenaed. 
This chapter should be broken down into three small ones. One covering Thanks- 
giving Day and my return to Washington three days later, another covering the 
time in Nassau, and the final — the return to Washington. 

29. Long distance courtship .