I 



^~hCJU^ 




kSo^ 



ii-v 









2^i-^^h 



^5-^ 




.M^V-^^- 



SUICIDE 



Suicide 



A STUDY IN SOCIOLOGY 



By Emile Durkheim 



TRANSLATED BY JOHN A. SPAULDING AND GEORGE SIMPSON 
EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY GEORGE SIMPSON 

The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois 



Copyright i^^i by The Free Press, A corporation 

Printed in the United States of America 

by American Book-Knickerbocker Press, New York 

Designed by Sidney Solomon 

First Printing January i^^i 






To Those Who, with Durkheim, Understand 
the Life of Reason As Itself a Moral 
Commitment, and Especially to Arthur 
D. Gayer in Economics; Sol W. Gins- 
burg in Psychiatry; Robert S. Lynd in 
Sociology; and Arthur E. Murphy in 
Philosophy 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

Editor's Preface 9 

Editor's Introduction 13 

Preface 35 

Introduction 41 

Book One: Extra-Social Factors 

1 Suicide and Psychopathic States 57 

2 Suicide and Normal Psychological States — Race, Heredity 82 

3 Suicide and Cosmic Factors 104 

4 Imitation 123 

Book Two: Social Causes and Social Types 

1 How to Determine Social Causes and Social Types 145 

2 Egoistic Suicide 152 

3 Egoistic Suicide (^continued) 171 

4 Altruistic Suicide 217 

5 Anomic Suicide 241 

6 Individual Forms of the Different Types of Suicide 277 

Book Three: General Nature of Suicide 
as a Social Phenomenon 

1 The Social Element of Suicide 297 

2 Relations of Suicide with Other Social Phenomena 326 

3 Practical Consequences 361 

Appendices 393 

Detailed Table of Contents 399 



EDITOR'S PREFACE 



'F THE four major works of the renowned French sociologist, 
Emile Durkheim, only Le Suicide has remained to be translated. The 
Elementary Forms of the Religious Life was first published in Eng- 
lish in 191 5; the Division of Labor in Society in 1933 and The Rules 
of Sociological Method in 1938.^ Over half a century has gone by 
since the first edition of Le Suicide, yet far more than antiquarian in- 
terest attaches to it in the sociological, statistical, philosophical, and 
psychological disciplines. But the historical significance of the volume 
in social thought would be enough reason for presenting it to readers 
in the English-speaking world. As a milestone in social science and 
an indispensable part in understanding the work of the man who 
founded and firmly established academic sociology in France and 
influenced many others outside of France, it should have long since 
been available in translation. 

Though our statistical material today is more refined and broader, 
and our socio-psychological apparatus better established than was 
Durkheim's, his work on suicide remains the prototype of systematic, 
rigorous and unrelenting attack on the subject with the data, tech- 
niques, and accumulated knowledge available at any given period. 
Indeed, Le Suicide is among the very first modern examples of con- 
sistent and organized use of statistical method in social investigation. 
In the last decade of the nineteenth century when Durkheim was 
conducting the investigations incorporated in this work, repositories 
(governmental or private) of statistical information on this, or any 

1 AH of these are now published by the Free Press. 

9 



10 SUICIDE 

other subject, were either rare, skimpy, or badly put together. With 
characteristic energy and the aid of some of his students, especially 
Marcel Mauss, Durkheim realigned the available statistics so as to 
answer the question posed by the general problem and its internal 
details. At the time, statistical techniques were little developed, and 
Durkheim was forced at given points to invent them as he went 
along. The elements of simple correlation were unknown except 
among the pathfinders in statistical techniques like Galton and Pear- 
son, as were those of multiple and partial correlation, yet Durkheim 
establishes relationships between series of data by methodological 
perseverence and inference. 

The tables which Durkheim drew up have been left in the transla- 
tion in their somewhat quaint form, with no attempt to set them up 
according to present-day standards of statistical presentation. They 
have that way an historical value, as well as a character of their own. 
To embellish them would take away the atmosphere in which they 
were literally forged through necessity. Though more recent data are 
available, the kind of information Durkheim was trying to impart 
through them is still the kind that sociologists and actuarialists are 
interested in. Indeed, one table (on the effect of military life on 
suicide) has been taken over bodily in one of the best general, recent 
treatises on suicide.^ 

The maps which Durkheim placed in the text have been put in 
Appendices here, along with a special table which Durkheim drew 
up but could not use for reasons he gives in a footnote to it. The 
maps have been reproduced as they are with the French titles and 
statistical legends. 

But in addition to its historical and methodological import. Le 
Suicide is of abiding significance because of the probleoi it treats and 
the sociological approach with which it is handled. \For Durkheim 
is seeking to establish that what looks like a highly individual and 
personal phenomenon is explicable through the social structure and 
its ramifying functions/yVnd even the revolutionary findings in psy- 
chiatry and the refinement and superior competence of contemporary 
actuarial statistics on this subject have yet to come fully to grips with 
this. We shall have more to say of it in the introduction. 

* Dublin, Louis I, and Bunzel, Bessie, To Be or Not To Be, New York, 1933, 
p. 112-113. 



EDITOR S PREFACE II 

^here are those, moreover, who look upon Le Suicide as still an 
outstanding, if not the outstanding, work in what is called the study 
of social causation^ And in what has come to be known as the 
sociology of knowledge, Durkheim's attempts to relate systems of 
thought to states of the collective conscience involved in the currents 
of egoism, altruism, and anomy, in this volume, have been of no 
little influence,* 

Finally, Le Suicide shows Durkheim's fundamental principles of 
social interpretation in action. His social realism, which sees society 
as an entity greater than the sum of its parts, with its accompanying 
concepts of collective representations and the collective conscience, 
is here applied to a special problem-area, and the results are some of 
the richest it has ever borne. For Durkheim not only enunciated 
methodological and heuristic principles (as pre-eminently in The 
Rules of Sociological Method) ; he also tested them in research of 
no mean scope. That his work would have to be supplemented, added 
to, revised, and our knowledge advanced, he would be the first to 
admit, since he rightly saw scientific endeavor as a great collective 
undertaking whose findings are handed on from generation to genera- 
tion and improved upon in the process. 

The translation has been made from the edition which appeared 
in 1930, thirteen years after Durkheim's death and thirty-three years 
after the first edition in 1897. This edition was supervised by Marcel 
Mauss. Professor Mauss, in his brief introductory note there, tells us 
that it was not possible, because of the method of reprinting, to 
correct the few typographical and editorial errors. With the aid of 
Dr. John A. Spaulding, I have sought by textual and statistical query, 
to rectify them wherever they could be discovered. 

No index appeared in the French text, and none has been pre- 
pared here. Instead, the detailed table of contents which Durkheim 
drew up has been translated and placed at the back of this book. 

For the version of the translation here, I must take full responsi- 
bility, Dr, Spaulding and I worked over the first draft, then we both 
re-worked the second draft. But the final changes I made alone, 

Mr, Jerome H, Skolnick, a student of mine, aided in checking 

3 See especially, Maclver, R, M., Social Causation, New York, 1942. 
* See, for example, Parsons, Talcott, The Structure of Social Action, Glencoe, 
Illinois, 1949, 



J 2 suicroE 

the typescript and in proof-reading. He did not confine his work to 
routine, and many of his suggestions proved to be of great value 

to me. 

George Simpson 

The City College of New York 
November i, 1930. 



EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 



THE AETIOLOGY OF SUICIDE 



^HE range of Emile Durkheim's analysis of the interconnectedness 
of suicide with social and natural phenomena is so wide and varied 
as to preclude treatment of all its avenues and by-roads in the short 
space of this introduction. Within the confines of one not over-long 
volume, Durkheim has treated or touched on normal and abnormal 
psychology, social psychology, anthropology (especially the concept 
of race), meteorological and other "cosmic" factors, religion, mar- 
riage, the family, divorce, primitive rites and customs, social and 
economic crises, crime (especially homicide) and law and juris- 
prudence, history, education, and occupational groups. But a short 
appraisal is still possible because throughout Durkheim's work on 
each and all of these topics subsidiary to suicide, is the basic theme 
that suicide which appears to be a phenomenon relating to the indi- 
vidual is actually explicable aetiologically with reference to the social 
structure and its ramifying functions. 

The early chapters in Durkheim's work are devoted to the negation 
of doctrines which ascribe suicide to extra-social factors, such as 
mental alienation, the characteristics of race as studied by anthro- 
pology, heredity, climate, temperature, and finally to a negation of 
the doctrine of "imitation," particularly as represented in the works 
of Gabriel Tarde whose social theory at the time in France had many 
followers and against whom Durkheim waged unrelenting warfare 
within the bounds of scholarly and academic amenities. Here in these 
early chapters Durkheim is involved in a process of elimination: all 
theses which require resort to individual or other extra-social causes 

13 



14 SUICIDE 

for suicide are dispatched, leaving only social causes to be considered. 
This is used as a foundation for reaffirming his thesis stated in his 
introduction that the suicide-rate is a phenomenon sui generis; that 
is, the totality of suicides in a society is a fact separate, distinct, and 
capable of study in its own terms. 

Since, according to Durkheim, suicide cannot be explained by its 
individual forms, and since the suicide-rate is for him a distinct phe- 
nomenon in its own right, he proceeds to relate currents of suicide to 
social concomitants. It is these social concomitants of suicide which 
for Durkheim will serve to place any individual suicide in its proper 
aetiological setting. 

From a study of religious affiliation, marriage and the family, and 
political and national communities, Durkheim is led to the first of his 
three categories of suicide: namely, egoistic suicide, which results 
from lack of integration of the individual into society. The stronger 
the forces throwing the individual onto his own resources, the greater 
the suicide-rate in the society in which this occurs. With respect to 
religious society, the suicide-rate is lowest among Catholics, the fol- 
lowers of a religion which closely integrates the individual into the 
collective life. Protestantism's rate is high and is correlate with the 
high state of individualism there. Indeed, the advancement of science 
and knowledge which is an accompaniment of the secularization 
process under Protestantism, while explaining the universe to man, 
nevertheless disintegrates the ties of the individual to the group and 
shows up in higher suicide-rates. 

Egoistic suicide is also to be seen, according to Durkheim, where 
there is slight integration of the individual into family life. The 
greater the density of the family the greater the immunity of indi- 
viduals to suicide. The individual characteristics of the spouses is 
unimportant in explaining the suicide-rate; it is dependent upon the 
structure of the family and the roles played by its members. In polit- 
ical and national communities, it is Durkheim' s thesis that in great 
crises the suicide-rate falls because then society is more strongly in- 
tegrated and the individual participates actively in social life. His 
egoism is restricted and his will to live strengthened. 

Having established the variation of the suicide-rate with the degree 
of integration of social groups, Durkheim is led to consider the fact 
of suicide in social groups where there is comparatively great in- 



EDITOR S INTRODUCTION 1 5 

tegration of the individual, as in lower societies. Here where the in- 
dividual's life is rigorously governed by custom and habit, suicide is 
what he calls altruistic; that is, it results from the individual's taking 
his own life because of higher commandments, either those of re- 
ligious sacrifice or unthinking political allegiance. This type of sui- 
cide Durkheim finds still existent in modern society in the army 
where ancient patterns of obedience are rife. 

Egoistic suicide and altruistic suicide may be considered to be 
symptomatic of the way in which the individual is structured into the 
society; in the first case, inadequately, in the second case, over-ade- 
quately. But there is another form of suicide for Durkheim which 
results from lack of regulation of the individual by society. This he 
calls anomic suicide, and is in a chronic state in the modern economy. 
The individual's needs and their satisfaction have been regulated by 
society; the common beliefs and practices he has learned make him 
the embodiment of what Durkheim calls the collective conscience. 
When this regulation of the individual is upset so that his horizon 
is broadened beyond what he can endure, or contrariwise contracted 
unduly, conditions for anomic suicide tend toward a maximum. Thus, 
Durkheim instances sudden wealth as stimulative of suicide on the 
ground that the newly enriched individual is unable to cope with the 
new opportunities afforded him. The upper and lower limits of his 
desires, his scale of life, all are upset. The same type of situation 
occurs, according to Durkheim, in what he terms conjugal anomy 
exemplified by divorce. Here marital society no longer exercises its 
regulative influence upon the partners, and the suicide-rate for the 
divorced is comparatively high. This anomic situation is more se- 
verely reflected among divorced men than among divorced women, 
since it is the man, according to Durkheim, who has profited more 
from the regulative influence of marriage. 

At this point in his analysis, Durkheim claims that the individual 
forms of suicide can be properly classified. Now that the three aetio- 
logical types — egoistic, altruistic, and anomic — have been established, 
it is possible, he says, to describe the individual behavior-patterns of 
those exemplifying these types. The other way around — seeking to 
find the causes of suicide by investigating the individual types — 
Durkheim had originally claimed to be fruitless. In addition to tabu- 
lating the individual forms of the three different types, Durkheim 



i6 suicroE 

seeks to establish that there are individual forms of suicide which dis- 
play mixed types, such as the ego-anomic, the altruist-anomic, the 
ego-altruist. 

Thus, the statistics available to Durkheim he finds not correlated 
with biological or cosmic phenomena, but with social phenomena, 
such as the family, political and economic society, religious groups. 
This correlation he claims indicates decisively that each society has a 
collective inclination towards suicide, a rate of self -homicide which 
is fairly constant for each society so long as the basic conditions 
Df its existence remain the same. This collective inclination conforms, 
Durkheim believes, to his definition of a social fact given in his 
treatise, The Rules of Sociological Method. That is, this inclination is 
a reality in itself, exterior to the individual and exercising a coercive 
effect upon him. In short, the individual inclination to suicide is ex- 
plicable scientifically only by relation to the collective inclination, and 
this collective inclination is itself a determined reflection of the struc- 
ture of the society in which the individual lives. 

The aggregate of individual views on life is more than the sum of 
the individual views to Durkheim. It is an existence in itself; what he 
calls the collective conscience, the totality of beliefs and practices, of 
folkways and mores. It is the repository of common sentiments, a 
well-spring from which each individual conscience draws its moral 
sustenance. Where these common sentiments rigorously guide the in- 
dividual, as in Catholicism, and condemn the taking of one's own 
life, there the suicide-rate is low; where these common sentiments 
lay great stress on individualism, innovation and free thought, the 
hold over the individual slackens, he is tenuously bound to society, 
and can the more easily be led to suicide. The latter is the case with 
Protestantism. In lower societies, the collective conscience, according 
to Durkheim, holds individual life of little value, and self-immola- 
tion through suicide is the reflection of the society at work in the 
individual. And in higher societies where sudden crises upset the ad- 
justment to which the individual has become habituated through the 
common sentiments and beliefs, anomy appears which shows itself 
in a rising suicide-rate. 

Suicide, like crime, is for Durkheim no indication of immorality 
per se. In fact, a given number of suicides are to be expected in a 
given type of society. But where the rate increases rapidly, it is symp- 



editor's introduction 17 

tomatic of the breakdown of the collective conscience, and of a basic 
flaw in the social fabric. But suicide and criminality are not correla- 
tive, as some criminologists had claimed, although both when ex- 
cessive may indicate that the social structure is not operating normally. 

The suicide-rate which Durkheim found increasing rapidly through 
the nineteenth century cannot be halted in its upward curve by^sdu- 
cation, exhortation, or repressiorv)he says. For Durkheim all amelio- 
rative measures must go to the question of social structure. Egoistic 
suicide can be reduced by reintegrating the individual into group- 
life, giving him strong allegiances through a strengthened collective 
conscience. This can be accomplished in no small part, he thinks, 
through the re-establishment of occupational groups, compact volun- 
tary associations based on work-interests. This is the same recom- 
mendation he made in the second edition of his Division of Labor 
in Society apropos of the infelicitous workings of that phenomenon. 
The occupational group will also serve to limit the number of anomic 
suicides. In the case of conjugal anomy, his solution is in greater 
freedom and equality for women. 

Thus, suicide for Durkheim shows up the deep crisis in modern 
society, just as the study of any other social fact would. No social 
fact to him has been explained until it has been seen in its full and 
complete nexus with all other social facts and with the fundamental 
structure of society. 

II 

Since Durkheim' s work on suicide, the chief advances in our 
knowledge of the subject have come from actuarial statistics and 
psychoanalytic psychiatry. Durkheim's own approach has been car- 
ried forward, tested, and applied further by his student and friend, 
Maurice Halbwachs, in Les Causes du Suicide} For the argument 
here, it must be noted (as Parsons has already pointed out) that Halb- 
wachs saw that there is no antithesis such as Durkheim posited, be- 
tween the social and the psychopathological explanations of suicide, 
but that they are complementary.^ 

The actuarialists have studied the overall extent and trends of 
suicide, related it to race and color incidence, age and sex distribu- 

^ Paris, 1930. 

2 Parsons, Talcott, The Structure of Social Action, New York, 1937, p. 326. 



1 8 SUICIDE 

tion, urban and rural areas, seasonality (what Durkheim calls "cos- 
mic" factors), economic conditions, religious affiliation, marital 
status. But the actuarialists have formulated no thorough-going, con- 
sistent and systematic hypothesis concerning the causes of suicide, 
which is what Durkheim is after. A sound compendium of actuarial 
work on this subject can be found in Louis I. Dublin's and Bessie 
Bunzel's book, To Be or Not To Be.^ But for their interpretative 
framework, Dublin and Bunzel have had to fall back upon modern 
developments in psychiatry and mental hygiene.* 

Durkheim is skeptical about the reliability of the statistics on sui- 
cide with regard to motives, on the ground that recording of motives 
is done by untrained enumerators in offices of vital statistics, as well 
as that the motives ascribed by suicides to their acts are unreliable. 
But the inadequacy of statistics on suicide generally has been even 
more trenchantly pointed up by psychoanalysts. Gregory Zilboorg has 
this to say: "... Statistical data on suicide as they are compiled today 
deserve little if any credence; it has been repeatedly pointed out by 
scientific students of the problem that suicide cannot be subject to 
statistical evaluation, since all too many suicides are not reported as 
such. Those who kill themselves through automobile accidents are 
almost never recorded as suicides; those who sustain serious injuries 
during an attempt to commit suicide and die weeks or months later 
of these injuries or of intercurrent infections are never registered as 
suicides; a great many genuine suicides are concealed by families; and 
suicidal attempts, no matter how serious, never find their way into 
the tables of vital statistics. It is obvious that under these circum- 
stances the statistical data available cover the smallest and probably 
the least representative number of suicides; one is justified, there- 
fore, in discarding them as nearly useless in a scientific evaluation of 
the problem." ^ 

Moreover, Fenichel, following Brill and Menninger, has pointed 

3 New York, 1933. 

* A similar situation holds with an earlier sociological study, Ruth S. Cavan's 
Suicide (Chicago, 1928). Here too actuarial and social statistics are presented, along 
with psychological case-histories, but the crucial relationship — that of the individual 
case-histories of suicide to the basic elements in the social structure — has been left 
relatively untouched. 

5 "Suicide Among Civilized and Primitive Races," American Journal of Psychiatry, 
vol. 92, 1935-36. 



editor's introduction 19 

out the prevalence of "partial suicides," where death does not occur 
but which consist of "self -destructive actions, during melancholic 
states, carried out as self -punishment, as an expression of certain de- 
lusions or without any rationalization." The term, "partial suicides," 
Fenichel concludes, "is absolutely correct in so far as the underlying 
unconscious mechanisms are identical with those of suicide." ® It is 
clear that these "partial suicides" never find their way into the statis- 
tics of suicide. From the aetiological standpoint, they are identical 
with consummated suicides; but of them all, Fenichel writes: "The 
factors, doubtlessly quantitative in nature, that determine whether 
or when the result is to be a suicide, a manic attack, or a recovery 
are still unknown." '^ 

And even where statistical regularity appears to be ascertainable, a 
methodologist of science writes: "What makes the statistical regu- 
larity of long-run human conduct so striking is the fact that it shows 
itself in acts which are not the simple outcomes of a few mechanical 
forces, like the movements of spun coins, but in masses of close de- 
cisions of a very complex sort." He then goes on to instance the sta- 
tistics of female suicides in New York City.^ 

It appears inescapable to state that imtil we have better records 
and more literate statistical classification in terms of psychiatric 
nomenclature, we can draw few binding conclusions concerning reg- 
ularity in terms of age, ethnic groups, social status, etc. As an ex- 
ample, we may point out that Durkheim, Dublin and Bunzel, and 
others show little if any suicide among children, whereas Zilboorg 
has deemed it significant enough to make a special study.^ 

A further result of the unreliability of the statistics is that they 
have led to a conclusion that is fairly widespread that suicide grows 
as civilization advances. This thesis has been seriously challenged by 
Zilboorg. He concludes that suicide is evidently "as old as the hu- 
man race, it is probably as old as murder and almost as old as nat- 
ural death. The lower the cultural niveau of the race, the more 

^ Fenichel, Otto, The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis, New York, W. W. 
Norton and Company, Inc., 1945, p. 401. 

7 Ibid. 

8 Larrabee, Harold A., Reliable Knowledge, Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 
1945, P- 436. 

^ Zilboorg, Gregory, "Considerations on Suicide, with Particular Reference to 
that of the Young," American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, VIII, 1937. 



20 SUICIDE 

deep-seated the suicidal impulse appears. [Italics not in original}. 
. . . The man of today, as far as suicide is concerned, is deficient, 
indeed, as compared with his forefathers who possessed a suicidal 
ideology, mythology, and an unsurpassed technique." ^^ Zilboorg 
speaks of a traditional, almost instinctive bias, one of whose two 
chief elements is "the misconception that the rate of suicide increases 
with the development of our civilization, that in some unknown way 
civilization fosters suicidal tendencies within us." ^^ 

A statement of Steinmetz re-enforces Zilboorg's view. From his 
study of suicide among primitive people, Steinmetz reached the con- 
clusion that "it seems probable from the data I have been able to 
collect that there is a greater propensity to suicide among savage 
than among civilized peoples." ^- Whether Steinmetz' conclusion 
would still hold if we had adequate data on suicides and partial 
suicides, will remain an unsolved question until we have broken 
through the thorny thickets of unreliable recording and squeamish 
acknowledgement. 

Ill 

Modern developments in motive-analysis and in the description of 
the fundamental characteristics of the emotional life were unknown 
to Durkheim, of course. Sigmund Freud had only just begun his in- 
vestigations of the "unconscious" drives in human behavior when 
Le Suicide appeared, and it was to be more than a quarter of a cen- 
tury before his views were widely accepted after continual clinical 
confirmation, by which time Emile Durkheim was no longer among 
us. But today, over half a century since Le Suicide was first pub- 
lished, psychoanalytic psychiatry has done not overmuch to relate its 
revolutionary findings concerning human motives to sociological dis- 
coveries (with the exception of some ingenious references by Zil- 
boorg). Indeed, there are psychoanalysts who appear to hold that the 
fundamental patterns of behavior set in infancy are not seriously af- 
fected by social factors at all, and that neuroses are not cured by 
social analysis. This view seems to rest on the postulate that since 

'^^ American Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 92, 1935-36, p. 1361, 1362. 

11 Op. cit., p. 1 35 1. 

12 Steinmetz, S. R., "Suicide Among Primitive People," American Anthropologist, 
1894, quoted in Zilboorg, op. cit., p. 1352. 



EDITOR S INTRODUCTION 21 

therapy is and must be individual, and mental illness related back to 
the evolution of the psyche, there is no social aetiology ascribable to 
individual case-histories. Karl A. Menninger exemplifies this tend- 
ency.^^ From the wealth of case-history data and from his exten- 
sive and magistral clinical work, Menninger finds himself able to 
say only a few words in a concluding chapter titled "Social Tech- 
niques in the Service of Reconstruction," and even these few words 
end with the final conclusion that to the death-instinct there must be 
opposed the life-instinct, by calling forth from man his will to con- 
quer his own self-annihilatory drives. But Menninger fails to analyze 
the relation between these self-annihilatory drives and the manner in 
which they are called forth by social factors, and also what social fac- 
tors must be strengthened or called into being in order to overcome 
these drives. 

IV 

Though psychoanalytic psychiatry holds that within the corpus of 
its interpretative principles of behavior there are tools for ferreting 
out the causes of suicide, no one yet seems ready to commit himself 
unreservedly to a set of aetiological postulates, based either on em- 
pirical data or deduction from verified principles. Zilboorg writes: 
". . . It is clear that the problem of suicide from the scientific point 
of view remains unsolved. Neither common sense nor clinical psycho- 
pathology has found a causal or even a strict empirical solution." ^* 

In 1 91 8 at a psychoanalytic symposium on suicide in Vienna, Sig- 
mund Freud summarized the discussions as follows: "Despite the 
valuable material obtained in this discussion, we have not succeeded 
in arriving at any definite conclusion. . . . Let us therefore refrain 
from forming an opinion until the time comes when experience will 
have solved the problem." ^^ Since then, extensive work has been 
done on suicide by expert, highly trained psychoanalysts including 
Freud, Zilboorg, Abraham, Menninger, Brill, and others. 

But an important methodological obstacle must be pointed out, an 
obstacle which is almost impossible wholly to overcome at the pres- 

'^^ Man Against Himself, New York, Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1938. 
^* "Differential Diagnostic Types of Suicide," Archives of Neurology and Psy- 
chiatry, vol. 35, 1936, p. 271. 

^5 Quoted by Zilboorg, citation note 14 above, p. 272. 



22 suicroE 

ent time. Unless the individual who commits suicide has been under 
constant and long-time psychiatric examination (either through psy- 
choanalysis or clinical study with full and copious life-history rec- 
ords), an interpretation and classification of his suicide becomes an 
ex post facto reconstruction of his life-history. This is extremely diffi- 
cult, and probably impossible in most cases. Not even the most ardent 
opinion-poller or attitude-tester can go around interviewing suicides, 
and representative samples of a population can scarcely be investi- 
gated solely on the anticipatory ground that some of the items in 
the sample will commit suicide. 

To some small degree this obstacle has been overcome by psycho- 
analytic psychiatrists who have re-examined the records of patients 
who were under treatment or examination and who committed sui- 
cide then or later, or of patients who attempted suicide unsuc- 
cessfully or toyed with the idea while under treatment. Zilboorg 
particularly concerned himself with this problem, in a close study of 
institutionalized cases, and his conclusions must therefore be looked 
upon as a fairly definitive statement of where psychoanalytic psy- 
chiatry stands in this regard. He found that suicide appeared in those 
suflPering from depressive psychoses, compulsive neuroses, and 
schizophrenia, and was led to the conclusion: "Evidently there is no 
single clinical entity recognized in psychiatry that is immune to the 
suicidal drive." ^® Suicide, according to Zilboorg, "is to be viewed 
rather as a reaction of a developmental nature which is universal 
and common to the mentally sick of all types and probably also to 
many so-called normal persons." '^'^ He feels that "further psycho- 
analytic studies . . . will probably permit one later to subject the data 
to statistical tabulation and thus facilitate and probably corroborate 
the work on the clinical typology of suicides." ^^ 

V 

But from the body of principles in psychoanalytic psychiatry we 

are led to certain aetiological principles concerning suicide. It is the 

basic hypothesis here that interrelating psychoanalytic discoveries on 

the motives for suicide with the social conditions under which sui- 

18 op. cit., p. 282. 
1^ Op. cit., p. 289. 
18 Op. cit., p. 285. 



EDITOR S INTRODUCTION 23 

cide occurs, offers the most fruitful method of advancing our knowl- 
edge of the phenomenon. This hypothesis leads to the forging of sev- 
eral subsidiary ones. 

In attempting to arrive at such hypotheses, we must neglect the 
hortatory and speculative views on suicide expressed by some philos- 
ophers. Neither William James in his essay "Is Life Worth Living?" 
with his call to vital existence, nor Immanual Kant in his ethical 
treatises with his rather prudish view that suicide is a violation of the 
moral law, can come to terms with modern scientific data. It is not 
enough to dislike the fact of suicide to assuage its havoc in human 
life. Nor does the defense by David Hume of the individual's right 
to commit suicide, nor the suicide's harmony with the denial of the 
will to live as in Schopenhauer, advance our scientific understanding. 
To announce that human beings have a social or philo^phical right 
to commit suicide does not tell us why they do so. Câind until we 
know why they do so, we may condemn it as do James and Kant, 
or defend it as do Hume and Schopenhauer, but we cannot con- 
trol it^ 

From the standpoint of psychoanalytic psychiatry, it may be said 
that every individual has what we may call a suicide-potential, a tend- 
ency to self-murder which varies in degree of intensity from in- 
dividual to individual. To be sure, this intensity has never been 
measured by psychometricians, and the difiiculty of measuring it 
is obvious and great. The degree of intensity of this potential is 
established in infancy and early childhood by the fears, anxieties, 
frustrations, loves and hatreds engendered in the individual by the 
family-environment in terms of eliminatory processes, weaning, sex- 
education, sibling rivalry, rejection or over-acceptance by the parents, 
degree of dependence. Where through excessive mother-love, father- 
rejection, inferiority induced by siblings, the individual is not readied 
for responsible adulthood according to the customs and mores of the 
society he is to participate in, the suicide-potential of an individual 
may be very high. At the other extreme, is the individual whose 
rearing has channeled the basic psychic configurations into work- 
activities or other activities, with no promises or rewards not possible 
in the world of reality; here the suicide-potential of the individual 
is slight. But slight as it may be, the woes, trials, and tribulations 
of adulthood may aggravate it to a point where self-murder becomes 



24 SUICIDE 

a possibility. Suicide is an ego-manifestation even though it is an 
annihilation of the ego. It is a pain inflicted on the ego, which, in 
being a compensation for guilt or a relief from anxiety, may be the 
only form of release, the utmost in going "beyond the pleasure 
principle." 

Emotions therefore are not simple qualities of behavior explicable 
in terms of an immediate situation; they relate back to the life-his- 
tory of the individual. Feelings of melancholia, depression, or any of 
the other states which Durkheim describes when he comes to classi- 
fying what he calls the morphological types of suicide in terms of 
their social causes, are not those of the moment of suicide; they have 
a long history in the individual, and although he may be stimulated 
to suicide by what looks like an immediate cause, no such stimulus 
would have resulted in the self-murder unless the underlying patterns 
of behavior had already been set. In the sense that all human beings 
have been subjected to the process of frustration and repression, of 
guilt and anxiety, to that extent suicide is a potential outlet under 
given kinds of emotional stress. That certain individuals resort to it 
requires investigation into the intensity with which these feelings are 
operative in them, as against their weaker operation in those who do 
not resort to it. 

The most widely accepted view today in psychoanalysis is that sui- 
cide is most often a form of "displacement"; that is, the desire to 
kill someone who has thwarted the individual is turned back on the 
individual himself. Or technically stated: the suicide murders the 
introjected object and expiates guilt for wanting to murder the ob- 
ject. The ego is satisfied and the superego mollified through self- 
murder. 

All of the emotions manifested in suicides are, then, explicable 
in terms of the life-history of the individual, particularly the chan- 
neling of the basic psychic configurations through the family. It may 
thus be possible to do what Durkheim thought was impossible — 
namely, classify suicides originally in terms of motives and what he 
calls morphologically. For the emotions of the suicide are psycho- 
genic and unilateral in the sense that the individual emotion-struc- 
ture has been laid down in infancy and childhood. It has been said 
that individual behavior must thus be construed not only as de- 
termined, but as over-determined, in the sense that it is relatively 



editor's introduction 25 

difficult to overcome the original structuring of the emotional life in 
the early years. But this recognition that behavior is what has been 
called over- determined can establish a situation where intelligence 
may redirect it. 

Suicidal behavior is behavior which has not been redirected. The 
resurgence of old psychic wounds and frustrations more than offsets 
what life has to offer at present or in prospect. But it is important 
to investigate precisely what causes the resurgence, unless it is con- 
tended that no matter what life holds in store for the individual, his 
suicide-potential is so overwhelming that sooner or later it will win 
out. The struggle of the individual to win out over the death-instinct 
may thus be seen as a battle won, or partially or wholly lost, in in- 
fancy or childhood through the family and the schoolroom; or which 
is refought in the clinic or analytic room to a new stalemate or vic- 
tory. 

At this point, psychoanalytic psychiatry has failed to push the issue 
into the social realm. The basic reason for this failure lies in the pre- 
occupation of psychoanalysis with therapy, that is, with the cure of 
mental illness. Now this type of therapy is obviously individual, and 
requires the recognition by the individual of his unconscious desires 
and wishes, the manner in which they have been frustrated and re- 
pressed, and the psychic toll they have taken of him. Through this 
recognition arrived at through "free association" in the analytic room 
(although on occasion possible also in clinic where depth-analysis 
proves unnecessary), the individual discovers why he behaves the 
way he does and is within the limits of the neurosis-intensity able to 
orient his behavior into new channels. 

But though this type of therapy is necessarily individual and re- 
quires that the individual piece together the motivation-nexus for his 
conduct, this does not mean that social factors have not been causally 
involved in the neurosis. Neuroses, and suicide seems to present pro- 
found neurotic elements even when committed by a so-called normal 
person, must be treated medically as an individual phenomenon, but 
their causes may lie deep in the social life-history of the individual. 

VI 

The basic problem for social research must be to interrelate the 
life-histories of individual suicides and attempted suicides with socio- 



26 suicroE 

logical variables, on the hypothesis that certain social environments 
may (a) induce or (b) perpetuate or (c) aggravate the suicide-po- 
tential. If we can correlate for masses of data, suicides or attempted 
suicides with their having been induced, perpetuated, or aggravated 
by certain social environments, then we are in a position to establish 
laws of generalized occurrence. 

It was Durkheim's contention that it was impossible to start an 
aetiological investigation of suicide as a social phenomenon by seek- 
ing to establish types of individual behavior in suicides. We now 
know better, and with the unflagging ability Durkheim always 
showed in utilizing the findings of psychologic science, there is every 
precedent in his work for believing that he would strive to bring his 
sociological analysis into harmony with psychoanalysis. 

Below are offered some h3^otheses for research today. Basic to all 
of these hypotheses is the imderlying major hypothesis that suicidal 
behavior is a combination of psycho-instinctual impulse and social 
precipitation. 

Problems of Collection of Data. "We must investigate the possibil- 
ity of getting matched samples so that individuals with the same so- 
cial background may be compared — as to those who commit suicide 
and those who do not. This raises the intricate methodological prob- 
lem whether there is any identity of social background on the emo- 
tional level. Reliable statistics on suicide cannot be compiled unless 
we have ready-at-hand accurate and painstakingly recorded psychi- 
atric life-histories on all. This requires that the intimate life of the 
family be recorded in so far as it affects the individual, and that this 
be done from early age. 

Hypotheses as Regards the Family. The emotional patterns of those 
attempting or committing suicide are laid down in infancy and early 
childhood by familial relationships. Socialization in the family is 
a process of frustration for all, and thus suicide is a potential outlet 
for everybody. It is necessary to find the relation of later social pré- 
cipitants of suicide to the early emotional patterning. 

Moreover, it is necessary to seek to interrelate the case-histories of 
suicides and attempted suicides with the type of family-rearing, in- 
cluding such variables as ethnic group, religious affiliation, income- 
group, size of family and place of the individual suicide in the fam- 
ily, educational level. 



editor's introduction 27 

Suicide and Nationality. Suicide-rates differ from country to coun- 
try. In part, this may be due to differences in record-keeping or qual- 
ity of vital statistics. Countries of Germanic influence show high 
suicide-rates, and so does Japan. In Germanic countries this may be 
the result of religion. The effect of Lutheranism and Calvinism, 
which throw guilt-feelings back on the individual, and make frus- 
tration general with no compensating belief in the religious sanctity 
of such things as poverty, humility, and celibacy, must here be thor- 
oughly investigated. The rates are not high for Catholics in Germanic 
countries. 

The case of Japan (and certain segments of the population in In- 
dia) involves investigation into family-life and social beliefs. The 
psychological development of the Japanese on the score of suicide ap- 
pears to be completely inverted compared with that of our type of 
society. How can the same fundamental psychological mechanisms 
have such diametrically opposite results? This again raises the vexing 
problem of the relation of underlying instinctual patterns of behavior, 
and the different ways in which they can be objectified through social 
conditioning. Not to mention the manner in which patterns of social 
behavior are handed down from generation to generation. An inter- 
esting sidelight here is the effect which our attempt today to democ- 
ratize Japan and change its people over to Western ways will have 
upon the Japanese suicide-rate. 

Urban Life and Suicide. Present findings, that rates are high in ur- 
ban areas, must be re-investigated in terms of the psychic aggrava- 
tion of urban living, ^is one thing to discover that urban rates are / s^^ 
high because of aggravation and perpetuation of basic emotional' 
patterns; it is quite another to hold that urban living induces suicide. ' 

Suicide and Religious Affiliation. There is general agreement that 
the suicide-rate for Catholics is lowest of all religious groups. This 
requires investigation into the emotional outlets offered to Catholics 
for repressed instinctual desires, as against other religious groups. 

This leads to inquiry into the causes of suicide among those Cath- 
olics who do commit it. These should show up as confirmatory of 
causes among non-Catholics. And what of the suicide-rate among 
Catholic converts; is this lower or higher than among other Catholics, 
and among other religious groups? 

This in turn raises the problem whether suicides of Catholics are 



28 SUICIDE 

being accurately reported since the religious prohibition against sui- 
cide in the Catholic church may well lead to serious complications. 

The suicide rates for Protestants everywhere shows itself as higher 
than that for Catholics, and often for the Jews. This has been 
ascribed by Morselli and Durkheim to the individualism emphasized 
by Protestantism and its emphasis upon reflective thinking and the in- 
dividual conscience. If this holds true, then the most individualistic 
Protestant sects should show the highest suicide rates. For example, 
in the United States, Unitarians should show a very high rate, and 
high-church Episcopalians a very low rate. Do they? We do not 
know. Moreover, we have no data that relates psychiatric life- 
histories to religious affiliation. Where there has been emphasis in 
Unitarian churches on mental hygiene and the ministers have re- 
ferred troubled members of their flock to psychoanalytic psychiatry 
as a general practice, the rate may be low. 

Whereas in the nineteenth century, the suicide-rate for the Jews 
appeared to be lowest of the three main currents of religion in West- 
ern civilization, more recent figures (reflecting particularly political 
events in Europe under the Nazis) would probably show that it has 
increased beyond the other two. 

The religious environment may be strictly linked with psychiatric 
interpretation of suicide, Durkheim' s hypothesis of the comparative 
immunity of Catholics to suicide, which appears to be confirmed 
within the undoubtedly narrow limits of accuracy of contemporary 
actuarial and social statistics, may sink deep roots in psychiatric sci- 
ence. Durkheim ascribed Catholicism's immunity-giving power to the 
way in which it integrates the individual into the group, through a 
complete, thorough and all-encompassing body of common senti- 
ments and beliefs. But to what do these common sentiments and 
beliefs refer? Catholic sentiments and beliefs seek to relieve the 
individual of guilt, make all sins expiable, establish an intricate, 
hierarchical system of father-substitutes, and an ingenious, poetic 
image of the mother. 

And the less rigorous Protestant sects give no sublimatory outlet 
for infantile repression and frustration, through poetry, art, and 
ritual, and there is a rampaging of the sense of guilt which cannot 
be expiated through the confessional but which faces God and his 
elders' wrath in all its individual nakedness. Calvinism, and to no 



EDITOR S INTRODUCTION 29 

small degree, Lutheranism, deal with sin repressively and individ- 
ualistically. In early Protestantism, the unconscious is thrown back 
upon itself, and later only exclusively non-religious social sanctions 
hold it in check. 

Suicide and Sex. Consummated suicides are higher among men 
than among women, but it seems that attempted suicides are higher 
among women than among men. Laying aside the unreliability of 
the statistics, we may ask, is this because of the social position of 
women, or because of the emotional differences between men and 
women, or an interrelationship of both, and how and to what degree? 

Suicide and Age. The suicide-rate is believed to increase with age. 
But is this not possibly because early frustrations are aggravated by 
failures in middle Yiie'^ And what relation is there between middle- 
age suicide-rates and failure in intimate marital and familial rela- 
tions? 

The suicide-rate increases, according to the statistics we have, with 
advance in age. It is particularly high among the aged. Several prob- 
lems arise here. First, is it that there is less reluctance to admit that 
death resulted from suicide when the individual is aged? Second, 
old-age is the time when degenerative diseases reach their mortal 
climax, and the affect upon the psyche may be immense. Third, shall 
we also call suicide the self-murder which is perpetrated in the 
knowledge that death is not far off anyhow? Fourth, is the social ob- 
livion to which the aged are subjected an invitation to what the 
psychoanalysts call the desire for maternal oblivion; that is, a return 
to the kindly sleep of the unborn? These questions, and others, must 
obviously be to the forefront in the new branch of medicine called 
geriatrics, particularly in the light of what has been termed our aging 
population. 

Suicide and Income-Groups. Suicide-rates are relatively high 
among the highest income-groups. Wealth, the touchstone of success 
in our type of society, is no assurance of immunity. Is this because of 
over-protection in infancy and youth? And what of suicides among 
self-made men? Dublin and Bunzel come to the conclusion that there 
is no simple causal relation between economic factors and suicide. 
Should, then, suicides among all economic groups show up confirma- 
tory of the same emotional difficulties? 

Suicide and War. In the midst of a shooting war, suicide-rates 



30 SUICIDE 

tend to decline; so the statistics say. But a shooting war offers for 
those in battle optimum opportunity for suicide to be committed 
without anyone being aware of it. What looks like courage may be 
suicidal proclivity; and anyway one may not contemplate suicide if 
the chances are greater that life may soon be over. 

As far as the civilian population is concerned, the whole question 
of the impact of war upon psychic desiderata remains to be investi- 
gated. 

Suicide and Marital Status. Marital status and suicide are pre- 
sumed to be strictly interrelated. Divorced men have a higher 
suicide-rate than the undivorced, divorced women a higher rate than 
undivorced women but lower than divorced men. What of suicide- 
rates among the divorced who have re- wed? 

Among the widowed, childless marriages give high rates. But the 
interpretation of such phenomena seems to require generalization 
based on psychiatric case-histories, and some understanding of the 
relation of marital status to emotional life as patterned before mar- 
riage, divorce, or widowhood. And what of suicide-rates of the 
widowed who re- wed. -^ If marriage protects against suicide, particu- 
larly fertile marriage, why does it not protect all such marriages? 
Is it that the suicide-potential overcomes even the devotion to spouse 
and family in the case of suicides? And if so, how did the suicide- 
potential get so powerful? 

Suicide and the Negro. The rate for Negroes is very low compared 
to whites, in our society. There is obviously (if the statistics are cor- 
rect) no correlation between Negro underprivilege and suicide, as 
might be expected. Is this because systematic oppression and under- 
privilege lead individuals to be adjusted to the misery and tragedy of 
human existence which is visited upon all? Expecting nothing of life, 
they may not be disappointed at how little it does offer them. But 
here a serious check must be made by studies of suicide among 
upper-class and well-educated Negroes, and among low-income and 
poorly educated Negroes. Do Negroes who are on the margin of 
upper-class white standards of living, materially and intellectually, 
commit suicide more than do other Negroes? 

But Negro women have a rate somewhat closer to white women, 
than Negro men have to white men. Here intimate knowledge of the 
private lives of such Negro women would be of help. Also questions 



EDITOR S INTRODUCTION 3 1 

of high and low coloration may be necessarily involved throughout 
the problem of the relation of Negroes to suicide. 

Suicide and Curative Therapy. Where, from analytic-room and 
clinic, the suicidal proclivity originally appeared high in given indi- 
viduals, and curative therapy proved successful, what is the suicide- 
rate in later life among these individuals? Has the proclivity been re- 
directed towards life? And what kind of life? 

VII 

To raise these hypotheses is certainly not to answer them. 

Since the respect for human personality in our society is so great, 
we hold as a fundamental value an abhorrence of suicide. This in 
turn raises the problem of what to do about combatting suicide. 
From the psychiatric point of view, the answer would seem to be the 
vigorous training of parents and parents-to-be in the principles of 
mental hygiene, a rigorous training of nursery-school, grade-school, 
and high-school teachers in these principles, and an extensive system 
of psychiatric record-keeping in these "coming-of-age" organizations. 
Sociologically considered, it is necessary to assuage the suicidal pro- 
clivities of whatever social environments we find inducing and ag- 
gravating and perpetuating tendencies towards self-murder among in- 
dividuals. 

Some social scientists have for some time been chagrined by the 
increasing trend in professional guilds to establish programs for re- 
search, and not to give answers. Here, in the case of suicide, re- 
search has gone on for over fifty years, and some may feel that it is 
high time we had some answers. To this the answer is that it is only 
recently that we have found the key to this Pandora's box, but that 
this key itself can only open the box; it cannot quickly conquer the 
released wild and dark furies of irrationality to which human beings 
are heir. 

All those who would enter this arena of research had better be 
prepared for the difficulties which await; and no ready cures should 
be expected. It is not administrative devices that will bring fewer 
suicides, but kindly ministration based on the tragedy of humanity 
in being imprisoned by irrational biology and psychology whose 
depths we have only just plumbed, and which in turn are nursed by 
prudery and squeamishness in acknowledging them as realities. 



32 SUICIDE 

To fight irrationality, the findings of science and human reason 
must be incorporated into the social structure and the functioning of 
the individual in that structure. In the long tradition of Western 
thought, Durkheim joins with psychoanalysis in emphasizing that 
the life of reason has many enemies, the chief of which today is the 
failure to apply what we have discovered on sound evidence, to the 
social world about us. That he did not have our evidence at his dis- 
posal is an accident of birth and history; but, to use some of his own 
words in the preface to Le Suicide: "There is nothing necessarily 
discouraging in the incompleteness of the results thus far obtained; 
they should arouse new efforts, not surrender. . . . This makes pos- 
sible some continuity in scientific labor, — continuity upon which 
progress depends." 

George Simpson 



SUICIDE 



PREFACE 



^< 



ociOLOGY has been in vogue for some time. Today this word, 
little known and almost discredited a decade ago, is in common use. 
Representatives of the new science are increasing in number and 
there is something like a public feeling favorable to it. Much is ex- 
pected of it. It must be confessed, however, that results up to the 
present time are not really proportionate to the number of publica- 
tions nor the interest which they arouse. The progress of a science 
is proven by the progress toward solution of the problems it treats. 
It is said to be advancing when laws hitherto unknown are discov- 
ered, or when at least new facts are acquired modifying the formula- 
tion of these problems even though not furnishing a final solution. 
Unfortunately, there is good reason why sociology does not appear in 
this light, and this is because the problems it proposes are not usually 
clear-cut. It is still in the stage of system-building and philosophical 
syntheses. Instead of attempting to cast light on a limited portion of 
the social field, it prefers brilliant generalities reflecting all sorts of 
questions to definite treatment of any one. Such a method may indeed 
momentarily satisfy public curiosity by offering it so-called illumina- 
tion on all sorts of subjects, but it can achieve nothing objective. 
Brief studies and hasty intuitions are not enough for the discovery 
of the laws of so complex a reality. And, above all, such large and 
abrupt generalizations are not capable of any sort of proof. All that 
is accomplished is the occasional citation of some favorable exam- 
ples illustrative of the hypothesis considered, but an illustration is 
not a proof. Besides, when so many various matters are dealt with, 

35 



36 SUICIDE 

none is competently treated and only casual sources can be employed, 
with no means to make a critical estimate of them. Works of pure 
sociology are accordingly of little use to whoever insists on treating 
only definite questions, for most of them belong to no particular 
branch of research and in addition lack really authoritative docu- 
mentation. 

Believers in the future of the science must, of course, be anxious 
to put an end to this state of affairs. If it should continue, sociology 
would soon relapse into its old discredit and only the enemies of rea- 
son could rejoice at this. The human mind would suffer a grievous 
setback if this segment of reality which alone has so far denied or 
defied it should escape it even temporarily. There is nothing neces- 
sarily discouraging in the incompleteness of the results thus far ob- 
tained. They should arouse new efforts, not surrender. A science so 
recent cannot be criticized for errors and probings if it sees to it that 
their recurrence is avoided. Sociology should, then, renounce none 
of its aims; but, on the other hand, if it is to satisfy the hopes placed 
in it, it must try to become more than a new sort of philosophical 
literature. Instead of contenting himself with metaphysical reflection 
on social themes, the sociologist must take as the object of his re- 
search groups of facts clearly circumscribed, capable of ready defini- 
tion, with definite limits, and adhere strictly to them. Such auxiliary 
subjects as history, ethnography and statistics are indispensable. The 
only danger is that their findings may never really be related to the 
subject he seeks to embrace; for, carefully as he may delimit this 
subject, it is so rich and varied that it contains inexhaustible and 
unsuspected tributary fields. But this is not conclusive. If he proceeds 
accordingly, even though his factual resources are incomplete and his 
formulae too narrow, he will have nevertheless performed a useful 
task for future continuation. Conceptions with some objective foun- 
dation are not restricted to the personality of their author. They have 
an impersonal quality which others may take up and pursue; they 
are transmissible. This makes possible some continuity in scientific 
labor, — continuity upon which progress depends. 

It is in this spirit that the work here presented has been conceived. 
Suicide has been chosen as its subject, among the various subjects 
that we have had occasion to study in our teaching career, because 
few are more accurately to be defined and because it seemed to us 



PREFACE 37 

particularly timely; its limits have even required study in a prelimi- 
nary work. On the other hand, by such concentration, real laws are 
discoverable which demonstrate the possibility of sociology better 
than any dialectical argument. The ones we hope to have demon- 
strated will appear. Of course we must have made more than one 
error, must have overextended the facts observed in our inductions. 
But at least each proposition carries its proofs with it and we have 
tried to make them as numerous as possible. Most of all, we have 
striven in each case to separate the argument and interpretation from 
the facts interpreted. Thus the reader can judge what is relevant in 
our explanations without being confused. 

Moreover, by thus restricting the research, one is by no means de- 
prived of broad views and general insights. On the contrary, we 
think we have established a certain number of propositions concern- 
ing marriage, widowhood, family life, religious society, etc., which, 
if we are not mistaken, are more instructive than the common the- 
ories of moralists as to the nature of these conditions or institutions. 
There will even emerge from our study some suggestions concerning 
the causes of the general contemporary maladjustment being under- 
gone by European societies and concerning remedies which may re- 
lieve it. One must not believe that a general condition can only be 
explained with the aid of generalities. It may appertain to specific 
causes which can only be determined if carefully studied through no 
less definite manifestations expressive of them. Suicide as it exists 
today is precisely one of the forms through which the collective affec- 
tion from which we suffer is transmitted; thus it will aid us to un- 
derstand this. 

Finally, in the course of this work, but in a concrete and specific 
form, will appear the chief methodological problems elsewhere 
stated and examined by us in greater detail.^ Indeed, among these 
questions there is one to which the following work makes a con- 
tribution too important for us to fail to call it immediately to the 
attention of the reader. 

Sociological method as we practice it rests wholly on the basic 
principle that social facts must be studied as things, that is, as reali- 

1 Les regies de la Méthode sociologique, Paris, F. Alcan, 1895. (Translated into 
English as The Rules of Sociological Method, and published by the Free Press, 
Glencoe, Illinois, 1950.) 



38 suicroE 

ties external to the individual. There is no principle for which we 
have received more criticism; but none is more fundamental. In- 
dubitably for sociology to be possible, it must above all have an 
object all its own. It must take cognizance of a reality which is not 
in the domain of other sciences. But if no reality exists outside of 
individual consciousness, it wholly lacks any material of its own. In 
that case, the only possible subject of observation is the mental states 
of the individual, since nothing else exists. That, however, is the 
field of psychology. From this point of view the essence of marriage, 
for example, or the family, or religion, consists of individual needs 
to which these institutions supposedly correspond: paternal affection, 
filial love, sexual desire, the so-called religious instinct, etc. These 
institutions themselves, with their varied and complex historical 
forms, become negligible and of little significance. Being superficial, 
contingent expressions of the general characteristics of the nature of 
the individual, they are but one of its aspects and call for no special 
investigation. Of course, it may occasionally be interesting to see how 
these eternal sentiments of humanity have been outwardly manifested 
at different times in history; but as all such manifestations are im- 
perfect, not much importance may be attached to them. Indeed, in 
certain respects, they are better disregarded to permit more attention 
to the original source whence flows all their meaning and which they 
imperfectly reflect. On the pretext of giving the science a more solid 
foundation by establishing it upon the psychological constitution of 
the individual, it is thus robbed of the only object proper to it. It is 
not realized that there can he no sociology unless societies exist, and 
that societies cannot exist if there are only individuals. Moreover, 
this view is not the least of the causes which maintain the taste for 
vague generalities in sociology. How can it be important to define 
the concrete forms of social life, if they are thought to have only a 
borrowed existence? 

But it seems hardly possible to us that there will not emerge, on 
the contrary, from every page of this book, so to speak, the impres- 
sion that the individual is dominated by a moral reality greater than 
himself: namely, collective reality. When each people is seen to 
have its own suicide-rate, more constant than that of general mortal- 
ity, that its growth is in accordance with a coefficient of acceleration 
characteristic of each society; when it appears that the variations 



PREFACE 39 

through which it passes at different times of the day, month, year, 
merely reflect the rhythm of social life; and that marriage, divorce, 
the family, religious society, the army, etc., affect it in accordance 
with definite laws, some of which may even be numerically expressed 
— these states and institutions will no longer be regarded simply as 
characterless, ineffective ideological arrangements. Rather they will 
be felt to be real, living, active forces which, because of the way they 
determine the individual, prove their independence of him; which, 
if the individual enters as an element in the combination whence 
these forces ensue, at least control him once they are formed. Thus it 
will appear more clearly why sociology can and must be objective, 
since it deals with realities as definite and substantial as those of the 
psychologist or the biologist.^ 

We must, finally, acknowledge our gratitude to our two former 
pupils. Professor N. Ferrand of the Ecole primaire supérieure at 
Bordeaux and M. Marcel Mauss, agrégé de philosophie, for their 
generous aid and assistance. The former made all the maps contained 
in this book; the latter has enabled us to combine the elements neces- 
sary for Tables XXI and XXII, the importance of which will appear 
later. For this purpose the records of some 26,000 suicides had to be 
studied to classify separately their age, sex, marital status, and the 
presence or absence of children. M. Mauss alone performed this 
heavy task. 

These tables have been drawn up from documents of the Ministry 
of Justice not appearing in the annual reports. They have been most 
kindly submitted to us by M. Tarde, Chief of the Bureau of Legal 
Statistics. His assistance is most gratefully acknowledged. 

Emile Durkheim 

2 Nevertheless on page 325, footnote, we shall show that this way of looking 
at it, far from ruling out all liberty, is the only means of reconciling liberty with 
the determinism revealed by the statistical data. 



INTRODUCTION 



^. 



INCE the word "suicide" recurs constantly in the course of con- 
versation, it might be thought that its sense is universally known and 
that definition is superfluous. Actually, the words of everyday lan- 
guage, like the concepts they express, are always susceptible of more 
than one meaning, and the scholar employing them in their accepted 
use without further definition would risk serious misunderstanding. 
Not only is their meaning so indefinite as to vary, from case to case, 
with the needs of argument, but, as the classification from which they 
derive is not analytic, but merely translates the confused impressions 
of the crowd, categories of very different sorts of fact are indistinctly 
combined under the same heading, or similar realities are differ- 
ently named. So, if we follow common use, we risk distinguishing 
what should be combined, or combining what should be distin- 
guished, thus mistaking the real affinities of things, and accordingly 
misapprehending their nature. Only comparison affords explanation. 
A scientific investigation can thus be achieved only if it deals with 
comparable facts, and it is the more likely to succeed the more cer- 
tainly it has combined all those that can be usefully compared. But 
these natural affinities of entities cannot be made clear safely by such 
superficial examination as produces ordinary terminology; and so the 
scholar cannot take as the subject of his research roughly assembled 
groups of facts corresponding to words of common usage. He him- 
self must establish the groups he wishes to study in order to give 
them the homogeneity and the specific meaning necessary for them 
to be susceptible of scientific treatment. Thus the botanist, speaking 

41 



42 suicroE 

of flowers or fruits, the zoologist of fish or insects, employ these 
various terms in previously determined senses. 

Our first task then must be to determine the order of facts to be 
studied under the name of suicides. Accordingly, we must inquire 
whether, among the different varieties of death, some have common 
qualities objective enough to be recognizable by all honest observers, 
specific enough not to be found elsewhere and also sufficiently kin 
to those commonly called suicides for us to retain the same term 
without breaking with common usage. If such are found, we shall 
combine under that name absolutely all the facts presenting these 
distinctive characteristics, regardless of whether the resulting class 
fails to include all cases ordinarily included under the name or in- 
cludes others usually otherwise classified. The essential thing is not 
to express with some precision what the average intelligence terms 
suicide, but to establish a category of objects permitting this classifi- 
cation, which are objectively established, that is, correspond to a 
definite aspect of things. 

Among the difi^erent species of death, some have the special qual- 
ity of being the deed of the victim himself, resulting from an act 
whose author is also the sufferer; and this same characteristic, on the 
other hand, is certainly fundamental to the usual idea of suicide. The 
intrinsic nature of the acts so resulting is unimportant. Though sui- 
cide is commonly conceived as a positive, violent action involving 
some muscular energy, it may happen that a purely negative attitude 
or mere abstention will have the same consequence. Refusal to take 
food is as suicidal as self-destruction by a dagger or fire-arm. The 
subject's act need not even have been directly antecedent to death 
for death to be regarded as its effect; the causal relation may be in- 
direct without that changing the nature of the phenomenon. The 
iconoclast, committing with the hope of a martyr's palm the crime of 
high treason known to be capital and dying by the executioner's 
hand, achieves his own death as truly as though he had dealt his own 
death-blow; there is, at least, no reason to classify differently these 
two sorts of voluntary death, since only material details of their exe- 
cution differ. We come then to our first formula: the term suicide is 
applied to any death which is the direct or indirect result of a posi- 
tive or negative act accomplished by the victim himself. 

But this definition is incomplete; it fails to distinguish between 



INTRODUCTION 43 

two very different sorts of death. The same classification and treat- 
ment cannot be given the death of a victim of hallucination, who 
throws himself from an upper window thinking it on a level with 
the ground, and that of the sane person who strikes while knowing 
what he is doing. In one sense, indeed, few cases of death exist 
which are not immediately or distantly due to some act of the sub- 
ject. The causes of death are outside rather than within us, and are 
effective only if we venture into their sphere of activity. 

Shall suicide be considered to exist only if the act resulting in 
death was performed by the victim to achieve this result? Shall only 
he be thought truly to slay himself who has wished to do so, and 
suicide be intentional self-homicide? In the first place, this would 
define suicide by a characteristic which, whatever its interest and sig- 
nificance, would at least suffer from not being easily recognizable, 
since it is not easily observed. How discover the agent's motive and 
whether he desired death itself when he formed his resolve, or had 
some other purpose? Intent is too intimate a thing to be more than 
approximately interpreted by another. It even escapes self-observa- 
tion. How often we mistake the true reasons for our acts! We con- 
stantly explain acts due to petty feelings or blind routine by generous 
passions or lofty considerations. 

Besides, in general, an act cannot be defined by the end sought 
by the actor, for an identical system of behavior may be adjustable to 
'too many different ends without altering its nature. Indeed, if the in- 
tention of self-destruction alone constituted suicide, the name suicide 
could not be given to facts which, despite apparent differences, are 
fundamentally identical with those always called suicide and which 
could not be otherwise described without discarding the term. The 
soldier facing certain death to save his regiment does not wish to die, 
and yet is he not as much the author of his own death as the manu- 
facturer or merchant who kills himself to avoid bankruptcy? This 
holds true for the martyr dying for his faith, the mother sacrificing 
herself for her child, etc. Whether death is accepted merely as an 
unfortunate consequence, but inevitable given the purpose, or is 
actually itself sought and desired, in either case the person renounces 
existence, and the various methods of doing so can be only varieties 
of a single class. They possess too many essential similarities not to 
be combined in one generic expression, subject to distinction as the 



44 suicroE 

species of the genus thus established. Of course, in common terms, 
suiciHe is pre-eminently the desperate act of one who does not care 
to live. But actually life is none the less abandoned because one 
desires it at the moment of renouncing it; and there are common 
traits clearly essential to all acts by which a living being thus re- 
nounces the possession presumably most precious of all. Rather, the 
diversity of motives capable of actuating these resolves can give rise 
only to secondary differences. Thus, when resolution entails certain 
sacrifice of life, scientifically this is suicide; of what sort shall be 
seen later. 

The common quality of all these possible forms of supreme re- 
nunciation is that the determining act is performed advisedly; that 
at the moment of acting the victim knows the certain result of his 
conduct, no matter what reason may have led him to act thus. All 
mortal facts thus characterized are clearly distinct from all others 
in which the victim is either not the author of his own end or else 
only its unconscious author. They differ by an easily recognizable 
feature, for it is not impossible to discover whether the individual 
did or did not know in advance the natural results of his action. 
Thus, they form a definite, homogeneous group, distinguishable 
from any other and therefore to be designated by a special term. 
Suicide is the one appropriate; there is no need to create another, 
for the vast majority of occurrences customarily so-called belong to 
this group. We may then say conclusively: the term suicide is applied 
to all cases of death resulting directly or indirectly from a positive 
or negative act of the victim himself, which he knows will produce 
this result. An attempt is an act thus defined but falling short of 
actual death. 

This definition excludes from our study everything related to the 
suicide of animals. Our knowledge of animal intelligence does not 
really allow us to attribute to them an understanding anticipatory 
of their death nor, especially, of the means to accomplish it. Some, 
to be sure, are known to refuse to enter a spot where others have 
been killed; they seem to have a presentiment of death. Actually, 
however, the smell of blood sufficiently explains this instinctive 
reaction. All cases cited at all authentically which might appear true 
suicides may be quite differently explained. If the irritated scorpion 
pierces itself with its sting (which is not at all certain) , it is probably 



INTRODUCTION 45 

from an automatic, unreflecting reaction. The motive energy aroused 
by his irritation is discharged by chance and at random; the creature 
happens to become its victim, though it cannot be said to have had 
a preconception of the result of its action. On the other hand, if some 
dogs refuse to take food on losing their masters, it is because the 
sadness into which they are thrown has automatically caused lack 
of hunger; death has resulted, but without having been foreseen. 
Neither fasting in this case nor the wound in the other have been 
used as means to a known efl^ect. So the special characteristics of 
suicide as defined by us are lacking. Hence in the following we shall 
treat human suicide only.^ 

But this definition not only forestalls erroneous combinations and 
arbitrary exclusions; it also gives us at once an idea of the place of 
suicide in moral life as a whole. It shows indeed that suicides do not 
form, as might be thought, a wholly distinct group, an isolated class 
of monstrous phenomena, unrelated to other forms of conduct, but 
rather are related to them by a continuous series of intermediate 
cases. They are merely the exaggerated form of common practices. 
Suicide, we say, exists indeed when the victim at the moment he 
commits the act destined to be fatal, knows the normal result of it 
with certainty. This certainty, however, may be greater or less. 
Introduce a few doubts, and you have a new fact, not suicide but 
closely akin to it, since only a difference of degree exists between 
them. Doubtless, a man exposing himself knowingly for another's 
sake but without the certainty of a fatal result is not a suicide, even 
if he should die, any more than the daredevil who intentionally 
toys with death while seeking to avoid it, or the man of apathetic 
temperament who, having no vital interest in anything, takes no 
care of health and so imperils it by neglect. Yet these different ways 
of acting are not radically distinct from true suicide. They result 
from similar states of mind, since they also entail mortal risks not 
unknown to the agent, and the prospect of these is no deterrent; 
the sole difference is a lesser chance of death. Thus the scholar who 

^A very small but highly suspicious number of cases may not be exph'cable in 
this way. For instance as reported by Aristotle, that of a horse, who, realizing that 
he had been made to cover his dam without knowing the fact and after repeated 
refusals, flung himself intentionally from a cliff {History of Animals, IX, 47). 
Horse-breeders state that horses are by no means averse to incest. On this whole 
question see Westcott, Suicide, p. 174-179. 



46 SUICIDE 

dies from excessive devotion to study is currently and not wholly 
unreasonably said to have killed himself by his labor. All such facts 
form a sort of embryonic suicide, and though it is not methodologi- 
cally sound to confuse them with complete and full suicide, their 
close relation to it must not be neglected. For suicide appears quite 
another matter, once its unbroken connection is recognized with 
acts, on the one hand, of courage and devotion, on the other of 
imprudence and clear neglect. The lesson of these connections will 
be better understood in what follows. 

II 

But is the fact thus defined of interest to the sociologist? Since 
suicide is an individual action affecting the individual only, it must 
seemingly depend exclusively on individual factors, thus belonging 
to psychology alone. Is not the suicide's resolve usually explained by 
his temperament, character, antecedents and private history? 

The degree and conditions under which suicides may be legiti- 
mately studied in this way need not now be considered, but that they 
may be viewed in an entirely different light is certain. If, instead of 
seeing in them only separate occurrences, unrelated and to be sepa- 
rately studied, the suicides committed in a given society during a 
given period of time are taken as a whole, it appears that this total 
is not simply a sum of independent imits, a collective total, but is 
itself a new fact sui generis, with its own unity, individuality and 
consequently its own nature — a nature, furthermore, dominantly 
social. Indeed, provided too long a period is not considered, the 
statistics for one and the same society are almost invariable, as 
appears in Table I. This is because the environmental circumstances 
attending the life of peoples remain relatively unchanged from year 
to year. To be sure, more considerable variations occasionally occur; 
but they are quite exceptional. They are also clearly always con- 
temporaneous with some passing crisis affecting the social state.^ 
Thus, in 1848 there occurred an abrupt decline in all European states. 

If a longer period of time is considered, more serious changes are 

observed. Then, however, they become chronic; they only prove that 

the structural characteristics of society have simultaneously suffered 

profound changes. It is interesting to note that they do not take place 

2 The numbers applying to these exceptional years we have put in parentheses. 



INTRODUCTION 47 

with the extreme slowness that quite a large number of observers 
has attributed to them, but are both abrupt and progressive. After a 
series of years, during which these figures have varied within very 
narrow limits, a rise suddenly appears which, after repeated vacilla- 
tion, is confirmed, grows and is at last fixed. This is because every 
breach of social equilibrium, though sudden in its appearance, takes 

TABLE I — Stability of Suicide in the Principal European Coun- 
tries (absolute figures) 



Years 


France 


Prussia 


England 


Saxony 


Bavaria 


Denmark 


1841 


2,814 


1,630 




290 




337 


1842 


2,866 


1,598 




318 




317 


1843 


3,020 


1,720 




420 




301 


1844 


2,973 


1,575 




335 


244 


285 


1845 


3,082 


1,700 




338 


250 


290 


1846 


3,102 


1,707 




373 


220 


376 


1847 


(3,647) 


(1,852) 




377 


217 


345 


1848 


(3,301) 


(1,649) 




398 


215 


(305) 


1849 


3,583 


(1,527) 




(328) 


(189) 


337 


1850 


3,596 


1,736 




390 


250 


340 


1851 


3,598 


1,809 




402 


260 


401 


1852 


3,676 


2,073 




530 


226 


426 


1853 


3,415 


1,942 




431 


263 


419 


1854 


3,700 


2,198 




547 


318 


363 


1855 


3,810 


2,351 




568 


307 


399 


1856 


4,189 


2,377 




550 


318 


426 


1857 


3,967 


2,038 


1,349 


485 


286 


427 


1858 


3,903 


2,126 


1,275 


491 


329 


457 


1859 


3,399 


2,146 


1,248 


507 


387 


451 


1860 


4,050 


2,105 


1,365 


548 


339 


468 


1861 


4,454 


2,185 


1,347 


(643) 






1862 


4,770 


2,112 


1,317 


557 






1863 


4,613 


2,374 


1,315 


643 






1864 


4,521 


2,203 


1,340 


(545) 




411 


1865 


4,946 


2,361 


1,392 


619 




451 


1866 


5,119 


2,485 


1,329 


704 


410 


443 


1867 


5.011 


3,625 


1,316 


752 


471 


469 


1868 


(5,547) 


3,658 


1,508 


800 


453 


498 


1869 


5,114 


3,544 


1,588 


710 


425 


462 


1870 




3,270 


1,554 






486 


1871 




3,135 


1,495 








1872 




3,467 


1,514 









time to produce all its consequences. Thus, the evolution of suicide 
is composed of undulating movements, distinct and successive, which 
occur spasmodically, develop for a time, and then stop only to begin 
again. On the above table one of these waves is seen to have occurred 
almost throughout Europe in the wake of the events of 1848, or 
about the years 1 850-1 853 depending on the country; another began 
in Germany after the war of 1866, in France somewhat earlier, about 
i860 at the height of the imperial government, in England about 
1868, or after the commercial revolution caused by contemporary 
commercial treaties. Perhaps the same cause occasioned the new 
recrudescence observable in France about 1865. Finally, a new for- 



48 suicroE 

ward movement began after the war of 1870 which is still evident 
and fairly general throughout Europe.^ 

At each moment of its history, therefore, each society has a definite 
aptitude for suicide. The relative intensity of this aptitude is measured 
by taking the proportion between the total number of voluntary 
deaths and the population of every age and sex. We will call this 
numerical datum the rate of mortality through suicide, characteristic 
of the society under consideration. It is generally calculated in pro- 
portion to a million or a hundred thousand inhabitants. 

Not only is this rate constant for long periods, but its invariability 
is even greater than that of leading demographic data. General mor- 
tality, especially, varies much more often from year to year and the 
variations it undergoes are far greater. This is shown assuredly by 
comparing the way in which both phenomena vary in several periods. 
This we have done in Table II. To manifest the relationship, the 
rate for each year of both deaths and suicides, has been expressed 
as a proportion of the average rate of the period, in percentage form. 
Thus the differences of one year from another or with reference to 
the average rate are made comparable in the two columns. From this 
comparison it appears that at each period the degree of variation is 
much greater with respect to general mortality than to suicide; on 
the average, it is twice as great. Only the minimum difference be- 
tween two successive years is perceptibly the same in each case during 
the last two periods. However, this minimum is exceptional in the 
column of mortality, whereas the annual variations of suicides differ 
from it rarely. This may be seen by a comparison of the average 
differences.* 

To be sure, if we compare not the successive years of a single 
period but the averages of different periods, the variations observed 
in the rate of mortality become almost negligible. The changes in 
one or the other direction occurring from year to year and due to 
temporary and accidental causes neutralize one another if a more 
extended unit of time is made the basis of calculation; and thus 
disappear from the average figures which, because of this elimination, 

3 In the table, ordinary figures and heavy type figures represent respectively the 
series of numbers indicating these different waves of movement, to make each group 
stand out in its distinctiveness. 

* Wagner had already compared mortality and marriage in this way. {Die 
Gesetzmàssigkett, etc., p. 87.) 



INTRODUCTION 



49 



TABLE II — Comparative Variations of the Rate of Mortality by 
Suicide and the Rate of General Mortality 



A. ABSOLUTE FIGURES 





Suicides 


Deaths 




Suicides 


Deaths 




Suicides 


Deaths 




per 


per 




per 


per 




per 


per 




100,000 


1,000 




100,000 


1,000 




100,000 


1,000 


Period 


Inhabi- 


Inhabi- 


Period 


Inhabi- 


Inhabi- 


Period 


Inhabi- 


Inhabi- 


1841-46 


tants 


tants 


1849-55 


tants 


tants 


1856-60 


tants 


tants 


1841 


8.2 


23.2 


1849 


10.0 


27.3 


1856 


11.6 


23.1 


1842 


8.3 


24.0 


1850 


10.1 


21.4 


1857 


10.9 


23.7 


1843 


8.7 


23.1 


1851 


10.0 


22.3 


1858 


10.7 


24.1 


1844 


8.5 


22.1 


1852 


10.5 


22.5 


1859 


11.1 


26.8 


1845 


8.8 


21.2 


1853 


9.4 


22.0 


1860 


11.9 


21.4 


1846 


8.7 


23.2 


1854 
1855 


10.2 
10.5 


27.4 
25.9 









Averages 8.5 



22.8 



Averages 10.1 



24.1 



Averoges 11.2 



23.8 



ANNUAL RATE RELATED TO THE AVERAGE IN 
PERCENTAGE FORM 



1841 


96 


101.7 


1849 


98.9 


113.2 


1856 


103.5 


97 


1842 


97 


105.2 


1850 


100 


88.7 


1857 


97.3 


99.3 


1843 


102 


101.3 


1851 


98.9 


92.5 


1858 


95.5 


101.2 


1844 


100 


96.9 


1852 


103.8 


93.3 


1859 


99.1 


112.6 


1845 


103.5 


92.9 


1853 


93 


91.2 


1860 


106.0 


89.9 


1846 


102.3 


101.7 


1854 
1855 


100.9 
103 


113.6 
107.4 








Averages 


100 


100 


Averages 


100 


100 


Averages 


100 


100 



C DEGREE OF DIFFERENCE 





Between 


Two Con- 




Above and Below 




secutive Years 




the Average 




Greatest 


least 


Average 


Greatest Greatest 




Difference 


Difference 


Difference 


Below Above 








Per. 1841-46 




General mortality 


8.8 


2.5 


4.9 


7.1 4.0 


Suicide-rate 


5.0 


1 


2.5 
Per. 1849-55 


4 2.8 


General mortality 


24.5 


0.8 


10.6 


13.6 11.3 


Suicide-rate 


10.8 


1.1 


4.48 
Per. 1856-60 


3.8 7.0 


General mortality 


22.7 


1.9 


9.57 


12.6 10.1 


Suicide-rote 


6.9 


1.8 


4.82 


6.0 4.5 



show much more invariability. For example, in France from 1841 to 
1870, it was in each successive ten-year period 23.18; 23.72; 22.87. 
But, first, it is already remarkable that from one year to its successor 
suicide is at least as stable, if not more so, than general mortality 
taken only from period to period. The average rate of mortality, 



50 suicroE 

furthermore, achieves this regularity only by being general and im- 
personal, and can afford only a very imperfect description of a given 
society. It is in fact substantially the same for all peoples of approxi- 
mately the same degree of civilization; at least, the differences are 
very slight. In France, for example, as we have just seen, it oscillates, 
from 1841 to 1870, around 23 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants; during 
the same period in Belgium it was successively 23.93, 22.5, 24.04; 
in England, 22.32, 22.21, 22.68; in Denmark, 22.65 {^^45~49)> 
20.44 (^855-59)5 20.4 (1861-68). With the exception of Russia, 
which is still only geographically European, the only large European 
countries where the incidence of mortality differs somewhat more 
widely from the above figures are Italy, where even between 1861 
and 1867 it rose to 30.6, and Austria, where it was yet greater 
(32. 52). 5 On the contrary, the suicide-rate, while showing only 
slight annual changes, varies according to society by doubling, trip- 
ling, quadrupling, and even more (Table III below). Accordingly, 
to a much higher degree than the death-rate, it is peculiar to each 
social group where it can be considered as a characteristic index. It is 
even so closely related to what is most deeply constitutional in each 
national temperament that the order in which the different societies 

TABLE III — Rate of Suicides per Million Inhabitants in the 
Different European Countries 

Period Numerical Posifion in ihe 

1866-70 1871-75 1874-78 1 period 2 period 3 period 



Italy 


30 


35 


38 


1 


1 


1 


Belgium 


66 


69 


78 


2 


3 


4 


England 


67 


66 


69 


3 


2 


2 


Norwoy 


76 


73 


71 


4 


4 


3 


Austria 


78 


94 


130 


5 


7 


7 


Sweden 


85 


81 


91 


6 


5 


5 


Bavaria 


90 


91 


100 


7 


6 


6 


France 


135 


150 


160 


8 


9 


9 


Prussia 


142 


134 


152 


9 


8 


8 


Denmark 


277 


258 


255 


10 


10 


10 


Saxony 


293 


267 


334 


11 


11 


11 



appear in this respect remains almost exactly the same at very dif- 
ferent periods. This is proved by examining this same table. During 
the three periods there compared, suicide has everywhere increased, 
but in this advance the various peoples have retained their respective 

' According to Bertillon, article Mortalité in the Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des 
sciences medicals, V. LXI, p. 738. 



INTRODUCTION 5 1 

distances from one another. Each has its own peculiar coefficient of 
acceleration. ^^-"^ - 

The suicide-rate is therefore a factual order, unified and definite, 
as is shown by both its permanence and its variability. For this per- 
manence would be inexplicable if it were not the result of a group 
of distinct characteristics, solidary one with another, and simultane- 
ously effective in spite of different attendant circumstances; and this 
variability proves the concrete and individual quality of these same 
characteristics, since they vary with the individual character of society 
itself. In short, the se statistical data express the suicidal tend ency 
wi th which each society is collectively affli cted. We need not state 
the actual nature of this tendency, whether it is a state sui generis 
of the collective mind,^ with its own reality, or represents merely a 
sum of individual states. Although the preceding considerations are 
hard to reconcile with the second hypothesis, we reserve this problem 
for treatment in the course of this work.'^ Whatever one's opinion 
on this subject, such a tendency certainly exists under one heading or 
another. Each society is predisposed to contribute a definite quota of 
voluntary deaths. This predisposition may therefore be the subject 
of a special study belonging to sociology. This is the study we are 
going to undertake. 

We do not accordingly intend to make as nearly complete an 
inventory as possible of all the conditions affecting the origin of 
individual suicides, but merely to examine those on which the definite 
fact that we have called the social suicide-rate depends. The two 
questions are obviously quite distinct, whatever relation may never- 
theless exist between them. Certainly many of the individual condi- 
tions are not general enough to affect the relation between the total 
number of voluntary deaths and the population. They may perhaps 
cause this or that separate individual to kill himself, but not give 
society as a whole a greater or lesser tendency to suicide. As they 
do not depend on a certain state of social organization, they have no 
social repercussions. Thus they concern the psychologist, not the 
sociologist. The latter studies the causes capable of affecting not 

8 By the use of this expression we of course do not at all intend to hypostasize 
the collective conscience. We do not recognize any more substantial a soul in society 
than in the individual. But we shall revert to this point. 

7 Bk. Ill, Chap. I. 



52 suicroE 

separate individuals but the group. Therefore among the factors of 
suicide the only ones which concern him are those whose action is 
f-'^ felt by society as a whole. The suicide-rate is the product of these 
factors. This is why we must limit our attention to them. 

Such is the subject of the present work, to contain three parts. 

The phenomenon to be explained can depend only on extra-social 
causes of broad generality or on causes expressly social. We shall 
search first for the influence of the former and shall find it non- 
existent or very inconsiderable. ^ --— - 

Next we shall determine the nature of the social causes, how they 
produce their effects, and their relations to the individual states asso- 
ciated with the different sorts of suicide. 

After that, we shall be better able to state precisely what the social 
element of suicide consists of; that is, the collective tendency jnst 
referred to, its relations to other social facts, and the means that can 
be used to counteract it.® 

^ Whenever necessary, the special bibliography of the particular questions treated 
will be found at the beginning of each chapter. Below are references on the general 
bibliography of suicide: 

I. Official statistical publications forming our principal sources: Oesterreichische 
Statistik (Statistik des Sanitâtswesens). — Annuaire statistique de la Belgique. — 
Zeitschrift des Koeniglisch Bayerischen statistischen Bureau. — Preussische Statistik 
(Sterblichkeit nach Todesursachen und Altersklassen der Gestorbenen). — Wiirtem- 
bûrgische Jahrbûcher fur Statistik und Landeskunde. — Badische Statistik. — Tenth 
Census of the United States. Report on the mortality and vital statistics of the United 
States, 1880, nth part. — Annuario statistico Italian©. — Statistica delle cause delle 
Morti in tutti i communi del Regno. — ^Relazione medico-statistica sulle conditions 
sanitarie dell' Exercito Italiano. — Statistische Nachrichten des Grossherzogthums 
Oldenburg. — Compte-rendu general de l'administration de la justice criminelle en 
France. 

Statistisches Jahrbuch der Stadt Berlin. — Statistik der Stadt Wien. — Statistisches 
Handbuch fiir den Hamburgischen Staat. — Jahrbuch fiir die amtliche Statistik der 
Bremischen Staaten. — Annuaire statistique de la ville de Paris. 

Other useful information will be found in the following articles: Platter, Ueber 
die Selbstmorde in Oesterreich in den Jahren 1819-1872. In Statist. Monatsh , i8-j6. 
— Brattassevic, Die Selbstmorde in Oesterreich in den Jahren i8j^-jj, in Stat. 
Monatsh., 1878, p. 429. — Ogle, Suicides in England and Wales in relation to Age, 
Sex, Season and Occupation. In Journal of the Statistical Society, 1886. — Rossi, // 
Suicidio nella Spagna nel 1884. Arch, di psychiatria, Turin, 1886. 

II. Studies on suicide in general: De Guerry, Statistique morale de la France, Paris, 
1835, and Statistique morale comparée de la France et de l'Angleterre, Paris, 1864. — 
Tissot, De la manie du suicide et de l'esprit de révolte, de leurs causes et de leurs 
remèdes, Paris, 1841. — Etoc-Demazy, Recherches statistiques sur le suicide, Paris, 
1844. — Lisle, Du suicide, Paris, 1856. — Wappaus, Allgemeine Bevôlkerungsstatistik, 



INTRODUCTION 53 

Leipzig, i86i. — Wagner, Die Gesetzmassigkeit in den scheinbar willkUrlichen 
menschlichen Handlungen, Hamburg, 1864, Part 2. — Brierre de Boismont, Du sui- 
cide et de la folie-suicide, Paris, Germer Bailliere, 1865. — Douay, Le suicide ou la 
mort volontaire, Paris, 1870. — Leroy, Etude sur le suicide et les maladies mentales 
dans le department de Seine-et-Marne, Paris, 1870. — Oettingen, Die Moralstatistik, 
3rd Ed., Erlangen, 1882, p. 786-832 and accompanying tables 103-120. — By the same, 
Ueber acuten und chronischen Selbstmord, Dorpat, 1881. — Morselli, // suicidio, 
Milan, 1879. — Legoyt, Le suicide ancien et moderne, Paris, 1881. — Masaryk, Der 
Selbstmord als sociale Massenerscheinung, Vienna, 1881. — Westcott, Suicide, its his- 
tory, literature, etc., London, 1885. — Motta, Bibliografia del Suicidio, Bellinzona, 
1890. — Corre, Crime et suicide, Paris, 1891. — Bonomelli, // suicidio, Milan, 1892. 
— Mayr, Selbstmordstatistik, In Handworterbuch der Staatswissenschaften, heraus- 
gegeben von Conrad, Erster Supplementband, Jena, 1895. — Hauviller, D., Suicide, 
thesis, 1898-99. 



BOOK ONE EXTRA-SOCIAL FACTORS 



CHAPTER I SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 



^. 



'here are two sorts of extra-social causes to which one may, 
a priori, attribute an influence on the suicide-rate; they are organic- 
psychic dispositions and the nature of the physical environment. 
In the individual constitution, or at least in that of a significant 
class of individuals, it is possible that there might exist an inclina- 
tion, varying in intensity from country to country, which directly 
leads man to suicide; on the other hand, the action of climate, tem- 
perature, etc., on the organism, might indirectly have the same effects. 
Under no circumstances can the hypothesis be dismissed unconsidered. 
We shall examine these two sets of factors successively, to see whether 
they play any part in the phenomenon under study and if so, what. 



The annual rate of certain diseases is relatively stable for a given 
society though varying perceptibly from one people to another. 
Among these is insanity. Accordingly, if a manifestation of insanity 

1 Bibliography. — Falret, De I'hypochondrie et du suicide, Paris, 1822. — Esquirol, 
Des maladies mentales, Paris, 1838 (V. I, p. 526-676) and the article Suicide, in 
Dictionnaire de médecine, in 60 vols. — Cazauvieilh, Du suicide et de l'aliénation 
mentale, Paris, 1840 — Etoc-Demazy, De la jolie dans la production du suicide, in 
Annales medico-psych., 1844. — Bourdin, Du suicide considéré cofnme maladie, Paris, 
1845. — Dechambre, De la monomanie homicide-suicide, in Gazette Medic, 1852. — 
Jousset, Du suicide et de la monomanie suicide, 1858. — Brierre de Boismont, op. 
cit. — Leroy, op. cit. — Art. Suicide, in Dictionnaire de medicine et de chirurgie pra- 
tique, V. XXXIV, p. 117. — Strahan, Suicide and Insanity, London, 1894. 

Lunier, De la production et de la consommation des boissons alcooliques en France, 
Paris, 1877. — By the same, art. in Annales medico-psych., 1872; journal de la Soc. 
de Stat., 1878. — Prinzing, Trunksucht und Selbstmord, Leipzig, 1895. 

57 



58 SUICIDE 

were reasonably to be supposed in every voluntary death, our problem 
would be solved; suicide would be a purely individual affliction.^ 

This thesis is supported by a considerable number of alienists. 
According to Esquirol: "Suicide shows all the characteristics of men- 
tal alienation." ^ — "A man attempts self-destruction only in delirium 
and suicides are mentally alienated." * From this principle he con- 
cluded that suicide, being involuntary, should not be punished by 
law. Falret ^ and Moreau de Tours use almost the same terms. The 
latter, to be sure, in the same passage where he states his doctrine, 
makes a remark which should subject it to suspicion: "Should suicide 
be regarded in all cases as the result of mental alienation? Without 
wishing to dispose here of this difficult question, let us say generally 
that one is instinctively the more inclined to the affirmative the 
deeper the study of insanity which he has made, the greater his 
experience and the greater the number of insane persons whom he 
has examined." ^ In 1845 Dr. Bourdin, in a brochure which at once 
created a stir in the medical world, had enunciated the same opinion 
even more unreservedly. 

This theory may be and has been defended in two different ways. 
Suicide itself is either called a disease in itself, sui generis, a special 
form of insanity; or it is regarded, not as a distinct species, but 
simply an event involved in one or several varieties of insanity, and 
not to be found in sane persons. The former is Bourdin's thesis; 
Esquirol is the chief authority holding the other view. "From what 
has preceded," he writes, "suicide may be seen to be for us only a 
phenomenon resulting from many different causes and appearing 
under many different forms; and it is clear that this phenomenon is 
not characteristic of a disease. From considering suicide as a disease 
sui generis, general propositions have been set up which are belied 
by experience." "^ 

The second of these two methods of proving suicide to be a mani- 
festation of insanity is the less rigorous and conclusive, since because 

2 In so far as insanity itself is purely individual. Actually it is partly a social 
phenomenon. We shall return to this point. 
^Maladies mentales, v. i, p. 639. 
'^Ibid., V. I, p. 665. 
^ Du suicide, etc., p. 137. 
^ In Annales medico-psych., v. VII, p. 287. 
^ Maladies mentales, v. I, p. 528. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 59 

of it negative experiences are impossible. A complete inventory of 
all cases of suicide cannot indeed be made, nor the influence of 
mental alienation shown in each. Only single examples can be cited 
which, however numerous, cannot support a scientific generalization; 
even though contrary examples were not affirmed, there would always 
be possibility of their existence. The other proof, however, if obtain- 
able, would be conclusive. If suicide can be shown to be a mental 
disease with its own characteristics and distinct evolution, the ques- 
tion is settled; every suicide is a madman. 
But does suicidal insanity exist? 

II 

Since the suicidal tendency is naturally special and definite if it 
constitutes a sort of insanity, this can be only a form of partial 
insanity, limited to a single act. To be considered a delirium it must 
bear solely on this one object; for, if there were several, the delirium 
could no more be defined by one of them than by the others. In 
traditional terminology of mental pathology these restricted deliria 
are called monomanias. A monomaniac is a sick person whose men- 
tality is perfectly healthy in all respects but one; he has a single flaw, 
clearly localized. At times, for example, he has an unreasonable and 
absurd desire to drink or steal or use abusive language; but all his 
other acts and all his other thoughts are strictly correct. Therefore, if 
there is a suicidal mania it can only be a monomania, and has indeed 
been usually so-called.^ 

On the other hand, if this special variety of disease called mono- 
manias is admitted, it is clear why one readily includes suicide among 
them. The character of these kinds of afflictions, according to the 
definition just given, is that they imply no essential disturbance of 
intellectual functions. The basis of mental life is the same in the 
monomaniac and the sane person; only, in the former, a specific 
psychic state is prominently detached from this common basis. In 
short, monomania is merely one extreme emotion in the order of 
impulses, one false idea in the order of representations, but of such 
intensity as to obsess the mind and completely enslave it. Thus, 
ambition, from being normal, becomes morbid and a monomania of 
grandeur when it assumes such proportions that all other cerebral 
8 See Brierre de Boismont, p. 140. 



6o SUICIDE 

functions seem paralyzed by it. A somewhat violent emotional access 
disturbing mental equilibrium is therefore enough to cause the mono- 
mania to appear. Now suicides generally seem influenced by some 
abnormal passion, whether its energy is abruptly expended or grad- 
ually developed; it may thus even appear reasonable that some such 
force is always necessary to offset the fundamental instinct of self- 
preservation. Moreover, many suicides are completely indistinguish- 
able from other men except by the particular act of self-destruction; 
and there is therefore no reason to impute a general delirium to them. 
This is the reasoning by which suicide, under the appellation of 
monomania, has been considered a manifestation of insanity. 

But, do monomanias exist? For a long time this was not ques- 
tioned; alienists one and all concurred without discussion in the 
theory of partial deliria. It was not only thought confirmed by clinical 
observation but regarded as corollary to the findings of psychology. 
The human intelligence was supposed to consist of distinct faculties 
and separate powers which usually function cooperatively but may 
act separately; thus it seemed natural that they might be separately 
affected by disease. Since human intelligence may be manifested 
without volition and emotion without intelligence, why might there 
not be affections of the intelligence or will without disturbances of 
the emotions and vice versa? Applied to the specialized forms of 
these faculties, the same principle led to the theory that a lesion may 
exclusively affect an impulse, an action or an isolated idea. 

Today however this opinion has been universally discarded. The 
non-existence of monomanias cannot indeed be proved from direct 
observation, but not a single incontestable example of their existence 
can be cited. Clinical experience has never been able to observe a 
diseased mental impulse in a state of pure isolation; whenever there 
is lesion of one faculty the others are also attacked, and if these 
concomitant lesions have not been observed by the believers in mono- 
mania, it is because of poorly conducted observations. "For example," 
writes Falret, "take an insane person obsessed by religious ideas who 
would be classified among religious monomaniacs. He declares him- 
self divinely inspired; entrusted with a heavenly mission he brings 
a new religion to the world. . . . This idea will be said to be wholly 
insane; yet he reasons like other men except for this series of religious 
thoughts. Question him more carefully, however, and other morbid 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 6l 

ideas will soon be discovered; for instance, you will find a tendency 
to pride parallel to the religious ideas. He believes himself called 
upon to reform not only religion but also to reform society; perhaps 
he will also imagine the highest sort of destiny reserved for himself. 
... If you have not discovered tendencies to pride in this patient, 
you will encounter ideas of humility or tendencies to fear. Pre- 
occupied with religious ideas he will believe himself lost, destined 
to perish, etc." ^ All of these forms of delirium will, of course, not 
usually be met with combined in a single person, but such are those 
most commonly found in association; if not existing at the same 
moment in the illness they will be found in more or less quick 
succession. 

Finally, apart from these special manifestations, there always exists 
in these supposed monomaniacs a general state of the whole mental 
life which is fundamental to the disease and of which these delirious 
ideas are merely the outer and momentary expression. Its essential 
character is an excessive exaltation or deep depression or general 
perversion. There is, especially, a lack of equilibrium and coordina- 
tion in both thought and action. The patient reasons, but with lacunas 
in his ideas; he acts, not absurdly, but without sequence. It is in- 
correct then to say that insanity constitutes a part, and a restricted 
part of his mental life; as soon as it penetrates the understanding it 
totally invades it. 

Moreover, the principle underlying the hypothesis of monomania 
contradicts the actual data of science. The old theory of the faculties 
has few defenders left. The different sorts of conscious activity are 
no longer regarded as separate forces, disunited, and combined only 
in the depths of a metaphysical substance, but as interdependent 
functions; thus one cannot suffer lesion without the others being 
affected. This interpénétration is even closer in mental life than in 
the rest of the organism; for psychic functions have no organs suf- 
ficiently distinct from one another for one to be affected without the 
others. Their distribution among the different regions of the brain 
is not well defined, as appears from the readiness with which its 
different parts mutually replace each other, if one of them is pre- 
vented from fulfilling its task. They are too completely intercon- 
nected for insanity to attack certain of them without injury to the 

^ Maladies mentales, 437. 



62 suicroE 

others. With yet greater reason it is totally impossible for insanity 
to alter a single idea or emotion without psychic life being radically 
changed. For representations and impulses have no separate exist- 
ence; they are not so many little substances, spiritual atoms, con- 
stituting the mind by their combination. They are merely external 
manifestations of the general state of the centers of consciousness, 
from which they derive and which they express. Thus they cannot 
be morbid without this state itself being vitiated. 

But if mental flaws cannot be localized, there are not, there cannot 
be monomanias properly so-called. The apparently local disturbances 
given this name always derive from a more extensive perturbation; 
they are not diseases themselves, but particular and secondary mani- 
festations of more general diseases. If then there are no monomanias, 
there cannot be a suicidal monomania and, consequently, suicide is 
not a distinct form of insanity. 

Ill 

It remains possible, however, that suicide may occur only in a 
state of insanity. If it is not by itself a special form of insanity, there 
are no forms of insanity in connection with which it may not appear. 
It is only an episodic syndrome of them, but one of frequent occur- 
rence. Perhaps this frequency indicates that suicide never occurs in 
a state of sanity, and that it indicates mental alienation with certainty? 

The conclusion would be hasty. For though certain acts of the 
insane are peculiar to them and characteristic of insanity, others are 
common to them and to normal persons, though assuming a special 
form in the case of the insane. There is no reason, a priori, to place 
suicide in the first of the two categories. To be sure, alienists state 
that most of the suicides known to them show all the indications of 
mental alienation, but this evidence could not settle the question, 
for the reviews of such cases are much too summary. Besides, no 
general law could be drawn from so narrowly specialized an expe- 
rience. From the suicides they have known, who were, of course, 
insane, no conclusion can be drawn as to those not observed, who, 
moreover, are much more numerous. 

The only methodical procedure consists of classifying according 
to their essential characteristics the suicides committed by insane 
persons, thus forming the principal types of insane suicide, and then 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 63 

trying to learn whether all cases of voluntary death can be included 
under these systematically arranged groups. In other words, to learn 
whether suicide is an act peculiar to the insane one must fix the forms 
it assumes in mental alienation and discover whether these are the 
only ones assumed by it. 

In general, specialists have paid little heed to classifying the 
suicides of the insane. The four following types, however, probably 
include the most important varieties. The essential elements of the 
classification are borrowed from Jousset and Moreau de Tours. ^° 

1. Maniacal suicide. — This is due to hallucinations or delirious 
conceptions. The patient kills himself to escape from an imaginary 
danger or disgrace, or to obey a mysterious order from on high, etc.^^ 
But the motives of such suicide and its manner of evolution reflect 
the general characteristics of the disease from which it derives — 
namely, mania. The quality characteristic of this condition is its 
extreme mobility. The most varied and even conflicting ideas and 
feelings succeed each other with intense rapidity in the maniac's 
consciousness. It is a constant whirlwind. One state of mind is in- 
stantly replaced by another. Such, too, are the motives of maniacal 
suicide; they appear, disappear, or change with amazing speed. The 
hallucination or delirium which suggests suicide suddenly occurs; the 
attempt follows; then instantly the scene changes, and if the attempt 
fails it is not resumed, at least, for the moment. If it is later repeated 
it will be for another motive. The most trivial incident may cause 
these sudden transformations. One such patient, wishing to kill him- 
self, had leaped into a river — one that was generally shallow. He was 
seeking a place where submersion was possible when a customs 
officer, suspecting his intention, took aim and threatened to fire if 
he did not leave the water. The man went peaceably home at once, 
no longer thinking of self-destruction. ^^ 

2. Melancholy suicide. — This is connected with a general state of 
extreme depression and exaggerated sadness, causing the patient no 
longer to realize sanely the bonds which connect him with people 
and things about him. Pleasures no longer attract; he sees everything 

^^ See article, Suicide, in Dictionnaire de medicine et de chirurgie pratique, 
^1 These hallucinations must not be confused with those tending to deceive the 
patient as to the risks he runs; for example, to make him mistake a window for a 
door. In the latter case, there is no suicide as defined above, but accidental death. 
12 Bourdin, op. cit., p. 43. 



64 SUICIDE 

as through a dark cloud. Life seems to him boring or painful. As 
these feelings are chronic, so are the ideas of suicide; they are very 
fixed and their broad determining motives are always essentially the 
same. A young girl, daughter of healthy parents, having spent her 
childhood in the country, has to leave at about the age of fourteen, 
to finish her education. From that moment she contracts an extreme 
disgust, a definite desire for solitude and soon an invincible desire 
to die. "She is motionless for hours, her eyes on the ground, her 
breast laboring, like someone fearing a threatening occurrence. Firmly 
resolved to throw herself into the river, she seeks the remotest places 
to prevent any rescue." ^^ However, as she finally realizes that the 
act she contemplates is a crime she temporarily renounces it. But after 
a year the inclination to suicide returns more forcefully and attempts 
recur in quick succession. 

Hallucinations and delirious thoughts often associate themselves 
with this general despair and lead directly to suicide. However, they 
are not mobile like those just observed among maniacs. On the con- 
trary they are fixed, like the general state they come from. The fears 
by which the patient is haunted, his self-reproaches, the grief he 
feels are always the same. If then this sort of suicide is determined 
like its predecessor by imaginary reasons, it is distinct by its chronic 
character. And it is very tenacious. Patients of this category prepare 
their means of self-destruction calmly; in the pursuit of their purpose 
they even display incredible persistence and, at times, cleverness. 
Nothing less resembles this consistent state of mind than the maniac's 
constant instability. In the latter, passing impulses without durable 
cause; in the former, a persistent condition linked with the patient's 
general character. 

3. Obsessive suicide. — In this case, suicide is caused by no motive, 
real or imaginary, but solely by the fixed idea of death which, with- 
out clear reason, has taken complete possession of the patient's mind. 
He is obsessed by the desire to kill himself, though he perfectly 
knows he has no reasonable motive for doing so. It is an instinctive 
need beyond the control of reflection and reasoning, like the needs 
to steal, to kill, to commit arson, supposed to constitute other varieties 
of monomania. As the patient realizes the absurdity of his wish he 
tries at first to resist it. But throughout this resistence he is sad, 

13 Falret, Hypochondrie et suicide, p. 299-307. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 65 

depressed, with a constantly increasing anxiety oppressing the pit of 
his stomach. Hence, this sort of suicide has sometimes been called 
anxiety-suicide. Here is the confession once made by a patient to 
Brierre de Boismont, which perfectly describes the condition: "I am 
employed in a business house. I perform my regular duties satisfac- 
torily but like an automaton, and when spoken to, the words sound 
to me as though echoing in a void. My greatest torment is the 
thought of suicide, from which I am never free. I have been the 
victim of this impulse for a year; at first it was insignificant; then 
for about the last two months it has pursued me everywhere, yet I 
have no reason to kill myself. . . . My health is good; no one in 
my family has been similarly afflicted; I have had no financial 
losses, my income is adequate and permits me the pleasures of people 
of my age." ^'^ But as soon as the patient has decided to give up the 
struggle and to kill himself, anxiety ceases and calm returns. If the 
attempt fails it is sometimes sufficient, though unsuccessful, to quench 
temporarily the morbid desire. It is as though the patient had voided 
this impulse. 

4. Impulsive or automatic suicide. — It is as unmotivated as the 
preceding; it has no cause either in reality or the patient's imagina- 
tion. Only, instead of being produced by a fixed idea obsessing the 
mind for a shorter or longer period and only gradually affecting the 
will, it results from an abrupt and immediately irresistible impulse. 
In the twinkling of an eye it appears in full force and excites the act, 
or at least its beginning. This abruptness recalls what has been men- 
tioned above in connection with mania; only the maniacal suicide 
has always some reason, however irrational. It is connected with the 
patient's delirious conceptions. Here on the contrary the suicidal 
tendency appears and is effective in truly automatic fashion, not 
preceded by any intellectual antecedent. The sight of a knife, a walk 
by the edge of a precipice, etc. engender the suicidal idea instanta- 
neously and its execution follows so swiftly that patients often have 
no idea of what has taken place. "A man is quietly talking with his 
friends; suddenly he leaps, clears a parapet and falls into the water. 
Rescued immediately and asked for the motives of his behaviour, he 
knows nothing of them, he has yielded to irresistible force." ^^ "The 

^^ Suicide et folie-suicide, p. 397. 
^^ Brierre, op. cit., p. 574. 



66 suicroE 

strange thing is," another says, "that I can't remember how I climbed 
the casement and my controlling idea at the time; for I had no 
thought of killing myself, or, at least I have no memory of such a 
thought today." ^^ To a lesser degree, patients feel the impulse 
growing and manage to escape the fascination of the mortal instru- 
ment by fleeing from it immediately. 

In short, all suicides of the insane are either devoid of any motive 
or determined by purely imaginary motives. Now, many voluntary 
deaths fall into neither category; the majority have motives, and 
motives not unfounded in reality. Not every suicide can therefore 
be considered insane, without doing violence to language. Of all the 
suicides just characterized, that which may appear hardest to detect 
of those observed among the sane is melancholy suicide; for very 
often the normal person who kills himself is also in a state of dejec- 
tion and depression like the mentally alienated. But an essential dif- 
ference between them always exists in that the state of the former 
and its resultant act are not without an objective cause, whereas in 
the latter they are wholly unrelated to external circumstances. In 
short, the suicides of the insane differ from others as illusions and 
hallucinations differ from normal perceptions and automatic impulses 
from deliberate acts. It is true that there is a gradual shading from 
the former to the latter; but if that sufficed to identify them one 
would also, generally speaking, have to confuse health with sickness, 
since the latter is but a variety of the former. Even if it were proved 
that the average man never kills himself and that only those do so 
who show certain anomalies, this would still not justify considering 
insanity a necessary condition of suicide; for an insane person is not 
simply a man who thinks or acts somewhat differently from the 
average. 

Thus, suicide has been so closely associated with insanity only by 
arbitrarily restricting the meaning of the words. "That man does not 
kill himself," Esquirol exclaims, "who, obeying only noble and 
generous sentiments, throws himself into certain peril, exposes him- 
self to inevitable death, and willingly sacrifices his life in obedience 
to the laws, to keep pledged faith, for his country's safety." ^"^ He 
cites the examples of Decius, of Assas, etc. Falret likewise refuses tc 

^^ Ibid., p. 314. 

^^ Maladies mentales, v. I, p. 529. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 67 

consider Curtius, Codnis or Aristodemus as suicides. ^^ Bourdin ex- 
cepts in this manner all voluntary deaths inspired not only by religious 
faith or political conviction but even by lofty affection. But we know 
that the nature of the motives immediately causing suicide cannot 
be used to define it, nor consequently to distinguish it from what it 
is not. All cases of death resulting from an act of the patient himself 
with full knowledge of the inevitable results, whatever their purpose, 
are too essentially similar to be assigned to separate classes. Whatever 
their cause, they can only be species of a single genus; and to dis- 
tinguish among them, one must have other criteria than the victim's 
more or less doubtful purpose. This leaves at least a group of suicides 
unconnected with insanity. Once exceptions are admitted, it is hard 
to stop. For there is only a gradual shading between deaths inspired 
by usually generous feelings and those from less lofty motives. An 
imperceptible gradation leads from one class to the other. If then 
the former are suicides, there is no reason for not giving the same 
name to the latter. 

There are therefore suicides, and numerous ones at that, not con- 
nected with insanity. They are doubly identifiable as being deliberate 
and as springing from representations involved in this deliberation 
which are not purely hallucinatory. This often debated question may 
therefore be solved without requiring reference to the problem of 
freedom.. To learn whether all suicides are insane, we have not asked 
whether or not they act freely; we have based ourselves solely on 
the empirical cliaracteristics observable in the various sorts of volun- 
tary death. 

IV 

Since the suicides of insane persons do not constitute the entire 
genus but only a variety of it, the psychopathic states constituting 
mental alienation can give no clue to the collective tendency to 
suicide in its generality. But between mental alienation properly so- 
called and perfect equilibrium of intelligence, an entire series of 
intermediate stages exist; they are the various anomalies usually com- 
bined under the common name of neurasthenia. Let us therefore see 
whether they, in cases devoid of insanity, do not have an important 
role in the origin of the phenomenon we are studying. 

^8 Hypochondrie et suicide, p. 3. 



68 SUICIDE 

The very existence of insane suicide suggests the question. In fact, 
if a deep affection of the nervous system is enough to create suicide, 
a lesser affection ought to exercise the same influence to a lesser 
degree. Neurasthenia is a sort of elementary insanity; it must there- 
fore have the same effects in part. It is also a much more widespread 
condition than insanity; it is even becoming progressively more 
general. The total of abnormalities thus termed may therefore be 
one of the factors with which the suicide-rate varies. 

Besides, neurasthenia may reasonably predispose to suicide; for by 
temperament neurasthenics seem destined to suffer. It is well known 
that pain, in general, results from too violent a shock to the nervous 
system; a too intense nervous wave is usually painful. But this maxi- 
mum intensity beyond which pain begins varies with individuals; it is 
highest among those whose nerves have more resistance, less in 
others. The painful zone begins earlier, therefore, among the latter. 
Every impression is a source of discomfort for the neuropath, every 
movement an exertion; his nerves are disturbed at the least contact, 
being as it were unprotected; the performance of physiological func- 
tions which are usually most automatic is a source of generally painful 
sensations for him. On the other hand, it is true that the zone or 
pleasure itself also begins at a lower level; for the excessive pene- 
trability of a weakened nervous system makes it a prey to stimuli 
which would not excite a normal organism. Thus insignificant occur- 
rences may cause such a person excessive pleasures. Seemingly he 
must gain on one side all that he losses on the other and, thanks 
to this compensatory action, he should not be less well armed than 
others to sustain the conflict. This is not the case however, and his 
inferiority is real; for current impressions, sensations most frequently 
reproduced by the conditions of average life, are always of a definite 
intensity. Life therefore is apt to be insufficiently tempered for this 
sufferer. To be sure, he may live with a minimum of suffering when 
he can live in retirement and create a special environment only par- 
tially accessible to the outer tumult; thus he sometimes is seen to flee 
the world which makes him ill and to seek solitude. But if forced 
to enter the melee and unable to shelter his tender sensitivity from 
outer shocks, he is likely to suffer more pain than pleasure. Such 
organisms are thus a favorite field for the idea of suicide. 

Nor does this situation alone make life difficult for the neuropath. 



SUICroE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 69 

Due to this extreme sensitivity of his nervous system, his ideas and 
feelings are always in unstable equilibrium. Because his slightest 
impressions have an abnormal force, his mental organization is utterly 
upset at every instant, and under the hammer of these uninterrupted 
shocks cannot become definitely established. It is always in process 
of becoming. For it to become stable past experiences would have to 
have lasting effects, whereas they are constantly being destroyed and 
swept away by abruptly intervening upheavals. Life in a fixed and 
constant medium is only possible if the functions of the person in 
question are of equal constancy and fixity. For living means respond- 
ing appropriately to outer stimuli and this harmonious correspondence 
can be established only by time and custom. It is a product of experi- 
ments, sometimes repeated for generations, the results of which have 
in part become hereditary and which cannot be gone through all over 
again everytime there is necessity for action. If, however, at the 
moment of action everything has to be reconstructed, so to speak, 
it is impossible for this action to be what it should be. We require 
this stability not only in our relations with the physical environment, 
but also with the social environment. The individual can maintain 
himself in a society definitely organized only through possessing an 
equally definite mental and moral constitution. This is what the 
neuropath lacks. His state of disturbance causes him to be constantly 
taken by surprise by circumstances. Unprepared to respond, he has 
to invent new forms of conduct; whence comes his well-known taste 
for novelty. When, however, he has to adapt himself to traditional 
situations, improvised contrivances are inadequate against those de- 
rived from experience; and they therefore usually fail. Thus the more 
fixed the social system, the more difiicult is life there for so mobile 
a person. 

This psychological type is therefore very probably the one most 
commonly to be found among suicides. What share has this highly 
individual condition in the production of voluntary deaths? Can it 
alone, if aided by circumstances, produce them, or does it merely 
make individuals more accessible to forces exterior to them and 
which alone are the determining causes of the phenomenon? 

To settle the question directly, the variations of suicide would 
have to be compared with those of neurasthenia. Unfortunately, the 
latter has not been statistically studied. But the difficulty may be 



JO suicroE 

indirectly solved. Since insanity is only the enlarged form of nervous 
degeneration, it may be granted without risk of serious error that the 
number of nervous degenerates varies in proportion to that of the 
insane, and consideration of the latter may be used as a substitute in 
the case of the former. This procedure would also make it possible 
to establish a general relation of the suicide-rate to the total of mental 
abnormalities of every kind. 

One fact might lead us to attribute to them an undue influence; 
the fact that suicide, like insanity, is commoner in cities than in the 
country. It seems to increase and decrease like insanity, a fact which 
might make it seem dependent on the latter. But this parallelism 
does not necessarily indicate a relation of cause to effect; it may very 
well be a mere coincidence. The latter hypothesis is the more 
plausible in that the social causes of suicide are, as we shall see, 
themselves closely related to urban civilization and are most intense 
in these great centers. To estimate the possible effect of psychopathic 
states on suicide, one must eliminate cases where they vary in propor- 
tion to the social conditions of the latter; for when these two factors 
tend in the same direction the share of each cannot be determined 
in the final result. They must be considered only where they are in 
inverse proportion to one another; only when a sort of conflict exists 
between them can one learn which is decisive. If mental disorders 
are of the decisive importance sometimes attributed to them, their 
presence should be shown by characteristic effects, even when social 
conditions tend to neutralize them; and, inversely, the latter should 
be unable to appear when individual conditions contradict them. The 
following facts show that the opposite is the rule: 

I. All statistics prove that in insane asylums the female inmates 
are slightly more numerous than the male. The proportion varies by 







No. of 


Men 


and 


Women 






io 


100 


/nsane 




Yeor 


Men 






Women 


Silesia 


1858 


49 






51 


Saxony 


1861 


48 






52 


Wurtemberg 


1853 


45 






55 


Denmark 


1847 


45 






55 


Norway 


1855 


45* 






56* 


New York 


1855 


44 






56 


Massachusetts 


1854 


46 






54 


Maryland 


1850 


46 






54 


France 


1890 


47 






53 


France 


1891 


48 






52 



* As in Durkheim's original, though equaling more than 100 together. — Ed. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 7 1 

countries, but as appears in tlie table on the preceding page, it is in 
general 54 or 55 for the women to 46 or 45 for the men. 

Koch has compared the results of the census taken of the total 
insane population in eleven different states. Among 166,675 insane 
of both sexes, he found 78,584 men and 88,091 women, or 1.18 
insane per 1,000 male and 1.30 per 1,000 female inhabitants.^^ 
Mayr has discovered similar figures. 

There is the question, to be sure, whether the excess of women 
is not simply due to the mortality of the male being higher than 
that of the female insane. In France, certainly, of every 100 insane 
who die in asylums, about 5 5 are men. The larger number of women 
recorded at a given time would therefore not prove that women 
have a greater tendency to insanity, but only that, in this condition 
as in all others, they outlive men. It is none the less true that the 
actual insane population includes more women than men; if, then, 
as seems reasonable, we apply the argument from the insane to the 
nervous, more neurasthenics must be admitted to exist at a given 
moment among females than among men. So, if there were a causal 
relation between the suicide-rate and neurasthenia, women should 
kill themselves more often than men. They should do so at least as 
often. For, even considering their lower mortality and correcting the 

TABLE IV " — Share of Each Sex in the Total Number of 
Suicides 





Ahsoi 


^ufe Numk 


lers of 


To 


100 Suicides 






Suicides 






Number 


of 




Men 




Women 


Men 




Women 


Austrio (1873-77) 


11,429 




2,478 


82.1 




17.9 


Prussia (1831-40) 


11,435 




2,534 


81.9 




18.1 


Prussia (1871-76) 


16,425 




3,724 


81.5 




18.5 


Italy (1872-77) 


4,770 




1,195 


80 




20 


Saxony (1851-60) 


4,004 




1,055 


79.1 




20.9 


Saxony (1871-76) 


3,625 




870 


80.7 




19.3 


France (1836-40) 


9,561 




3,307 


74.3 




25.7 


France (1851-55) 


13,596 




4,601 


74.8 




25.2 


France (1871-76) 


25,341 




6,839 


79.7 




21.3 


Denmark (1845-56) 


3,324 




1,106 


75.0 




25.0 


Denmark (1870-76) 


2,485 




748 


76.9 




23.1 


England (1863-67) 


4,905 




1,791 


73.3 




26.7 


* According to Morselli. 















census figures accordingly, our only conclusion would be that they 
have a predisposition to insanity at least as great as that of men; 
their lower figure of mortality and their numerical superiority in all 
13 Koch, Zur Statistik der Geisteskrankhehen, Stuttgart, 1878, p. 73. 



72 suicroE 

censuses of the insane almost exactly cancel each other. But far from 
their aptitude for voluntary death being either higher or equal to 
that of men, suicide happens to be an essentially male phenomenon. 
To every woman there are on the average four male suicides (Table 
IV, p. 71). Each sex has accordingly a definite tendency to suicide 
which is even constant for each social environment. But the intensity 
of this tendency does not vary at all in proportion to the psycho- 
pathic factor, whether the latter is estimated by the number of new 
cases registered annually or by that of census subjects at a given 
moment. 

2. Table V shows the comparative strength of the tendency to 
insanity among the different faiths. 

TABLE V "^ — Tendency to Insanity Among the Different Re- 
ligious Faiths 

Number of Insane per 1,000 Inhabitants of 

Each Faith 
Protestants Catholics Jevrs 



Silesia (1858) 


0.74 


0.79 


1.55 


Mecklenburg (1862) 


1.36 


2.00 


5.33 


Duchy of Baden (1863) 


1.34 


1.41 


2.24 


Duchy of Baden (1873) 


0.95 


1.19 


1.44 


Bavaria (1871) 


0.92 


0.96 


2.86 


Prussia (1871) 


0.80 


0.87 


1.42 


Wurtemberg (1832) 


0.65 


0.68 


1.77 


Wurtemberg (1853) 


1.06 


1.06 


1.49 


Wurtemberg (1875) 


2.18 


1.86 


3.96 


Grand Duchy of Hess (1864) 


0.63 


0.59 


1.42 


Oldenburg (1871) 


2.12 


1.76 


3.37 


Canton of Bern (1871) 


2.64 


1.82 





'According to Koch, op. cit., p. 108-119. 

Insanity is evidently much more frequent among the Jews than 
among the other religious faiths; we may therefore assume that the 
other affections of the nervous system are likewise in the same pro- 
portion among them. Nevertheless, the tendency to suicide among 
the Jews is very slight. We shall even show later that it is least 
prominent in this religion.^" In this case accordingly suicide varies 
in inverse proportion to psychopathic states, rather than being con- 
sistent with them. Doubtless this does not prove that nervous and 
cerebral weaknesses have ever been preservatives against suicide; but 
they must have very little share in determining it, since it can reach 
so low a figure at the very point where they reach their fullest 
development. 

2» See below, Bk. II, Chap. 2. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 73 

If Catholics alone are compared with Protestants, the inverse pro- 
portion is less general; yet it is very frequent. The tendency of 
Catholics to insanity is only one-third lower than that of Protestants 
and the difference between them is therefore very slight. On the 
other hand, in Table XVIII (see p. 154), we shall see that the 
former kill themselves much less often than the latter, without ex- 
ception anywhere. 

3. It will be shown later (see Table IX, p. roi), that in all 
countries the suicidal tendency increases regularly from childhood to 
the most advanced old age. If it occasionally retrogresses after the 
age of 70 or 80, the decrease is very slight; it still remains at this 
time of life from two to three times greater than at maturity. On the 
other hand, insanity appears most frequently at maturity. The danger 
is greatest at about 30; beyond that it decreases, and is weakest 
by far in old age.^^ Such a contrast would be inexplicable if the 
causes of the variation of suicide and those of mental disorders were 
not different. 

If the suicide-rate at each age is compared, not with the relative 
frequency of new cases of insanity appearing during this same period, 
but with the proportional number of the insane population, the lack 
of any parallelism is just as clear. The insane are most numerous in 
relation to the total population at about the age of 35. The propor- 
tion remains about the same to approximately 60; beyond that it 
rapidly decreases. It is minimal, therefore, when the suicide-rate is 
maximal, and prior to that no regular relation can be found between 
the variations of the two.^^ 

4. If different societies are compared from the double point of 
view of suicide and insanity, no greater relation is found between the 
variations of these two phenomena. True, statistics of mental aliena- 
tion are not compiled accurately enough for these international com- 
parisons to be very strictly exact. Yet it is notable that the two 
following tables, taken from two different authors, offer definitely 
concurring conclusions. 

Thus the countries with the fewest insane have the most suicides; 
the case of Saxony is especially striking. In his excellent study on 
suicide in Seine-et-Marne, Dr. Leroy had already observed the same 

21 Koch, op. cit., p. 139-146. 

22 Koch, op. cit., p. 81. 



74 



SUICIDE 



TABLE Vf — Relations of Suicide and Insanity in Different 
European Countries 



No. Insane 
per 100,000 
Inhabitants 



No. Suicides 

per 1,000,000 

Inhabitants 



Ranking Order of 

Covniries for 

insanity Suicide 



Norway 

Scotland 

Denmark 

Honnover 

France 

Belgium 

Wurtemburg 

Saxony 

Bavaria 



180 (1855) 

164 (1855) 

125 (1847) 

103 (1856) 

99 (1856) 

92 (1858) 

92 (1853) 

67 (1861) 

57 (1858) 



No. Insane 
per 100,000 
Inhabitants 



107 (1851-55) 
34 (1856-60) 

258 (1846-50) 

13 (1856-60) 

100 (1851-55) 

50 (1855-60) 

108 (1846-56) 
245 (1856-60) 

73 (1846-56) 

B* 

No. Suicides 

per 1,000,000 

Inhabitants 



1 4 

2 8 

3 1 

4 9 

5 5 

6 7 

7 3 

8 2 

9 6 



Averages of Suicides 



Wurtemburg 
Scotland 



215 (1875) 
202 (1871) 



Norway 185 (1865) 

Ireland 180 (1871) 

Sweden 177 (1870) 

England and Wales 175 (1871) 



Fronce 

Denmark 

Belgium 



146 (1872) 
137 (1870) 
134 (1868) 



180 (1875) 
35 

85 (1866-70) 

14 

85 (1866-70) 

70 (1870) 

150 (1871-75) 

277 (1866-70) 

66 (1866-70) 



107 



63 



164 



153 



Bavaria 98 (1871) 86 (1871) 

Cisalpine Austria 95 (1873) 122 (1873-77) 

Prussia 86 (1871) 133 (1871-75) 

Saxony 84 (1875) 272 (1875) 

* The first part of the table is borrowed from the article, "Atienation mentale," in the Dic- 

tionnaire of Dechambre (v. Ill, p. 34); the second from Oettingen, Moralstatistik, Table appen- 
dix 97. 



fact. "Usually," he writes, "the places with a large number of mental 
diseases also have many suicides. However these two maxima may 
be completely distinct. I should even be inclined to believe that, side 
by side with some countries fortunate enough to have neither mental 
diseases nor suicides . . . there are others where mental diseases 
only are found." The reverse occurs in other localities.^^ 

Morselli, to be sure, reaches slightly different conclusions.^^ But 
this is because, first, he has combined the insane proper and idiots 
under the common name of alienated.^^ Now, the two afflictions 

23 Op. cit., p. 238. 

-* op. cit., p. 404. 

-^ Morselli does not expressly say so, but it appears from the figures he gives. 
They are too high to represent cases of insanity only. Cf. the Table given in De- 
chambre's Dictionnaire where the distinction is made. Morselli has evidently given 
the total of the insane and the idiots. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 75 

are very different, especially in regard to the influence upon suicide 
provisionally attributed to them. Far from predisposing to suicide, 
idiocy seems rather a safeguard against it; for idiots are much more 
numerous in the country than in the city, while suicides are much 
rarer in the country. Two such different conditions must therefore 
be distinguished in seeking to determine the share of different neuro- 
pathic disorders in the rate of voluntary deaths. But even by com- 
bining them no regular parallelism is found between the extent of 
mental alienation and that of suicide. If indeed, accepting Morselli's 
figures unreservedly, the principal European countries are separated 
into five groups according to the importance of their alienated popu- 
lation (idiots and insane being combined in the same classification), 
and if then the average of suicides in each of these groups is sought, 
the following table is obtained: 



Mentally Alienated 


Suicides per 


per 100,000 


1,000,000 


Inhabitants 


Inhabitants 


from 340 to 280 


157 


from 261 to 245 


195 


from 185 to 164 


65 


from 150 to 116 


61 


from 110 to 100 


68 



1st Group (3 countries) 

2nd Group (3 countries) 

3rd Group (3 countries) 

4th Group (3 countries) 

5th Group (3 countries) 

On the whole it appears that there are many suicides where the 
insane and idiots are numerous, and that the inverse is true. But 
there is no consistent agreement between the two scales which would 
show a definite causal connection between the two sets of phenomena. 
The second group, which should show fewer suicides than the first 
has more; the fifth, which from the same point of view should be 
less than all the others, is on the contrary larger than the fourth 
and even than the third. Finally, if for Morselli's statistics of mental 
alienation those of Koch are substituted, which are much more com- 
plete and apparently more careful, the lack of parallelism is much 
more pronounced. The following in fact is the result: ^^ 









Insane and Idiots 


Average of Suicides 








per 100,000 


per 1,000,000 








Inhabitants 


inhabitants 


1st 


Group 


(3 countries) 


from 422 to 305 


76 


2nd 


Group 


(3 countries) 


from 305 to 291 


123 


3rd 


Group 


(3 countries) 


from 268 to 244 


130 


4th 


Group 


(3 countries) 


from 223 to 218 


227 


5th 


Group 


(4 countries) 


from 216 to 146 


77 



28 We have omitted only Holland from the European countries reported upon by 
Koch, the information given concerning the intensity of the tendency to suicide there 
not seeming sufficient. 



yô SUICroE 

Another comparison made by Morselli between the different prov- 
inces of Italy is by his own admission very inconclusive.^^ 

5. In short, as insanity is agreed to have increased regularly for 
a century ^^ and suicide likewise, one might be tempted to see proof 
of their interconnection in this fact. But what deprives it of any con- 
clusive value is that in lower societies where insanity is rare, suicide 
on the contrary is sometimes very frequent, as we shall show below.^^ 

The social suicide-rate therefore bears no definite relation to the 
tendency to insanity, nor, inductively considered, to the tendency to 
the various forms of neurasthenia. 

If in fact, as we have shown, neurasthenia may predispose to 
suicide, it has no such necessary result. To be sure, the neurasthenic 
is almost inevitably destined to suffer if he is thrust overmuch into 
active life; but it is not impossible for him to withdraw from it in 
order to lead a more contemplative existence. If then the conflicts 
of interests and passions are too tumultuous and violent for such a 
delicate organism, he nevertheless has the capacity to taste fully the 
rarest pleasures of thought. Both his muscular weakness and his 
excessive sensitivity, though they disqualify him for action, qualify 
him for intellectual functions, which themselves demand appropriate 
organs. Likewise, if too rigid a social environment can only irritate 
his natural instincts, he has a useful role to play to the extent that 
society itself is mobile and can persist only through progress; for 
he is superlatively the instrument of progress. Precisely because he 
rebels against tradition and the yoke of custom, he is a highly fertile 
source of innovation. And as the most cultivated societies are also 
those where representative functions are the most necessary and most 
developed, and since, at the same time, because of their very great 
complexity, their existence is conditional upon almost constant 
change, neurasthenics have most reason for existence precisely when 
they are the most numerous. They are therefore not essentially a-social 
types, self-eliminating because not born to live in the environment 
in which they are put down. Other causes must supervene upon their 
special organic condition to give it this twist and develop it in this 

27 op. cit., p. 403. 

2* Completely conclusive proof of it, to be sure, has never been given. Whatever 
the increase has been, the coefficient of acceleration is. not known. 
29 See Bk. II, Chap. IV. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 77 

direction. Neurasthenia by itself is a very general predisposition, 
not necessarily productive of any special action, but capable of assum- 
ing the most varied forms according to circumstances. It is a field 
in which most varied tendencies may take root depending on the 
fertilization it receives from social causes. Disgust with life and inert 
melancholy will readily germinate amongst an ancient and disoriented 
society, with all the fatal consequences which they imply; contrari- 
wise, in a youthful society an ardent idealism, a generous proselytism 
and active devotion are more likely to develop. Although the degen- 
erate multiply in periods of decadence, it is also through them that 
States are established; from among them are recruited all the great 
innovators. Such an ambiguous power ^^ could not therefore account 
for so definite a social fact as the suicide-rate. 



But there is a special psychopathic state to which for some time it 
has been the custom to attribute almost all the ills of our civilization. 
This is alcoholism. Rightly or wrongly, the progress of insanity, 
pauperism and criminality have already been attributed to it. Can it 
have any influence on the increase of suicide? A priori the hypothesis 
seems unlikely, for suicide has most victims among the most culti- 
vated and wealthy classes and alcoholism does not have its most 
numerous followers among them. But facts are unanswerable. Let 
us test them. 

If the French map of suicides is compared with that of prosecu- 
tions for alcoholism,^^ almost no connection is seen between them. 
Characteristic of the former is the existence of two great centers of 
contamination, one of which is in the Ile-de-France, extending from 

30 A striking example of this ambiguity is seen in the similarities and differences 
between French and Russian literature. The sympathy accorded the latter in France 
shows that it does not lack affinity with our own. In the writers of both nations, in 
fact, one perceives a morbid delicacy of the nervous system, a certain lack of mental 
and moral equilibrium. But what different social consequences flow from this iden- 
tical condition, at once biological and psychological! Whereas Russian literature is 
excessively idealistic, whereas its peculiar melancholy originating in active pity for 
human suffering is the healthy sort of sadness which excites faith and provokes 
action, ours prides itself on expressing nothing but deep despair and reflects a dis- 
quieting state of depression. Thus a single organic state may contribute to almost 
opposite social ends. 

31 According to the Compte general de l'administration de la justice criminelle, for 
1887. See Appendix I. 



78 suicroE 

there eastward, while the other lies on the Mediterranean, stretching 
from Marseilles to Nice. The light and dark areas on the maps of 
alcoholism have quite a different distribution. Here three chief cen- 
ters appear, one in Normandy, especially in Seine-Inferieure, another 
in Finisterre and the Breton departments in general, and the third 
in the Rhone and the neighboring region. From the point of view 
of suicide, on the other hand, the Rhone is not above the average, 
most of the Norman departments are below it and Brittany is almost 
immune. So the geography of the two phenomena is too different 
for us to attribute to one an important share in the production of 
the other. 

The same result is obtained by comparing suicide not with crim- 
inal intoxication but with the nervous or mental diseases caused by 
alcoholism. After grouping the French departments in eight classes 
according to their rank in suicides, we examined the average number 
of cases of insanity due to alcoholism in each class, using Dr. Lunier's 
figures.^- We got the following result: 











AI 


coholic Insane 








Suicides per 100,000 


per 


100 Admissions 








Inhabitants (1872-76) 


(1867-69 and 1874-76) 


1st 


Group 


( 5 deportments) 


Below 50 




11.45 


2nd 


Group 


(18 departments) 


From 51 to 75 




12.07 


3rd 


Group 


<15 departments) 


From 76 to 100 




11.92 


4th 


Group 


(20 departments) 


From 101 to 150 




13.42 


5th 


Group 


(10 departments) 


From 151 to 200 




14.57 


6th 


Group 


( 9 departments) 


From 201 to 250 




13.26 


7th 


Group 


( 4 departments) 


From 251 to 300 




16.32 


8th 


Group 


( 5 departments) 


Above 




13.47 



The two columns do not correspond. Whereas suicides increase 
sixfold and over, the proportion of alcoholic insane barely increases 
by a few units and the growth is not regular; the second class sur- 
passes the third, the fifth the sixth, the seventh the eighth. Yet if 
alcoholism affects suicide as a psychopathic condition it can do so 
only by the mental disturbance it causes. The comparison of the two 
maps confirms that of the averages. ^^ 

At first sight there seems to be a closer relation between the 
quantity of alcohol consumed and the tendency to suicide, at least 
for our country. Indeed most alcohol is drunk in the northern de- 
partments and it is also in this same region that suicide shows its 

22 De le production et de la consommatioiz des boissons alcooliques en France, 

P- 174-175- 

35 See Appendix I. 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 79 

greatest ravages. But, first, the two areas have nothing like the same 
outline on the two maps. The maximum of one appears in Normandy 
and the North and diminishes as it descends toward Paris; that of 
alcoholic consumption. The other is most intense in the Seine and 
neighboring departments; it is already lighter in Normandy and 
does not reach the North. The former tends westward, and reaches 
the Atlantic coast; the other has an opposite direction. It ends 
abruptly in the West, at Eure and Eure-et-Loire but has a strong 
easterly tendency. Moreover, the dark area on the map of suicides 
formed in the Midi by Var and Bouches-du-Rhone does not appear 
at all on the map of alcoholism. (See Appendix I) . 

In short, even to the extent that there is some coincidence it proves 
nothing, being random. Leaving France and proceeding farther 
North, for example, the consumption of alcohol increases almost 
regularly without the appearance of suicide. Whereas only 2.84 liters 
of alcohol per inhabitant were consumed on the average in France 
in 1873, the figure rises in Belgium to 8.56 for 1870, in England 
to 9.07 (1870-71), in Holland to 4 (1870), in Sweden to 10.34 
(1870), in Russia to 10.69 {^-866) and even, at Saint Petersburg 
to 20 (1855). ^^^ y^^ whereas, in the corresponding periods, 150 
suicides per million inhabitants occurred in France, Belgium had 
only 68, Great Britain 70, Sweden 85, Russia very few. Even at 
Saint Petersburg from 1864 to 1868 the average annual rate was 
only 68.8. Denmark is the only northern country where there are 
both many suicides and a large consumption of alcohol (16.51 liters 
in 1845).^^ If then our northern departments are distinguished both 
by their tendency to suicide and their addiction to alcohol, it is not 
because the former arises from the latter and is explained by it. 
The conjunction is accidental. In general, much alcohol is drunk in 
the North because of the local rarity of wine and its cost,^^ and 
perhaps because a special nourishment calculated to maintain the 
organism's temperature is more necessary there than elsewhere; and 
on the other hand the originating causes of suicide are especially 
concentrated in the same region of our country. 

3* See Lunier, op. cit., p. 180 S. Similar figures applying to other years are to be 
found in Prinzing, op. cit., p. 58. 

35 The consumption of wine indeed varies rather inversely to suicide. Most wine 
is drunk in the Midi where suicides are least numerous. Wine is, however, not to be 
regarded as a guarantee against suicide for this reason. 



80 



suicroB 



ALCOHOLISM AND SUICIDE IN GERMANY 



Consumption of 
Alcohol (1884-86) 
Liters per Capita 



Average of Suicides 

per 1,000,000 

Inhabitants 



Country 



1st Group 



2nd Group 



3rd Group 



4th Group 



13 to 10.8 



9.2 to 7.2 



6.4 to 4.5 



4 and less 



206.1 



208.4 



234.1 



147.9 



Posnonio, Silesia, 

Brandenburg, 

Pomerania 

East and West 
Prussia, Hanover, 
Province of Saxony, 
Thuringio, 
Westphalia 

Mecklenburg, 
Kingdom Saxony, 
Schleswig- 
Holstein, Alsace, 
Grand Duchy Hess 

Rhine provinces, 
Baden, Bavaria 
Wurtemburg 



The comparison of the different states of Germany confirms this 
conclusion. If they are classified both in regard to suicide and to 
alcoholic consumption,^*' (see above), it appears that the group show- 
ing most suicidal tendency (the third) is one of those where least 
alcohol is consumed. Genuine contrasts are even found in certain 
details: the province of Posen is almost the least affected by suicide 
of the entire Empire (96.4 cases per million inhabitants), yet it 
is the one where most alcoholism is found (13 liters per capita) ; in 
Saxony, where suicide is almost four times as common (348 per 
million), only half as much alcohol is consumed. It is to be noted, 
finally, that the fourth group, that of the lowest consumption of 
alcohol, is composed almost exclusively of southern states. From 
another standpoint, if suicide occurs there less than in the rest of 
Germany, this is because its population is either Catholic or contains 
large Catholic minorities.^'^ 

3^ See Prinzing, op. cit., p. 75. 

2^ To illustrate the influence of alcohol the example of Norway has occasionally 
been cited, where alcoholic consumption and suicide have shown a parallel decline 
since 1830. But in Sweden alcoholism has diminished also and proportionately, 
while suicide has continued to increase (115 cases per million in 1886-88, instead 
of 63 in 1821-30). The situation is the same in Russia. 

To give the reader all sides of the question we must add that the proportion of 
suicides ascribed to occasional or habitual drunkenness by French statistics rose from 
6.69 in 1849 to 13.41 per cent in 1876. But first, by no means all such cases are 
attributable to alcoholism properly so-called, nor must this be confused with simple 
intoxication nor fréquentation of a bar. Whatever the exact meaning of these figures, 



SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 8 1 

Thus no psychopathic state bears a regular and indisputable rela- 
tion to suicide. A society does not depend for its number of suicides 
on having more or fewer neuropaths or alcoholics. Although the 
different forms of degeneration are an eminently suitable psycho- 
logical field for the action of the causes which may lead a man to 
suicide, degeneration itself is not one of these causes. Admittedly, 
under similar circumstances, the degenerate is more apt to commit 
suicide than the well man; but he does not necessarily do so because 
of his condition. This potentiality of his becomes effective only 
through the action of other factors which we must discover, 

moreover, they do not prove that the abuse of spiritous liquors plays a large role in 
the suicide-rate. Finally, it will be shown later why no great value can be attached 
to the information thus given by statistics concerning the presumptive causes of 
suicide. 



CHAPTER 2 SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL 
STATES— RACE, HEREDITY 



' UT it might be that the tendenqr to suicide is based on the con- 
stitution of the individual without special dependence on the ab- 
normal states just considered. It might consist of purely psychological 
phenomena without necessarily being associated with any perversion 
of the nervous system. Why should there not occur among men a 
tendency to renounce existence, which is neither a monomania nor 
a form of mental alienation or neurasthenia? It might even be con- 
sidered an established fact if, as several writers on suicide have de- 
clared,^ each race had a characteristic suicide-rate of its own. For a 
race is defined and differentiated from others only by organic-psychic 
characteristics. If then suicide really varied with races, it would be 
established that it is closely connected with some organic disposition. 
But does this relation exist? 



First, what is a race? A definition is especially necessary because 
not merely the layman but anthropologists themselves use the word 
in quite varying senses. Yet underneath the different formulae sug- 
gested for it, two basic ideas are usually found: the ideas of resem- 
blance and filiation. One or the other occupies the first place accord- 
ing to different schools. 

Recently race has been understood to mean an aggregate of indi- 
viduals with clearly common traits, but traits furthermore due to deri- 

1 Notably Wagner, Gesetzmassigkeit, etc., p. 165 ff.; Morselli, p. 158; Oettingen, 
Moralstatistik, p. 760. 

82 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 83 

vation from a common stock. Whenever, under the influence of any 
cause, one or more members of the same sexual generation display 
a variation separating them from the rest of the species, and this 
variation, instead of disappearing in the next generation, becomes 
progressively established in the organism through heredity, it gives 
birth to a race. In this sense M. de Quatrefages could define race as 
"the total of similar individuals of the same species who transmit 
characteristics of a primitive sort by sexual propagation." ^ Thus 
understood, race would differ from species in that the original cou- 
ples from whom the different races of one species derive, would in 
turn all be derived from a single couple. The concept would thus be 
clearly circumscribed and defined by the special method of filiation 
to which it owes its source. 

Unfortunately, if this formula is accepted, the existence and area 
of a race can be established only by historical and ethnographic re- 
search, the results of which are always uncertain; for only very un- 
certain probabilities can be determined in questions of origin. More- 
over, it is not certain that there are today human races answering to 
this definition; for, due to crossings in every direction, each of the 
existing varieties of our species comes from very different origins. 
Without any other criterion being given, it would therefore be very 
hard to discover the relations of the various races to suicide, for no 
one could say with accuracy where they begin and end. Besides, M. 
de Quatrefages' concept errs in prejudging the solution of a problem 
as yet by no means scientifically settled. It assumes in fact that racial 
characteristics are formed through evolution, that they are fixed in the 
organism only through heredity. This is contested by a whole school 
of anthropology that has taken the name of polygenists. According 
to this school, instead of being derived as a whole from one and the 
same couple, in the manner of biblical tradition, humanity has ap- 
peared either simultaneously or successively at diflferent points on the 
globe. As these primitive stocks were formed independently of one 
another and in different environments, they differed from the be- 
ginning; hence, each of them would be a race. Therefore, the prin- 
cipal races would not have been formed by a progressive fixation of 
acquired differences, but from the beginning and all at once. 

Since this large question is still unsettled, it would be contrary to 

^ L'espèce hu7)ia!ne, p. 28. Paris, Felix Alcan. 



84 SUICIDE 

sound method to introduce into the notion of race the idea of filia- 
tion or kinship. It is better defined by its immediate quahties, directly 
available to the observer, and without reference to the whole question 
of origin. Only two characteristics are left to mark race. First, it is a 
group of individuals who resemble one another. But so do members 
of a single faith or profession. The distinguishing characteristic is 
that the resemblances are hereditary. It is a type which, however 
originally formed, is now hereditarily transmissible. In this sense, 
Prichard wrote: "By the term race is understood any collection of 
individuals with a greater or less number of common characteristics 
transmissible by heredity, regardless of the origin of these character- 
istics," M. Broca uses about the same terms: "The varieties of human 
kind," he writes, "have received the name of races, which suggests 
the idea of a more or less direct filiation between the individuals 
of the same variety, but this neither affirmatively nor negatively 
determines the question of kinship between individuals of different 
varieties." ^ 

Put thus, the question of the constitution of races becomes soluble 
but the word is then taken in such an extended sense that it becomes 
illusive. It no longer represents merely the most general branches of 
the species, the natural and relatively unchangeable divisions of hu- 
manity, but every sort of type. In fact, from this point of view each 
group of nations the members of which, due to their centuries- 
long intimate mutual relations, show partially hereditable similarities, 
would constitute a race. Thus we sometimes speak of a Latin race, 
an Anglo-Saxon race, etc. Only in this sense indeed can races still be 
regarded as concrete, living factors of historical development. In the 
mingling of peoples, in the melting-pot of history, the great primi- 
tive and fundamental races have finally become so blended with each 
other that they have lost almost all individuality. If they have not 
totally disappeared, at least only vague features and scattered traits 
are found in imperfect combination with one another, forming no 
characteristic physiognomies. A human type thus constituted merely 
by the aid of often indefinite data as to height and cranial structure 
is not sufficiently consistent and fixed to have attributed to it much 
influence on the course of social phenomena. The more specialized 
and smaller types called races in the broad sense of the word are 

3 Article, Anthropologie, in Dechambre's Dictionnaire, vol. V. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 85 

more clearly marked and necessarily have an historical role, since 
they are less the products of nature than of history. But they are far 
from objectively defined. We know little, for instance, of the exact 
differences between the Latin and the Anglo-Saxon races. Everybody 
speaks of them in his own way with little scientific exactness. 

These introductory remarks give warning that the sociologist must 
be very careful in searching for the influence of races on any social 
phenomenon. For to solve such problems the different races and their 
distinctions from each other must be known. This caution is the more 
essential because this anthropological uncertainty might well be due 
to the fact that the word "race" no longer corresponds to anything 
definite. Indeed, on the one hand, the original races have only a 
paleontological interest, and on the other the narrower groups so 
designated today seem to be only peoples or societies of peoples, 
brothers by civilization rather than by blood. Thus conceived, race 
becomes almost identical with nationality. 

II 

Yet let us agree that there are certain great types in Europe the 
most general characteristics of which can be roughly distinguished 
and among whom the peoples are distributed, and agree to give them 
the name of races. Morselli distinguishes four: the Germanic type, 
including as varieties the German, the Scandinavian, the Anglo-Saxon, 
the Flemish; the Celto-Roman type (Belgians, French, Italians, Span- 
iards) ; the Slav type and the Ural-Altaic type. We mention the last 
only by courtesy, since it has too few representatives in Europe for its 
relations to suicide to be ascertainable. In fact only the Hungarians, 
the Finns and the people of some Russian provinces can be assigned 
to it. The other three races would be classified as follows according 
to the decreasing order of their aptitude for suicide: first the Ger- 
manic peoples, then the Celto-Romans, and finally the Slavs.'* 

But can these differences really be imputed to the effects of race? 

The hypothesis would be plausible if each group of peoples thus 
combined under a single name had an equally strong tendency to 
suicide. But the greatest differences exist between nations of the same 
race. While in general the Slavs have little inclination to self-de- 

* We shall not mention the classifications proposed by Wagner and Oettingen; 
Morselli himself has criticized them decisively, (p. 160) 



86 SUICIDE 

struction, Bohemia and Moravia are exceptions. The former has 158 
suicides per million inhabitants and the second 136, while Carnida 
has only 46, Croatia 30, Dalmatia 14. Similarly, of all the Celto- 
Roman peoples, France stands out by the size of its contribution, 150 
suicides per million, while in the same period Italy had only about 
30 and Spain still fewer. It is hard to agree with Morselli that so 
great a difference is explained by the greater number of Germanic 
elements in France than in the other Latin countries. Granted espe- 
cially that the peoples thus distinguished among their kindred are 
also the most civilized, it is possible to assume that what differen- 
tiates societies and so-called ethnic groups is rather their unequal 
degree of civilization. 

Among the Germanic peoples the variety is yet greater. Of the 
four groups associated with this stock, three of them are much less 
inclined to suicide than the Slavs and Latins. These are the Flemish, 
numbering only 50 suicides (per million), the Anglo-Saxons with 
only 70; ^ as for the Scandinavians, Denmark, to be sure, has the high 
number of 268 suicides, but Norway has only 74.5 and Sweden only 
84. So it is impossible to attribute the Danish suicide-rate to race, 
since it produces opposite effects in the two countries where this race 
is purest. In short, of all the Germanic peoples, only the Germans 
are in general strongly inclined to suicide. If then the terms were 
strictly used, it would be a question not of race but of nationality. 
Yet, since the existence of a German type in part, at least, hereditary, 
has not been disproved, the sense of the word may be stretched to 
the extreme extent of saying that suicide is more developed among 
the peoples of German race than among most Celto-Roman, Slavic 
or even Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian societies. But that is all that 
may be concluded from the above figures. In any case, this is the only 
instance where a certain influence of ethnic characteristics might pos- 
sibly be suspected. Even here we shall find that in reality race plays 
no part. 

To attribute the German inclination to suicide to this cause, it is 
not enough to prove that it is general in Germany; for this might be 
due to the special nature of German civilization. But the inclination 
would have to be shown to be connected with an hereditary state of 

5 To explain these facts Morselli assumes, with no proof, that there are numerous 
Celtic elements in England and invokes the influence of climate for the Flemish. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 87 

the German organism, and that this is a permanent trait of the type, 
persisting even under change of social environment. Only thus could 
we regard it as a racial product. Let us see whether the German re- 
tains this sad primacy outside Germany, in the midst of the life of 
other peoples and acclimatized to different civilizations. 

Austria offers us a complete laboratory for answering this ques- 
tion. In differing proportions in the various provinces, the Germans 
are mixed with a population of totally different ethnic origins. Let 
us see whether their presence effects an increase in the number of sui- 
cides. Table VII shows for each province the average suicide-rate for 
the quinquennium 1872-77 together with the numerical weight of 
the German elements. The races have been distinguished by their 
use of language; though this is not an absolutely exact standard, it is 
nevertheless the surest that can be employed. 



TABLE VII — Comparison of Austrian Provinces with Respect 
to Suicide and Race 



No. of Germans Suicide-rate 

per 100 per 

Inhabitants Million 



Provinces 

purely 

German 


Lower Au 


stria 


95.90 


254 






Upper Au 


str 


ia 


100 


110 


Average 




Salzburg 






100 


120 


106 




Transolpii 


ie 


Tyrol 


100 


88 






Majority 
Germon 


Corjnthia 

Styria 

Silesia 






71.40 
62.45 
53.37 


92 

94 

190 


Average 
125 




Important 


Bohemia 






37.64 


158 


Average 
140 




German 


Moravia 






26.33 


136 




minority 


Bukovina 






9.06 


128 




Average 




Galicia 






2.72 


82 




of two 


Small 


Cisalpine 


Tyrol 


1.90 


88 




Groups 
86 


German 


Littoral 






1.62 


38 




minority 


Corniolo 
Dalmatia 






6.20 


46 
14 







In this table, taken from Morselli himself, not the least trace of 
German influence can be seen. Bohemia, Moravia and Bukovina, con- 
taining only from 37 to 9 per cent of Germans, have a higher aver- 
age of suicides (140) than Styria, Carinthia and Silesia (125), 
where the Germans are in the great majority. The latter provinces 
likewise, though containing an important Slav minority, in respect to 
suicide exceed the only three where the population is entirely Ger- 
man, Upper Austria, Salzburg and Transalpine Tyrol. To be sure. 
Lower Austria has many more suicides than the other regions; but its 



88 SUICIDE 

excess in this respect cannot be attributed to German elements, since 
Germans are more numerous in Upper Austria, Salzburg and Trans- 
alpine Tyrol where there are one-half or one-third as many suicides. 
The real reason for the high figure is that Lower Austria's metrop- 
olis, Vienna, like all capitals has an enormous annual number of sui- 
cides; in 1876, 320 were committed per million inhabitants. The 
part played by the metropolis must not be attributed to race. In- 
versely, the small number of suicides of the Littoral, Carniola and 
Dalmatia is not due to the lack of Germans; for in Cisalpine Tyrol 
and in Galicia, where there are just as few Germans, there are from 
two to five times as many voluntary deaths. Even if the average sui- 
cide-rate for all eight provinces with German minorities is taken, we 
get the figure 86 or as much as in Transalpine Tyrol where there are 
only Germans, and more than in Carinthia and Styria, where they are 
very numerous. Thus, when the German and the Slav live in the same 
social environment, their tendency to suicide is approximately the 
same. Accordingly, the difference observed between them under other 
circumstances is not one of race. 

It is the same with the difference noted between the German and 
the Latin. The two races are both found in Switzerland. Fifteen can- 
tons are wholly or in part German. Their average of suicides is 186 
(1876). Five have a French majority (Valais, Fribourg, Neufchatel, 
Geneva, Vaud). Their average of suicides is 255. The canton where 
fewest are committed. Valais (10 per i million), is the very one 
containing most Germans (319 per 1,000 inhabitants); on the other 
hand, Neufchatel, Geneva and Vaud where the population is almost 
wholly Latin have respectively 486, 321 and 371 suicides. 

To show more clearly the influence of the ethnic factor, if there 
is one, we have sought to eliminate the religious factor by which it 
might be obscured. To accomplish this we have compared German 
and French cantons of the same confession. The results of this calcu- 
lation only confirm those above: 

Swiss Cantons 
German Catholics 87 suicides German Protestants 293 suicides 

French Catholics 83 suicides French Protestants 456 suicides 

Among Catholics there is no perceptible difference between the 
races; and among Protestants, the French have the greater number. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 89 

Facts thus concur in showing that Germans commit suicide more 
than other peoples not because of their blood but because of the civ- 
ilization in which they are reared. However, one of Morselli's proofs 
to establish the influence of race might at first glance seem more con- 
clusive. The French people consists of a mixture of two principal 
races, the Celts and the Cymries, who from the beginning have been 
distinct from each other in regard to height. From the times of Julius 
Caesar the Cymries have been known for their great stature. Thus 
Broca was able to determine by the height of the inhabitants how 
these two races are distributed today over our territory, and he found 
populations of Celtic origin preponderant to the South of the Loire 
and those of Cymric origin to the North. This ethnographic map thus 
offers a certain similarity to that of suicide; for we know that suicides 
are concentrated largely in the northern part of the country and are, 
contrariwise, at their minimum in the Center and the Midi. But 
Morselli has gone further. He thought that he could prove the reg- 
ular variation of French suicides according to the distribution of 
ethnic groups. To do so, he formed six groups of departments, cal- 
culated the average suicides for each, and also that of drafted soldiers 
exempted for insufficient height; which is an indirect way of meas- 
uring the average height of the corresponding population, because 
average height increases as the number of exempted men decreases. 
These two series of averages are found to vary inversely with one an- 
other; the fewer men exempted for insufficient height, that is, the 
greater the average height, the greater the number of suicides is 
found to be.^ 

So exact a correspondence, if established, could scarcely be ex- 
plained by anything but the action of race. But Morselli's way of 
reaching this result forbids us to consider it final. As basis for his 
comparison, he took the six ethnic groups defined by Broca "^ accord- 
ing to the assumed degree of purity of the two races, Celts or 
Cymries. Despite this scholar's authority, these ethnographic ques- 
tions are much too complex and still leave too much room for a vari- 
ety of interpretations and contradictory hypotheses, for his proposed 
classification to be considered as certain. The number of more or less 
unverifiable historical conjectures with which he had to support it 

8 Morselli, op. cit., p. 189. 

^ Mémoires d'anthropologie, vol. I, p. 320. 



90 SUICIDE 

need only be considered for it to appear that though this research 
proves the presence in France of two clearly distinct anthropological 
types, the reality of the intermediate and variously shaded types which 
he believed he had discovered is much more doubtful.^ If we disre- 
gard this systematic but somewhat overingenious scheme, and merely 
classify the departments by the average stature characteristic of each 
(that is, by the average number of men exempted for insufficient 
height) , and if we confront each of these averages with that of sui- 
cide, results, quite different from Morselli's, are obtained. (See 
Table VIII, p. 91). 

The suicide-rate does not increase in regular proportion to the rela- 
tive importance of the real or supposed Cymric elements; for the first 
group with highest stature has fewer suicides than the second and 
scarcely more than the third. Likewise the last three groups are on 
approximately the same level,^ however unequal in respect to height. 
All that these figures show is that France is divided into two halves 
as regards both suicides and stature, one northern with numerous 
suicides and high stature, the other central with lower stature and 
fewer suicides, but that these two progressions are not exactly paral- 

^ The existence of two great regional masses seems indisputable, one consisting of 
15 northern departments in which tall stature predominates (only 39 exempt among 
a thousand drafted men), the other of 24 central and western departments where 
short stature is common (from 98 to 130 exemptions per thousand). Is this differ- 
ence a result of race? This is a much more difficult question. Considering that the 
average stature in France has perceptibly changed within thirty years, that the num- 
ber of exempt for this reason has dropped from 92.80 per thousand in 1831 to 59.40 
in i860, we have reason to doubt whether so changeable a characteristic is a very 
sure criterion for proving the existence of these relatively stable types called races. 
But, in any case, the constitution of the intermediate groups interposed between the 
two extreme types by Broca, their denomination and association with either the Cym- 
ric or the other stock, appears to leave place for even more doubt. Morphological 
reasons are impossible here. Anthropology may indeed determine the average stature 
in a given region, but not the crossings from which this average results. Now these 
intermediate statures may quite as well be due to crossings of the Celts with men 
of greater stature as to alliances of the Cymries with smaller men than themselves. 
Nor may geographical distribution be considered, for these mixed groups occur very 
sporadically, in the North-West (Normandy and the Lower Loire), the South-West 
(Aquitaine), the South (the Roman Province), in the East (Lorraine), etc. Histori- 
cal arguments then remain which can only be very conjectural. Little is known his- 
torically as to how, when, and in what conditions and proportions the various in- 
vasions and infiltrations of peoples took place. Still less can history help to deter- 
mine their influence on the organic constitution of these peoples. 

^ Especially if the Seine is disregarded, which, because of the exceptional con- 
ditions there, is not exactly comparable with the other departments. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 



91 



TABLE Vm 

DEPARTMENTS WITH HIGH STATURE 

No. of Exempt Average Suicide-rate 



1st group ( 9 deportments) 

2nd group ( 8 departments) 
3rd group (17 departments) 
General average 



1st group (22 departments) 

2nd group (12 departments) 
3rd group (14 departments) 
General average 



Below 40 per 
1,000 examined 

From 40 to 50 

From 50 to 60 

Below 60 per 
1,000 examined 

DEPARTMENTS WITH LOW STATURE 

From 60 to 80 
per 1,000 
examined 

From 80 to 100 

Above 100 

Above 60 per 
1,000 examined 



180 

249 
170 
191 



115 (without 

Seine, 101) 

88 

90 

103 (with Seine) 
93 (without 
Seine) 



lei. In other words, the two great regional masses foun(J on the 
ethnographic map are also found on that of suicides; but the coin- 
cidence is only broadly and generally accurate. It does not appear in 
the detailed variations shown by the two subjects compared. 

Once the coincidence has thus been reduced to its true proportions, 
it is no longer a decisive proof of the ethnic elements; for it is merely 
a curious fact inadequate to prove a law. It may well be a mere 
encounter of independent factors. The hypothesis attributing it to the 
action of race would at least require confirmation, even demonstra- 
tion, by other facts. On the contrary, it is contradicted by the follow- 
ing facts: 

1. It would be surprising if such a collective type as the Germans, 
incontestably real and with so strong an affinity for suicide, should 
cease to show this affinity at the first modification of social conditions, 
and if a somewhat problematic type like the Celts or the ancient 
Belgians, of whom only rare vestiges remain, should exert an effec- 
tive influence on this same tendency. There is too great a difference 
between the extremely general characteristics which memorialize this 
type and the complex and special character of such a tendency. 

2. We shall see below that suicide was common among the ancient 
Celts. ^"^ Therefore, if it is rare today in populations of supposedly 

" See below, Bk. II, Chap. 4. 



92 suicroE 

Celtic origin, it cannot be due to a congenital characteristic of the 
race but to changed external circumstances. 

3. Celts and Cymries are not pure primitive races; they were re- 
lated "by blood, language and beliefs." ^^ Both are only varieties of 
the tall, blond race which gradually spread throughout Europe by 
mass invasions or successive thrusts. The only ethnographic differ- 
ence between them is that the Celts became more differentiated from 
the common type through crossings with the smaller, darker races 
of the Midi. Thus, if the greater aptitude for suicide of the Cymries 
has ethnic causes, it is because in them the primitive race has changed 
less. In that case, however, suicide should be found to increase the 
more, even outside of France, the more the distinctive characteristics 
of this race have been unaltered. This is not so. The greatest stat- 
ures in Europe (1.72 m.) are found in Norway and, besides, the type 
probably originates in the North, especially on the Baltic coast; it is 
supposed also to be best preserved there. Yet the suicide-rate has not 
risen in the Scandinavian peninsula. The same race is said to have 
preserved its purity better in Holland, Belgium and England than in 
France, ^2 and yet the last-named country shows many more suicides 
than the other three. 

But this geographical distribution of French suicides may be ex- 
plained without the necessity of introducing the obscure operations 
of race. Our country is known to be divided morally as well as 
ethnologically into two parts as yet not wholly combined. The peo- 
ples of the Center and the Midi have retained their own tempera- 
ment, a characteristic way of life, and for this reason resist the ideas 
and manners of the North. Now the center of French civilization is 
in the North; it has remained essentially northern in character. Since, 
on the other hand, as will be seen later, this civilization contains the 
principal causes which lead Frenchmen to suicide, the geographical 
limits of its sphere of action are also those of the zone most fertile in 
suicides. Thus, if the people of the North commit suicide more than 
those of the Midi, it is not because they are more predisposed to it 
by their ethnic temperament, but simply that the social causes of sui- 
cide are more specially located north rather than south of the Loire, 

As for the origin and persistence of this twofold moral character 

11 Broca, op. cit., vol. I, p. 394. 

^2 See Topinard, Anthropologie, p. 464. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 93 

of our country, this is an historical question not adequately to be 
solved by ethnographic considerations. It is not, or at least not only, 
racial differences which may have been the cause of it; for very dis- 
tinct races may blend and disappear in one another. There is no such 
antagonism between the northern and southern types that centuries 
of common life have not been able to overcome. The native of Lor- 
raine was as different from the Norman as the Provencal from the 
inhabitant of Ile-de-France. But for historical reasons the provincial 
spirit and local traditionalism have remained much stronger in the 
Midi, while in the North the need of facing common enemies, a 
closer solidarity of interests and more frequent contacts have brought 
the peoples together and blended their history much sooner. And 
just this moral levelling, by increasing the circulation of persons, 
ideas and things has made the latter region the birthplace of an in- 
tense civilization.^^ 

Ill 

The theory that sees race as an important factor in the inclination 
to suicide also implies that it is hereditary; for it can be an ethnic 
characteristic only on this condition. But has the heredity of suicide 
been proved? The question deserves close examination because of an 
interest of its own besides its relation to the one just considered. If 
indeed it were proved that the tendency to suicide is genetically 
transmitted, it would follow that it depends closely on a definite or- 
ganic state. 

But the meaning of the words must first be defined. When suicide 
is said to be hereditary, is it meant merely that the children of sui- 
cides by inheriting their parents' disposition are inclined in like cir- 
cumstances to behave like them? In this sense the proposition is in- 
contestable but without bearing, for then it is not suicide which is 
hereditary; what is transmitted is simply a certain general tempera- 
ment which, in a given case, may predispose persons to the act but 

^3 The same remark applies to Italy. There, too, suicides are more numerous in the 
North than in the South, and, on the other hand, the average height of the people 
of the North is slightly greater than that of the South. But present-day Italian civi- 
lization is Piedmontese in origin and, on the other hand, the Piedmontese are slightly 
taller than the people of the South. The difference, however, is slight. The maximum 
found in Tuscany and Venetia is 1.65 m., the minimum, in Calabria, is 1.60, at least 
for continental Italy. In Sardinia height diminishes to 1.58 m. 



94 SUICIDE 

without forcing them, and is therefore not a sufficient explanation 
of their determination. In fact, the individual constitution which 
favors its appearance most, namely neurasthenia in its various forms, 
has been seen to offer no reason for the variations shown by the 
suicide-rate. But psychologists have very often spoken of heredity in 
quite another sense. According to this, it is the tendency to self- 
destruction which passes directly and wholly from parents to children 
and which, once transmitted, gives birth wholly automatically to 
suicide. It would then be a sort of psychological mechanism, semi- 
autonomous, not very different from a monomania and probably cor- 
responding to a no less definite physiological mechanism. Thus it 
would depend essentially on individual causes. 

Does observation show the existence of such an heredity? Cer- 
tainly, suicide sometimes reappears in a given family with terrible 
regularity. Gall cites one of the most striking examples: "A certain 
Mr. G — , a landowner, leaves seven children and a legacy of two 
millions; six remain in Paris or the neighborhood and retain their 
share of the father's fortune; some even increase it. None have mis- 
fortunes; all enjoy good health. . . . All seven brothers committed 
suicide within forty years." ^^ Esquirol knew a merchant, the father of 
six children, four of whom killed themselves; a fifth made repeated 
attempts. ^^ In other instances, parents, children and grandchildren 
yield successively to the same impulse. But the example of physiol- 
ogists should teach us not to draw hasty conclusions in these ques- 
tions of heredity which have to be treated very carefully. Thus, there 
are certainly many cases where tuberculosis attacks successive genera- 
tions and yet scholars still hesitate to admit that it is hereditary. The 
opposite seems to be the prevalent conclusion. This repetition of a 
disease in the same family may indeed be due not to the hereditary 
character of tuberculosis itself but to that of a general temperament 
calculated to receive and on occasion propagate the bacillus causing 
the disease. Here what is transmitted is not the affliction itself but 
only a field such as to favor its development. To have the right to 
reject the last explanation peremptorily, one must at least have 
proven that the Koch bacillus is often found in the foetus; until this 
has been proved the solution is doubtful. Like caution is required in 

^* Sur les functions du cerveau, Paris, 1825. 
"^^ Maladies mentales, vol. I, p. 582. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 95 

the problem before us. To solve it, therefore, it is not enough to cite 
certain facts favorable to the thesis of heredity. These facts must also 
be numerous enough not to be attributable to accidental circumstances 
— not to permit another explanation — to be contradicted by no other 
fact. Do they satisfy this triple condition? 

To be sure, they are considered common. But to conclude that the 
nature of suicide is hereditary, their greater or less frequency is not 
enough. One must also be able to show their proportion relative to 
the total of voluntary deaths. If hereditary antecedents were shown 
for a relatively high fraction of the total number of suicides, it might 
be admitted that a relation of causality exists between the two facts, 
that suicide tends to be hereditarily transmissible. But lacking this 
proof it is always possible that the cases cited are due to chance com- 
binations of various causes. Now the observations and comparisons 
which alone would solve this question have never been made on a 
large scale. Rarely is more than a certain number of interesting anec- 
dotes adduced. Our slight information on this particular matter is in 
no sense conclusive; it is even somewhat contradictory. Among 39 
insane cases with a more or less pronounced tendency to suicide ob- 
served by Dr. Luys in his hospital and on which he had collected 
fairly complete data, he found only a single case where the same 
tendency had already been found in the patient's family.^^ Of 265 
insane, Brierre de Boismont found only 11, or 4 per cent, whose 
parents had committed suicide.^'' The proportion given by Cazau- 
vieilh is much higher; he is said to have found hereditary antecedents 
in 13 patients out of 60, making 28 per cent.^^ According to Bavar- 
ian statistics, the only ones recording hereditary influence, it has 
been found about 13 in 100 times from 1857-66.^^ 

Indecisive as these facts may be, if they could be accounted for 
only by admitting a special suicidal heredity, this hypothesis would 
receive a certain authority from the sheer impossibility of accounting 
for it otherwise. But there are at least two other causes which, espe- 
cially in conjunction, may produce the same eflPect. 

First, almost all these observations were made by alienists and, 

1^ Suicide, p. 197. 

I'' Quoted by Legoyt, p. 242. 

^^ Suicide, pp. 17-19. 

^^ See Morselli, p. 410. 



96 SUICIDE 

consequently, among the insane. Of all diseases, insanity is perhaps 
the one most commonly transmitted. One may therefore question 
whether what is hereditary is the tendency to suicide rather than the 
insanity of which it is a frequent but nevertheless accidental symp- 
tom. Doubt is the more justified because according to all observers it 
is especially, if not exclusively, among insane suicides that cases 
favorable to the heredity-hypothesis occur.-" Even under such condi- 
tions, doubtless, heredity plays an important role; but it is no longer 
the heredity of suicide. What is transmitted is the general mental 
affliction, the nervous weakness of which suicide is a contingent re- 
sult, though one always to be apprehended. In this case heredity has 
nothing more to do with the tendency to suicide than with hemopty- 
sis in cases of hereditary tuberculosis. If the unfortunate, with both 
insane persons and suicides in his family, kills himself, it is not be- 
cause his parents had done the same but because they were insane. 
Thus, as mental sickness alters in transmission, as for example the 
melancholy of the progenitors becomes the chronic delirium or in- 
stinctive madness of the descendants, several members of the same 
family may kill themselves and all these suicides resulting from dif- 
ferent sorts of insanity may consequently be of different types. 

This primary cause, however, is not enough to explain all the facts. 
For it is not also proved, on the one hand, that suicide never repeats 
itself except among families of the insane; and on the other, the re- 
markable fact remains that in some of these families suicide seems to 
be in an endemic state, although insanity does not necessarily imply 
such a result. Not every insane person is impelled to self-destruction. 
How does it happen, then, that there are families of insane appar- 
ently predestined to it.'* The abundance of such cases evidently pre- 
supposes another factor than the one just mentioned, but which may 
be accounted for without attributing it to heredity. The contagious 
power of example is enough to cause it. 

In fact, we shall see in one of the following chapters that suicide 
is very contagious. This contagiousness is specially common among 
individuals constitutionally very accessible to suggestion in general 
and especially to ideas of suicide; they are inclined to reproduce not 
only all that impresses them but, above all, to repeat an act toward 
which they have already some inclination. This twofold condition is 

2" Brierre de Boismont, op. cit., p. 59; Cazauvieilh, op. cit., p. 19. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 97 

found among insane or merely neurasthenic persons whose parents 
have committed suicide. For their nervous weakness makes them sus- 
ceptible to hypnosis and simultaneously predisposes them to ready 
reception of the idea of self-destruction. It is not astonishing then 
that the memory or sight of the tragic end of their kinfolk becomes 
for them the source of an obsession or irresistible impulse. 

Not only is this explanation as satisfactory as that of heredity, 
but it alone can interpret certain facts. In families where repeated 
suicides occur, they are often performed almost identically. They take 
place not only at the same age but even in the same way. In one 
case hanging is preferred, in another asphyxiation or falling from a 
high place. In a case often quoted, the resemblance is yet greater; the 
same weapon served a whole family at intervals of several years. ^^ 
One more proof of heredity has been seen in these resemblances. Yet, 
if there are good reasons for not regarding suicide as a distinct psy- 
chological entity, how much more difficult to admit the existence of a 
tendency to suicide by hanging or shooting! Do not these facts rather 
show the great contagious influence of suicides, already recorded in 
their family history, on the minds of the survivors? For they must 
be besieged and persecuted by these memories to be persuaded to 
repeat the act of their predecessors so faithfully. 

This explanation is made yet more probable by numerous cases of 
the same character where heredity is not in question and where con- 
tagion is the only source of the evil. In the epidemics to be men- 
tioned again below, different suicides almost always resemble one 
another to an astonishing degree. They seem copies of one another. 
There is the well-known story of the fifteen patients who hung them- 
selves in swift succession in 1772 from the same hook in a dark pass- 
age of the hospital. Once the hook was removed there was an end 
of the epidemic. Likewise, at the camp of Boulogne, a soldier blew 
out his brains in a sentry-box; in a few days others imitated him in 
the same place; but as soon as this was burned, the contagion stopped. 
All these facts show the overpowering influence of obsession, because 
they cease with the disappearance of the material object which evoked 
the idea. Thus, when suicides, obviously springing from one another, 
all seem to follow the same model, they may fairly be attributed to 
the same cause, the more so because the latter must have maximum 

21 Ribot, L'hérédité, p. 145. Paris, Felix Alcan. 



98 SUICIDE 

effect in families where everything combines to augment its power. 
Furthermore, many persons feel that by imitating their parents 
they yield to the prestige of example. Such was the case of a family 
observed by Esquirol: "The youngest (brother) of between 26 and 
27 years became melancholy and threw himself from the roof of his 
house; a second who was caring for him reproached himself with the 
death, made several attempts at suicide, and died a year later from 
prolonged and repeated self-starvation. ... A fourth brother, a doc- 
tor, killed himself. Two years before, he had told me with terrify- 
ing despair that he would not escape his fate." ^- Moreau cites the 
following: an insane person whose brother and paternal uncle had 
committed suicide was influenced by the suicidal tendency. A brother 
who visited him at Charenton was appalled by the horrible thoughts 
he brought away and could not resist the conviction that he, too, 
would finally succumb.-^ A patient made the following confession to 
Brierre de Boismont: "Until the age of 53 I had good health; I had no 
troubles; my temperament was quite cheerful when, three years ago, I 
began to have gloomy thoughts. . . . For the past three months they 
have persecuted me constantly and I am tempted to kill myself at 
every moment. I will not conceal that my brother committed suicide 
at the age of 60; I had never thought seriously of it, but on reach- 
ing my fifty-sixth year the memory recurred to me more vividly and 
now it never leaves me." But one of the most conclusive facts is re- 
ported by Falret. A young girl of 19 learned that "an uncle on the 
father's side had intentionally killed himself. The news affected her 
greatly: she had heard it said that insanity was hereditary, and the 
thought that some day she might lapse into this sad condition soon 
obsessed her. . . . When she was in this sad state her father killed 
himself. From that time she felt herself absolutely destined to violent 
death. She had no other thought than the impending end and re- 
peated incessantly: "I must perish like my father and my uncle! Thus 
is my blood tainted!' She made an attempt. Now the man whom she 
thought her father was not really so. To free her from her fears her 
mother confessed the truth and obtained an interview for her with 
her real father. The great physical resemblance caused the patient's 

22 Lisle, op. cit., p. 195. 

23 Brierre, op. cit., p. 57. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 99 

doubts to disappear instantly. She at once gave up all idea of suicide; 
her cheerfulness steadily returned and she recovered her health." ^^ 

Thus, on one hand, the cases most favorable to the heredity of sui- 
cide do not suffice to prove its existence, and on the other, they read- 
ily admit of a different explanation. But in addition, certain statistical 
facts, the importance of which psychologists seem to have missed, are 
inconsistent with the hypothesis of hereditary transmission properly 
so-called. They are as follows: 

1. If there is an organic-psychic determinism of hereditary origin 
which predestines people to suicide it must have approximately equal 
effect upon both sexes. For as suicide by itself is in no sense sexual, 
there is no reason why inheritance should afflict men rather than 
women. Now, actually, the suicides of females are known to be 
very few, only a slight fraction of those of males. This would not be 
so if heredity had the influence attributed to it. 

Shall we say that women inherit the tendency to suicide as much 
as men, but that it is usually offset by the social conditions peculiar 
to the female sex? What then shall one think of an heredity which 
remains latent in most cases, except that it is a vague potentiality of 
a wholly unproven reality? 

2. Speaking of the heredity of tuberculosis, M. Grancher writes as 
follows: "We may recognize heredity in such a case (one of pro- 
nounced tuberculosis in a three-month old child); we are fully justi- 
fied in doing so. . . . It is much less certain that tuberculosis dates 
from the intra-uterine period when it appears fifteen or twenty 
months after birth, when nothing could suggest the existence of 
latent tuberculosis. . . . What shall we say of tuberculosis appearing 
fifteen, twenty or thirty years after birth? Even supposing that a lesion 
existed at the beginning of life, would it not have lost its virulence 
after so long a time? Is it natural to accuse these fossil microbes 
rather than decidedly living bacilli of all the evil ... to which the 
person is exposed in the course of his life?" ^^ In fact, lacking the 
peremptory proof of being shown the germ in the foetus or the new- 
born child, the right to declare an affection hereditary at least re- 
quires proof that it often occurs among young children. This is why 

2* Luys, op. cit., p. 201. 

^^Dictionnaire encyclopédique des sciences méd., art. Phtisie, vol. LXXVI, p. 542. 



100 suicroE 

heredity has been called the basic cause of the special madness ap- 
pearing in earliest infancy and known for this reason as hereditary 
insanity. Koch has even shown that where insanity is influenced by 
heredity, though not completely its result, it has a much greater tend- 
ency to precocity than where it has no known antecedents.^® 

Characteristics are cited, to be sure, which are considered hereditary 
and which, nevertheless, appear only at a more or less advanced age: 
the beard, horns of animals, etc. But this delay is explicable under the 
hypothesis of heredity only if they depend on an organic state itself 
capable of development only through the evolution of the individual; 
for example, heredity can evidently produce no demonstrable effects 
relating to the sexual functions until puberty. But if the transmitted 
characteristic is possible at any age, it should appear at once. Thus, 
the longer it takes in appearing, the more clearly must heredity be 
considered only a weak stimulus to its existence. It is not clear why 
the tendency to suicide should share one phase of organic develop- 
ment rather than another. If it constitutes a definite mechanism, 
capable of being transmitted fully organized, it should become active 
during the very first years. 

But the opposite actually takes place. Suicide is extremely rare 
among children. From 1861-75 according to Legoyt, there were in 
France per million children under 16 years of age 4.3 suicides by 
boys, 1.8 suicides by girls. According to Morselli, the figures are 
lower in Italy: they are not above 1.25 for the former and 0.33 for 
the latter sex (period from 1866-75), ^^^ the proportion is essen- 
tially the same in all countries. The earliest suicides are committed at 
five years and are wholly exceptional. But no proof exists that these 
extraordinary facts must be attributed to heredity. It must be re- 
membered that the child too is influenced by social causes which may 
drive him to suicide. Even in this case their influence appears in the 
variations of child-suicide according to social environment. They are 
most numerous in large cities.^'^ Nowhere else does social life com- 
mence so early for the child, as is shown by the precocity of the little 
city-dweller. Introduced earlier and more completely than others to 
the current of civilization, he undergoes its effects more completely 

26 op. cit., pp. 170-172. 

27 See Morselli, p. 329 S. 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 



lOI 



and earlier. This also causes the number of child-suicides to grow 
with pitiful regularity in civilized lands. ^® 

But in addition, not only is suicide very rare during childhood but 
it reaches its height only in old age, and during the interval grows 
steadily from age to age. 

TABLE IX '^ — Suicides at Different Ages (per million of each 
age) 





Fronce 


Prussia 


Sa 


xony 


Italy 


Denmark 




(1835-44) 


(1873-75) 


(1847-58) 


(1872-76) 


(1845-56) 




















Men 

& 




















Women 




Men 


Women 


Men 


Women 


Men 


Women 


Men 


Women 


Combined 


Below 




















16 years 


2.2 


1.2 


10.5 


3.2 


9.6 


2.4 


3.2 


1.0 


113 


16 to 20 


56.5 


31.7 


122.0 


50.3 


210 


85 


32.3 


12.2 


272 


20 to 30 


130.5 


44.5 


231.1 


60.8 


396 


108 


77.0 


18.9 


307 


30 to 40 


155.6 


44.0 


235.1 


55.6 






72.3 


19.6 


426 


40 to 50 


204.7 


64.7 


347.0 


61.6 


551 


126 


102.3 


26.0 


576 


50 to 60 


217.9 


74.8 






906 


207 


140.0 


32.0 


702 


60 to 70 


274.2 


83.7 


529.0 


113.9 


147.8 


34.5 




70 to 80 


317.3 


91.8 


917 


297 


124.3 


29.1 


785 


Above 


345.1 


81.4 






103.8 


33.8 


642 



The elements of this table are token from Morselli. 



With some shades of difference these relations are the same in all 
countries. Sweden is the only society in which the maximum comes 
between 40 and 50 years. Everywhere else, it occurs only in the last 
or next to the last period of life and, everywhere alike, with very 
slight exceptions due perhaps to errors of tabulation,^^ the increase 
to this extreme limit is continuous. The decrease observable beyond 
80 years is not absolutely general and in any case is very slight. The 
contingent of this age is somewhat below that of the septuagenarians, 
but is above the others or, at least, most of them. How therefore can 
one attribute to heredity a tendency appearing only in the adult and 
which, from that period pn, continues to increase with the advance of 
age? How consider an afiSiction congenital which, non-existent or very 

28 See Legoyt, p. 158 ff. Paris, Felix Alcan. 

29 For men only one case, that of Italy, is known to us where a stationary phase 
occurs between 30 and 40 years. For women there is a moment of pause at the same 
age, which is general and must therefore be real. It marks a stage in female life. As 
it is peculiar to the unmarried, it probably corresponds to the intermediate period 
when disappointments and frustrations caused by celibacy begin to be less felt, and 
when the moral isolation felt by the unmarried woman when alone in the world at 
a more advanced age does not yet produce all its effects. 



102 SUICIDE 

weak during childhood, develops constantly and reaches its maximum 
intensity only among the aged? 

The law of homochronous heredity cannot be invoked for the 
species. It practically states that under certain circumstances the in- 
herited characteristic appears among the descendants at approximately 
the same age as among the parents. This is not true of suicide, which, 
beyond lo or 15 years, is common to all ages. Its character is not to 
appear at a definite moment in life but to progress steadily from age 
to age. This constant progression shows that its cause itself develops 
as a man grows older. Heredity does not fulfill this condition; for by 
definition heredity is what it is and what it may be immediately on 
full fecundation. Does the suicidal tendency then exist latently from 
birth, but appear only under the influence of other forces which 
emerge late and develop progressively? This would indeed reduce 
hereditary influence at most to a very general, vague predisposition; 
for, if it requires the aid of another factor so much that its action 
is felt only with and in proportion to the occurrence of this factor, 
the latter must be regarded as the true cause. 

In short, the variation of suicide with age shows that no organic- 
psychic state can possibly be its determining cause. For everything or- 
ganic, being subject to the vital rhythm, successively experiences 
phases of growth, stoppage and, finally, regression. No biological or 
psychological characteristic progresses indefinitely; all, having reached 
a moment of climax, become decadent. Suicide, on the contrary, 
achieves its culminating point only at the final limits of human ex- 
istence. Even the decrease often observed at about 80 years of age is 
not only slight and not absolutely general, but only relative, since 
nonagenarians commit suicide as much or more than sexagenarians 
and, especially, more than men in full maturity. Does not this prove 
that the cause of the variations of suicide cannot be a congenital and 
invariable impulse, but the progressive action of social life? Just 
as suicide appears more or less early depending on the age at which 
men enter into society, it grows to the extent that they are more com- 
pletely involved in it. 

We are thus referred back to the conclusion of the preceding chap- 
ter. Doubtless, suicide is impossible if the individual's constitution 
is opposed to it. But 'the individual state most favorable to it is not a 



SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES IO3 

definite and automatic tendenq^ (except in the case of the insane), 
but a general, vague aptitude, which may assume various forms ac- 
cording to circumstances, permitting but not necessarily implying 
suicide and therefore giving no explanation for it. 



CHAPTER 3 SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS 



UT if individual predispositions are not by themselves the 
determining causes of suicide, perhaps they are more active in com- 
bination with certain cosmic factors. Just as the material environment 
at times causes the appearance of diseases which, without it, would 
remain dormant, it might be capable of activating the general and 
merely potential natural apitudes of certain persons for suicide. In 
that case, the suicide-rate need not be regarded as a social phenom- 
enon; due to the cooperation between certain physical causes and an 
organic-psychic state, it would spring wholly or chiefly from abnormal 
psychology. It might, to be sure, be hard to explain how, in such 
cases, suicide can be so intimately typical in each social group; for the 
cosmic environment does not greatly differ from country to country. 
One important fact, however, would have been seized: that at least 
some of the variations connected with this phenomenon might be 
accounted for without reference to social causes. 

Among such factors an influence on suicide has been attributed to 
only two : climate and seasonal temperature. 

I 

Suicides are distributed as follows on the map of Europe, accord- 
ing to the varying degrees of latitude: 

^ Bibliography. — Lombroso, Pensiero e Meteore; Ferri, Variations thermométriques 
et criminalité. In Archives d'Anth, criminelle, 1887; Corre, Le délit et le suicide à 
Brest. In Arch. d'Anth. crim., 1890, p. 109 ff., 259 fF.; by the same. Crime et sui- 
cide, pp. 605-639; Morselli, pp. 103-157. 

104 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS 105 

36th-43rd degree of latitude 21.1 suicides per million inhabitants 

43rd-5oth degree of latitude 93.3 suicides per million inhabitants 

50th-55th degree of latitude 172.5 suicides per million inhabitants 

Beyond 55th degree of latitude 88.1 suicides per million inhabitants 

Suicide is therefore at a minimum in the South and North of 
Europe; it is most developed in the Center. More exactly, Morselli 
has stated that the space between the 47th and 57th degrees of lati- 
tude, on the one hand, and the 20th and 40th of longitude on the 
other, was the area most favorable to suicide. This zone coincides ap- 
proximately with the most temperate region of Europe. Is this coin- 
cidence to be regarded as an effect of climatic influences? 

Morselli advanced this thesis, though somewhat hesitantly. Indeed, 
the relation is not readily discernible between temperate climate and 
the tendency to suicide; to require such an hypothesis the facts must 
be in unusual agreement. Now, far from there being a relation be- 
tween suicide and a given climate, we know suicide to have flourished 
in all climates. Italy is today relatively exempt; but it was very fre- 
quent there at the time of the Empire when Rome was the capital 
of civilized Europe. It has also been highly developed at certain 
epochs under the burning sun of India.^ 

The very shape of this zone shows that climate is not the cause of 
the numerous suicides committed there. The area formed by it on the 
map is not a single, fairly equal and homogeneous strip, including all 
the countries having the same climate, but two distinct areas: one 
having Ile-de-France and neighboring departments as a center, the 
other Saxony and Prussia. They therefore coincide with the two 
principal centers of European civilization, not with a clearly defined 
climatic region. We must therefore seek the cause of the unequal 
inclination of peoples for suicide, not in the mysterious effects of 
climate but in the nature of this civilization, in the manner of its 
distribution among the different countries. 

Another fact, already mentioned by Guerry, and confirmed through 
new observations by Morselli, which is fairly general though not with- 
out exceptions, may be similarly explained. In the countries outside 
the central zone, their regions closest to it, whether North or South, 
are those most stricken with suicide. Thus, it is most developed in 

2 See below, Bk. II, Chap. 4. 



io6 suicroE 

Italy in the North, while in England and Belgium it is more so in the 
South. But there is no reason to ascribe these facts to the proximity 
to the temperate climate. Is it not more probable that the ideas and 
sentiments, in short, the social currents so strongly influencing the 
inhabitants of Northern France and of Northern Germany to suicide, 
reappear in the neighboring countries of a somewhat similar way of 
life, but with less intensity? Another fact shows the great influence 
of social causes upon this distribution of suicide. Until 1870 the 
northern provinces of Italy showed most suicides, then the center and 
thirdly the south. But the difference between North and Center has 
gradually diminished and their respective ranks have been finally 
reversed (See Table X). Yet the climate of the different regions has 
remained the same. The change consists in the movement of the Ital- 
ian capital to the center of the country as a result of the conquest of 
Rome in 1870. Scientific, artistic and economic activity shifted in the 
same manner. Suicides followed along. 

One need dwell no further on an hypothesis proved by nothing 
and disproved by so many facts. 

TABLE X — Regional Distribution of Suicide in Italy 

Suicides per Million Rafio of Each Region Expressed in Terms 

Inhabitants of the North Represented by 100 

1866-67 1864-76 1884-86 1866-67 1364-76 1884-86 

63 



North 


33.8 


43.6 


Center 


25.6 


40.8 


South 


8.3 


16.5 



100 


100 


100 


75 


93 


139 


24 


37 


33 



II 

The influence of seasonal temperature seems better demonstrated. 
The facts are invariable though they may be variously interpreted. 

If without reference to them one were to try to foretell logically 
what season should be most favorable to suicide, one might easily 
assume the season when the sky is darkest, and the temperature low- 
est or most humid. Does not the desolate appearance of nature at 
such times tend to incline men to revery, awaken unhappy passions, 
provoke melancholy? Moreover, this is the time when life is most 
difficult, because a more abundant sustenance is necessary to replace 
the lack of natural warmth, and because this is harder to obtain. For 
this very reason Montesquieu considered cold, foggy countries most 
favorable to the development of suicide, and this opinion was long 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS IO7 

held. Applying it to the seasons, one would expect the height of sui- 
cide to occur in autumn. Although Esquirol had already expressed 
doubts as to the exactness of this theory, Falret still accepted it in 
principle.^ Today statistics have definitely refuted it. Neither in win- 
ter nor in autumn does suicide reach its maximum, but during the 
fine season when nature is most smiling and the temperature mildest. 
Man prefers to abandon life when it is least difficult. If the year is 
divided into two halves representing respectively the six warmest 
months (from March to August inclusive) and the six coldest, the 
former always include more suicides. Noi one country is an exception 
to this law. The proportion is everywhere almost exactly the same. 
Of 1,000 annual suicides from 590 to 600 are committed during the 
fine season and only 400 during the remainder of the year. 

The relation of suicide to the variations of temperature may be de- 
termined even more precisely. 

If it is agreed to call winter the three months from December to 
February inclusive, spring the three months from March to May, 
summer, from June to August and autumn the three following 
months, and if these four seasons are classified according to the im- 
portance of their suicide-mortality, summer is found to have the first 
place almost everywhere. Morselli was able from this point of view 
to compare 34 different periods among 18 European states, and has 
established that in 30 cases, or 88 per cent, the maximum of suicides 
occurs during the summer season, in only three cases in spring, and in 
only one case in autumn. This last irregularity, observed only in the 
Grand-Duchy of Baden and at a single moment of its history, is 
valueless, for it results from a calculation bearing on too brief a pe- 
riod; besides, it never recurred. The other three exceptions are 
scarcely more significant. They occur in Holland, Ireland and Sweden. 
For the first two countries the available figures which were the base 
for the seasonal averages are too uncertain for anything positive to be 
concluded; there are only 387 cases for Holland and 755 for Ireland. 
In general, the statistics for these two peoples are not wholly authori- 
tative. For Sweden, finally, the fact has been noted only for the pe- 
riod 1835-51. If we consider only the states concerning which there 
are authentic figures, the law may be held to be absolute and uni- 
versal. 

^ De I'hypochondrie, etc., p. 28. 



I08 SUICIDE 

The period of the minimum is no less regular: 30 times out of 34, 
or 88 per cent it occurs in winter; the other four times in autumn. 
The four countries departing from the rule are Ireland and Holland 
(as in the case above), the canton of Berne, and Norway. We know 
the import of the first two anomalies; the third has still less value, 
having been observed only from among 97 suicides in all. In short, 
26 out of 34 times, or 76 per cent, the seasons come in the following 
order: summer, spring, autumn, winter. This relation is true without 
exception for Denmark, Belgium, France, Prussia, Saxony, Bavaria, 
Wurttemberg, Austria, Switzerland, Italy and Spain. 

Not only are the seasons identically ranked, but the proportional 
share of each barely differs from country to country. To emphasize 
this uniformity, we have shown in Table XI the share of each season 
in the principal European states in relation to the annual total con- 
sidered as 1,000. The same series of numbers is seen to recur almost 
identically in each column. 

From these incontestable facts, Ferri and Morselli have concluded 
that temperature had a direct influence on the tendency to suicide; 
that heat by its mechanical action on the cerebral functions stimulated 
a person to suicide. Ferri even tried to explain how it produced this 

TABLE XI — Proportional Shore of Each Season in the Annual 
Total of the Suicides of Each Country 

Denmark Belgium France Saxony Bavaria Austria Prussia 

(1858-65) (1841-49) (1835-43) (1847-58) (1858-65) (1858-59) (1869-72) 



Summer 


312 


301 


306 


307 


308 


315 


290 


Spring 


284 


275 


283 


281 


282 


281 


284 


Autumn 


227 


229 


210 


217 


218 


219 


227 


Winter 


177 


195 


201 


195 


192 


185 


199 



1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 

effect. On the one hand, he says, heat increases the excitability of 
the nervous system; on the other, since in the warm season the or- 
ganism does not need to consume as much material to maintain its 
own temperature at the desired degree, there results an accumulation 
of available energy naturally tending to seek employment. During 
summer, for this twofold reason, there is a surplus of activity, an 
abundance of life demanding expenditure and able to find manifesta- 
tion only in violent action. Suicide is one of these manifestations, 
homicide another, and thus voluntary deaths increase during this sea- 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS IO9 

son simultaneously with sanguinary crime. Moreover, insanity in all 
its forms is supposed to develop at this period; thus, he says, suicide 
naturally develops in the same way, as a result of its relation to in- 
sanity. 

This theory, of tempting simplicity, at first seems in agreement 
with the facts. It even seems that it is merely their direct expression. 
Actually, it is a long way from accounting for them. 

Ill 

First, this theory implies a most debatable conception of suicide. It 
assumes that its constant psychological antecedent is a state of over- 
excitement, that it consists in a violent act and is only possible by a 
great exertion of energy. On the contrary, it very often results from 
extreme depression. Granted that excited or exasperated suicide oc- 
curs, suicide from unhappiness is as frequent; we shall have occasion 
to prove this. But heat cannot possibly act in the same way on both; 
if it stimulates the former, it must make the latter less frequent. Its 
possibly aggravating influence on certain persons would be offset and 
discounted by its moderating influence on others; hence it could not 
appear through the data of statistics, especially in any perceptible 
fashion. The seasonal variations shown by the statistics must there- 
fore have another cause. To accept the explanation that sees in them 
a mere consequence of similar, simultaneous variations of insanity, 
a more direct and closer connection between suicide and insanity 
would have to be conceded than exists. Besides, it is not even proved 
that the seasons affect the two phenomena identically,^ and even if 
this parallelism were certain, the question would still remain whether 
it is the seasonal changes of temperature which cause the curve of 

* The distribution of the cases of insanity among the seasons can be estimated 
only by the number of admissions to the asylums. Such a standard is very inade- 
quate; for families intern invalids not immediately but some time after the outbreak 
of the disease. Also such data as we have are a long way from showing perfect agree- 
ment between the seasonal variations of insanity and those of suicide. According to 
figures of Cazauvieilh, the share of each season in 1,000 annual admissions to 
Charenton is as follows: Winter, 222; Spring, 283; Summer, 261; Autumn, 231. 
The same calculation for the total of insane admitted to institutions of the Seine 
gives analogous results: Winter, 234; Spring, 266; Summer, 249; Autumn, 248. It 
appears, first, that the maximum occurs in Spring and not in Summer; moreover, the 
fact must be kept in mind that for the reasons indicated the real maximum has to be 
earlier; and secondly that the seasonal différences are very slight. They are much 
more marked for suicides. 



no suicroE 

insanity to rise and fall. Causes of a very different sort may possibly 
produce or contribute to this result. 

But, however this influence attributed to heat is explained, let us 
examine its reality. 

Certain observations do seem to show that too great heat excites 
man to kill himself. During the Egyptian campaign, the number of 
suicides in the French army seems to have increased and this growth 
was attributed to the rise in temperature. In the tropics men are often 
seen to throw themselves abruptly into the ocean under the direct 
rays of the sun. Dr. Dietrich relates that in a trip around the world 
from 1844-47 by Count Charles de Gortz he noticed an irresistible 
impulse among the sailors, called by him the horrors, which he de- 
scribes as follows: "The affliction usually appears in Winter when the 
sailors, landing after a long voyage, group themselves incautiously 
about a hot stove and, as is customary, indulge in all sorts of excesses. 
On returning on board the symptoms of the terrible horrors appear. 
Those stricken by it are irresistibly impelled to throw themselves into 
the water, whether overcome by dizziness in the midst of work at the 
mast-tops, or during sleep, from which they start up violently with 
frightful cries." The sirocco, likewise, which produces a stifling heat, 
has been observed to have a similar effect on suicide.*^ 

But this effect is not peculiar to heat; violent cold has the same 
result. Thus, during the retreat from Moscow our armies are said to 
have been stricken by numerous suicides. Such facts therefore cannot 
be used to explain the usually greater number of voluntary deaths in 
Summer than in Autumn and in Autumn than in Winter; for all that 
can be drawn from them is that extreme temperatures of whatever 
sort favor the development of suicide. Clearly, moreover, all sorts of 
excesses, abrupt and violent changes in physical environment, disturb 
the organism, derange the normal play of functions and thus cause 
species of deliria during which the idea of suicide may arise and be 
put into effect, if not checked. But these unusual, abnormal disturb- 
ances bear no likeness to the gradual changes of temperature in the 
course of every year. The question then is unsolved. Its solution must 
be sought by the analysis of statistical data. 

If temperature were the basic cause of the variations noted, sui- 
cide would vary regularly with it. This is not true. Far more suicides 

5 We take these facts from Brierre de Boismont, op. cit., pp. 60-62. 



SUICroE AND COSMIC FACTORS III 

occur in Spring than in Autumn, although it is a little colder in 
Spring: 

France Italy 

Proportion of Proportion of 

1,000 Annual Average Tern- 1,000 Annual Average Tem- 

Suicides in perature of Suicides in perature of 

Each Season the Seasons* Each Season the Seasons* 

Spring 284 50.36 degrees 297 55.22 degrees 

Autumn 227 51 .98 degrees 196 55.58 degrees 

* Fahrenheit. Durkheim gives the figures in centigrade. — Ed. 

Thus, while the thermometer is rising 1.62 F. degrees in France 
and .36 F. degrees in Italy, the number of suicides decreases by 21 
per cent in the former country and 35 per cent in the latter. Likewise, 
in Italy the winter temperature is much lower than that of Autumn 
(36.14 F. degrees instead of 55.58 F.) and yet suicide-mortality is 
about the same in both seasons (196 cases as against 194). Every- 
where the difference between Spring and Summer is very slight for 
suicides but very high for temperature. In France the difference is 
78 per cent for the one and only 8 per cent for the other; in Prussia 
it is 121 per cent and 4 per cent. 

This independence as regards temperature is still more noticeable 
if the monthly, not seasonal, variations of suicide are observed. In 
fact, these monthly variations obey the following law, found in all 
European countries: Beginning with January inclusive, the incidence 
of suicide increases regularly from month to month until about June 
and regularly decreases from that time to the end of the year. Usually, 
in 62 per cent of the cases, the maximum occurs in June, 25 per cent 
in May and 1 2 per cent in July. The minimum has occurred in 60 per 
cent of the cases in December, 22 per cent in January, 15 per cent in 
November and 3 per cent in October. The greatest irregularities, 
moreover, usually appear in series too small to be very significant. 
Wherever, as in France, the development of suicide can be followed 
over a long extent of time, it is seen to increase till June, then de- 
crease until January, and the distance between the extremes averages 
not less than from 90 to 100 per cent. Suicide therefore does not 
reach its height in the hottest months which are August or July; on 
the contrary, beginning with August it starts to diminish perceptibly. 
In most cases, likewise, it reaches its lowest point not in January, the 
coldest month, but in December. Table XII (see p. 112) shows for 



112 suicroE 

each month that the agreement between variations of the thermometer 
and of suicide are quite irregular and intermittent. 

In one and the same country, months with an essentially similar 
temperature produce a very different proportion of suicides (for in- 
stance, May and September, April and October in France, June and 
September in Italy, etc.) . The reverse is no less common; January and 
October, February and August in France have a like number of sui- 
cides in spite of great differences in temperature, and the same 
holds true for April and July in Italy and Prussia. Moreover, the pro- 
portional figures are almost exactly the same for each month in these 
different countries, although the temperature of the respective months 
varies greatly from one to another country. Thus May, whose tem- 
perature is 50.84 F. degrees in Prussia, 57.56 F. in France and 
64.4 F. in Italy, has 104 suicides in the first, 105 in the second 









TABLE 


XII • 




















Prussia 














(187&-78, 


80-82, 




France (1866-70) 


Ifaly (1883-88) 


85-89) 






No. of 






No. of 




No. of 






Suicides 






Suicides 




Suicides 






Monthly 






Monthly 


Average 


Monthly 




Average 


per 1,000 


Average Temp. 


per 1,000 Temperature 


per 1,000 




Temperature 


Annual 


Rome 


Naples 


Annual 


(1848-77) 


Annuel 


January 


36.12 


68 


44.24 


47.12 


69 


32.50 


61 


February 


39.20 


80 


46.76 


48.74 


80 


33.31 


67 


March 


43.52 


86 


50.72 


51.26 


81 


37.93 


78 


April 


50.18 


102 


56.30 


57.20 


98 


44.22 


99 


May 


57.56 


105 


64.40 


63.61 


103 


50.84 


104 


June 


62.96 


107 


71.42 


70.70 


105 


57.29 


105 


July 


66.12 


100 


76.82 


75.74 


102 


59.39 


99 


August 


65.30 


82 


75.74 


75.56 


93 


58.48 


90 


September 


60.26 


74 


70.16 


71.70 


75 


52.88 


83 


October 


52.34 


70 


61.34 


62.68 


65 


46.02 


78 


November 


43.70 


66 


51.62 


53.96 


63 


37.27 


70 


December 


38.66 


61 


46.22 


49.10 


61 


33.08 


61 



• All the months in this table have been reduced to 30 days. The figures relative to tem- 
perature are taken for France from l'Annuaire du bureau des longitudes, and for Italy from 
Annali dell' Ufficio centrale de Meteorologia. [Temperatures are here given in Fahrenheit; 
Durkheim's original figures are in Centigrade. — Ed.] 

and 103 in the third. ^ The same holds true for almost all the other 
months. The case of December is especially significant. Its share in 
the annual total of suicides is exactly the same for the three societies 
compared (6i per thousand); and yet at this time of year the ther- 
mometer registers on the average 46.22 F. degrees at Rome, 49.10 F. 
at Naples, while in Prussia it never rises above 33.20 F. Not only 

^ This stability of the proportional figures cannot be too much emphasized and we 
shall revert to its significance below (Bk. Ill, Chap. I.) 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS II3 

are the monthly temperatures not the same but they vary according to 
different laws in the different countries; thus, in France, the ther- 
mometer rises more from January to April than from April to June, 
while the reverse holds true for Italy. The thermometric variations 
and those of suicide are without any relation to one another. 

Moreover, if the temperature had the supposed influence, it should 
be felt equally in the geographic distribution of suicides. The hottest 
countries should be those most stricken. The deduction is so evident 
that the Italian school itself refers to it when undertaking to show 
that the homicidal tendency also increases with the heat. Lombroso 
and Ferri have tried to show that, as murders are more frequent in 
Summer than in Winter, they are also more numerous in the South 
than in the North. Unfortunately, in the case of suicide the evidence 
refutes the Italian criminologists: for it is least developed in the 
southern countries of Europe. Italy has only one fifth as much as 
France; Spain and Portugal are almost immune. On the French sui- 
cide map, the only white area of any extent consists of the depart- 
ments south of the Loire. Of course, we do not mean that this situa- 
tion is really an effect of temperature; but whatever its cause, it is a 
fact inconsistent with the theory that heat is a stimulant to suicide.*^ 

The perception of these difficulties and contradictions made Lom- 
broso and Ferri slightly modify the school's doctrine, without relin- 
quishing it in principle. According to Lombroso, whose opinion Mor- 
selli follows, it is not so much the intensity of heat which provokes 
suicide as the incidence of the first warm weather, the contrast be- 
tween the departing cold and the beginning of the hot season. The 
latter is supposed to shock the organism as yet unaccustomed to this 
new temperature. But a glance at Table XII is enough to show that 
this explanation is devoid of all foundation. If it were correct, the 
curve representing the monthly variations of suicide should remain 
horizontal during Autumn and Winter, then rise abruptly precisely 
at the appearance of the first warm weather, the cause of all the 

^ It is true that, according to these authors, suicide is only a variety of homicide. 
The absence of suicides in southern countries would thus be merely apparent, being 
oflFset by an excess of homicides. We shall see later what this fusion amounts to. 
But is it not already clear that this argument turns against its authors? If the ex- 
cess of homicides observed in hot countries offsets the lack of suicides, why does 
not the same offset occur during the warm season as well? Why is the latter fertile 
both in self-murder and in the murder of others? 



114 suicros 

trouble, and fall as suddenly, as soon as the organism has had time 
to acclimatize itself. On the contrary, its course is perfectly regular; 
while the rise lasts it is practically the same from one month to 
another. It rises from December to January, from January to Febru- 
ary, from February to March, that is, throughout the months when 
the first hot weather is yet distant, and descends steadily from Sep- 
tember to December, when the warm weather has so long since dis- 
appeared that this decrease cannot be attributed to its disappearance. 
Besides, when does the warm weather occur? It is generally assumed 
to begin in April. Actually, the thermometer rises from March to 
April from 33.52 F, degrees to 50,18 F,; the increase is thus 57 per 
cent, while it is only 40 per cent from April to May, 21 per cent 
from May to June. An unusual increase of suicides should there- 
fore be observed in April. Actually, the increase at that time is no 
higher than that found from January to February (18 per cent). In 
short, as this increase not only persists but rises, though more slowly, 
until June and even July, it seems very difficult to ascribe it to the 
action of Spring, unless this season is prolonged to the end of Sum- 
mer, exclusive only of the month of August. 

Besides, if the first hot weather were so deleterious, the first cold 
weather should have the same effect. It also suddenly attacks the un- 
prepared organism and disturbs vital functions until readaptation is 
accomplished. But no rise occurs in Autumn even faintly resembling 
that observed in Spring, It is thus not clear how Morselli could add, 
after recognizing that according to his theory the change from hot 
to cold should have the same effect as the reverse change: "This ac- 
tion of the first cold weather is verifiable in our statistical tables, or 
even better in the second rise of all our curves in Autumn, in the 
months of October and November, that is, when the change from 
the hot to the cold season is most sharply felt by the human organism 
and especially by the nervous system," ^ A mere reference to Table 
XII will show that this assertion is wholly contrary to the facts. From 
Morselli' s own figures the number of suicides in almost every country 
is shown not to increase from October to November, but rather to 
diminish. Exceptions exist only for Denmark, Ireland and for one 
period in Austria (1851-54), and the increase is negligible in all 

8 op. cit., p. 148. 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS 



115 



three cases.^ In Denmark the numbers rise from 68 per thousand to 
71, in Ireland from 62 to 66, in Austria from 65 to 68. There are 
likewise in October increases in only eight of thirty-one cases ob- 
served, namely during one period in Norway, one in Sweden, one in 
Saxony, one in Bavavia, Austria, the Duchy of Baden, and two in 
Wurttemberg. In all others there is a decrease or no change. To sum- 
marize, in twenty-one cases out of thirty-one, or 67 per cent, there is 
a regular diminution from September to December. 

The perfect continuity of the curve, both in its progressive and its 
regressive phases, thus proves that the monthly variations of suicide 
cannot result from a brief organic crisis, occurring once or twice 
annually as a sudden, temporary interruption of equilibrium. They 
can depend only on causes themselves varying with the same con- 
tinuity. 

IV 

It is now possible to perceive the nature of these causes. 
If the proportional share of each month in the total of annual sui- 
cides is compared with the average length of the day at the same time 

TABLE XIII — Comparison of the Monthly Variations of Sui- 
cides with the Average Length of Day in France 













No. 0/ Suicides 












Increase 


per Monfh 


Increase 




L< 


ingih 




and 


in 1,000 


and 




of 


Day 


* 


Diminufion 


Annual Suicides 


Diminufion 




Hr. 




Min. 


Increase 




Increase 


January 


9 




19 




68 




February 


10 




56 


From Jan. to 


80 


From Jon. to 


March 


12 




47 


April, 55% 


86 


April, 50% 


April 


14 




29 




102 




May 


15 




48 


From April to 


105 


From April 


June 


16 




3 


June, 10% 

D;m/nuf/on 


107 


to June, 5% 
Diminuiion 


July 


15 




4 


From June to 


100 


From June to 


August 


13 




25 


Aug., 17% 


82 


Aug., 24% 


September 


11 




39 


From Aug. to 


74 


From Aug. to 


October 


9 




51 


Oct., 27% 


70 


Oct., 27% 


November 


8 




31 


From Oct. to 


66 


From Oct. to 


December 


8 




11 


Dec, 17% 


61 


Dec, 13% 



* The indicated length is that of the last day of the month. 



^ We omit the figures for Switzerland. They are calculated for one year only 
(1876) and consequently nothing can be concluded from them. Moreover, the rise 
from October to November is very slight. Suicides increase from 83 per thousand 
to 90. 



ii6 suicroB 

of the year, the two numerical series thus obtained vary in exactly 
the same way. (See Table XIII). 

The parallelism is perfect. The maximum occurs at the same mo- 
ment in each case and the minimum likewise; during the interval, the 
two orders of facts progress pari passu. When the days grow longer 
quickly, suicides increase greatly ( January to April ) ; when the in- 
crease of the former slows down, so does that of the latter (April 
to June) . The same correspondence reappears during the time of de- 
crease. Even the different months when days are of approximately the 
same length have approximately the same number of suicides (July 
and May, August and April). 

So regular and precise a correspondence cannot be accidental. 
There must be some relation between the progress of the day and 
that of suicide. This hypothesis not only follows directly from Table 
XIII, it explains a fact which we have previously noted. We have 
seen that in the chief European societies suicides are distributed in a 
manner rigorously similar among the various portions of the year, 
seasons or months. ^^ The theories of Ferri and Lombroso could afford 
no explanation of this curious uniformity, for the temperature varies 
greatly in the different European countries and evolves differently. 
On the contrary, the length of the day is appreciably the same for all 
European countries we have compared. 

But what definitely proves the reality of this relation is the fact 
that in every season the majority of suicides occurs during the day- 
time. Brierre de Boismont was able to examine the records of 4,595 
suicides committed in Paris from 1834 to 1843. Out of the 3,518 
cases the moment of which could be determined, 2,094 had been 
committed by day, 766 during the evening and 658 at night. Those 
of the daytime and evening therefore are four-fifths of the sum total, 
and the former alone, three-fifths. 

Prussian statistics have assembled more voluminous data on this 
subject. They refer to 11,822 cases occurring in the years 1869-72. 
They only confirm the conclusions of Brierre de Boismont. As the 

1** This uniformity relieves us of making Table XIII more involved. It is not nec- 
essary to compare the monthly variations of the day and those of suicide in other 
countries than France, since both are everywhere appreciably the same, unless one 
compares countries of very different latitude. 





1871 


Early morning * 


35.9, 


Later morning 


158.3 


Middle of day 


73.1 


Afternoon 


143.6 


Evening 


53.5 


Night 


212.6 


Time unknown 


322 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS II7 

relations are appreciably the same each year, we will give, for brevity's 
sake, only those of 1871 and 1872: 

TABLE XIV — Number of Suicides at Each Time of Day Among 
1,000 Daily Suicides 

1872 

35.9 
159.71 
375 71.5 391.9 

160.7 J 

61.0 
219.3 
291.9 

1,000 1,000 

• This term means the time of day immediately succeeding sunrise. 

The preponderance of suicides by day is obvious. Therefore, if day- 
time is richer in suicides than night, the suicides naturally grow more 
numerous as the day lengthens. 

But what causes this diurnal influence? 

To explain it one could certainly not refer to the action of the sun 
and the temperature. Actually, suicides committed in the middle of 
the day, that is, at the moment of greatest heat, are far fewer than 
those of the afternoon ^^ or later morning. It will even appear below 
that a considerable decrease occurs at full noon. This explanation be- 
ing discarded, we have but one other possible, namely, that day favors 
suicide because this is the time of most active existence, when human 
relations cross and recross, when social life is most intense. 

Whatever information is available as to how suicide is distributed 
among the different hours of the day or the different days of the week 
confirms this view. On the basis of 1,993 cases observed by Brierre 
de Boismont for Paris and 548 covering all of France assembled by 
Guerry, the following are the chief oscillations of suicide during the 
twenty- four hours: 

Paris France 

Hourly Number Hourly Number 

of Suicides of Suicidée 

From midnight to 6 55 From midnight to 6 30 

From 6 to 11 708 From 2 to 6 61 

From 11 to noon 81 From noon to 2 32 

From noon to 4 705 From 6 to noon 47 

From 4 to 8 81 From 6 to midnight 38 

From 8 to midnight 61 

11 The French text here reads "evening." But those committed in the evening are 
not more numerous than those committed in the middle of the day. A look at Table 
XrV makes it indubitable that Durkheim meant "afternoon." — Ed. 



ii8 suicroE 

There are dearly two climactic periods of suicide; those when 
existence is most active, morning and afternoon. Between the two 
periods is one of rest when general activity is briefly interrupted; sui- 
cide pauses momentarily. This calm occurs in Paris at about eleven 
and at about noon in the other departments of France, It is longer 
and more definite in the departments than in the capital through the 
simple fact that non-Parisians take their chief meal then; the pause of 
suicide is accordingly longer and more definite there. The data of 
Prussian statistics given above would confirm this view.^^ 

Moreover, Guerry, having determined for 6,587 cases the day of 
week on which they happened, constructed the scale reproduced in 
Table XV. This shows that suicide diminishes toward the end of the 
week beginning with Friday. Prejudices concerning Friday are known 
to retard public activity. On this day railroad travel is much less than 





TABLE 


XV 










Share in Per ' 


Cent of 


Proportional 


Share 


of Each Sex 




Eoch Day in 


1,000 




Per Cent 




Per Cent 




Weekly Suicides 




Men 




Women 


Monday 


15.20 






69 




31 


Tuesday 


15.71 






68 




32 


Wednesday 


14.90 






68 




32 


Thursday 


15.68 






67 




33 


Fridoy 


13.74 






67 




33 


Saturday 


11.19 






69 




31 


Sunday 


13.57 






64 




36 



on others. On this day of ill omen people hesitate to make contacts 
and undertake business. An initial slackness commences on Saturday 
afternoon; in certain districts idleness is widespread; the prospect of 
the next day also perhaps has a calming effect on the mind. Finally, 
on Sunday economic activity stops completely. If activities of another 
sort did not replace those that have ceased, and recreation areas fill as 
studios, ofiices and shops empty, the decrease of suicide might con- 
ceivably be yet more noticeable on Sunday. This, it will be noted, is 
the day when woman's relative share is greatest; then also she most 

12 Another proof that social life experiences a rhythm of rest and activity at the 
different times of day is the variations of accidents by hours. They are distributed 
as follows according to the Prussian Bureau of Statistics: 

From 6 to noon 1,011 accidents per average hour 
From noon to 2 686 accidents per average hour 
From 2 to 6 1.191 accidents per average hour 

From 6 to 7 979 accidents per average hour 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS II9 

frequently departs from indoors, her shelter during the rest of the 
week, and mingles somewhat with the life of others.^^ 

Thus everything proves that if daytime is the part of the twenty- 
four hours most favorable to suicide, it is because it is also the time 
when social life is at its height. Then we have a reason why the num- 
ber of suicides increases, the longer the sun remains above the hori- 
zon. The mere lengthening of the days seems to offer wider latitude 
to collective life. Its time of rest begins later and is sooner over. It 
has more space to operate in. Thus its accompanying effects must 
develop simultaneously and, since suicide is one of them, it must 
increase. 

But this is the first, not the only cause. If public activity is greater 
in Summer than in Spring and in Spring than in Autumn and 
Winter, this is not merely because its setting enlarges as the year 
progresses, but because this activity is directly aroused for other 
reasons. 

For the countryside. Winter is a time of rest approaching stagna- 
tion. All life seems to stop; human relations are fewer both because 
of atmospheric conditions and because they lose their incentive with 
the general slackening of activity. People seem really asleep. In 
Spring, however, everything begins to awake; activity is resumed, 
relations spring up, interchanges increase, whole popular migrations 
take place to meet the needs of agricultural labor. Now these special 
conditions of rural life must have a great influence on the monthly 
distribution of suicides, since more than half the total of voluntary 
deaths comes from the country; in France, from 1873 to 1878, the 
country accounted for 18,470 cases out of a total of 36,365, They 
therefore naturally occur more often as the inclement season becomes 
remote. They reach their maximum in June or July, when activity is 

13 It is noteworthy that this contrast between the first and second parts of the 
week recurs during the month. The following, according to Brierre de Boismont, 
op. cit., p. 424, is the distribution of 4,595 Parisian suicides: 

During the first ten days of the month 1,727 

During the next ten days of the month 1,488 

During the last ten days of the month 1,380 

The numerical inferiority of the last ten days is even greater than the figures 

show; for because of the 31st day it often includes 11 days instead of 10. The 

rhythm of social life seems to reproduce the calendar's divisions; there seems to be 

renewed activity whenever a new period is entered and a sort of slackening as it 

draws to an end. 



120 SUICIDE 

greatest in the country. In August when everything begins to settle 
down, suicides diminish. They do so rapidly only beginning with 
October and especially November; perhaps because several harvests 
do not occur until Autumn. 

The same reasons also affect the entire land, though to a lesser 
extent. City life itself is more active during the fine season. Com- 
munications being easier then, people travel more readily and inter- 
social relations increase. Below are the seasonal receipts of our great 
railroad lines, for express service only (for 1887) : ^^ 



Winter 


71.9 


million 


francs 


Spring 


86.7 


million 


francs 


Summer 


105.1 


million 


francs 


Autumn 


98.1 


million 


francs 



The inner life of every city exhibits the same phases. During this 
same year, 1887, the number of passengers travelling from one point 
in Paris to another regularly increased from January (655,791) to 
June (848,831 ) , then decreased as steadily to December (659,960) .^^ 

A final instance confirms this interpretation of the facts. If, for 
reasons just indicated, urban life must be more intense in Summer 
and in Spring than during the rest of the year, nevertheless the dif- 
ference between seasons should be less marked there than in the 
country. For trade and industry, art and science as well as fashion- 
able activities are less interrupted in Winter than agriculture. The 
occupations of city-dwellers may continue with approximate regu- 
larity throughout the year. The greater or lesser length of days 
especially should have little effect in great centers, because artificial 
lighting there restricts darkness more than elsewhere. If then the 
monthly and seasonal variations of suicide depend on the irregular 
intensity of collective life, they should be less noticeable in great 
cities than in the country as a whole. The facts strictly confirm this 

1* See the Bulletin du ministère des travaux publics. 

^5 Ibid. The following may be added to all the other facts showing the increase of 
social activity during the Summer; namely, that accidents are commoner during the 
fine season than at other times. Here is their distribution in Italy: 

1886 1887 1888 

Spring 1,370 2,582 2,457 

Summer 1,823 3,290 3,085 

Autumn 1,474 2,560 2,780 

Winter 1,190 2,748 3,032 

If from this point of view Winter sometimes numerically follows Summer, this is merely be- 
cause falls are commoner due to ice and because the cold itself produces special accidents. If 
we discount such accidents, the seasons assume the same order as for suicides. 



SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS 121 

conclusion. Table XVI (see below) shows that whereas in France, 
Prussia, Austria and Denmark there is a difference of 52, 45 and 
even of 68 per cent between the minimum and the maximum, at 
Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, etc., this averages from 20 to 25 per cent 
and even reaches 12 per cent (at Frankfurt). 

It is clear, moreover, that the maximum generally occurs in Spring 
in great cities, imlike the rest of society. Even where Spring is sur- 
passed by Summer (Paris and Frankfurt), the increase in the latter 
season is slight. This is because during the fine season a veritable 

TABLE XVI — Seasonal Variations of Suicide in Several Large 
Cities Compared with Those of the Whole 
Country 

PROPORTIONAL FIGURES FOR 1,000 ANNUAL SUICIDES 

Paris Berlin Hamburg Vienna Frank- Geneva France Prussia Austria 

furt 

(1838- 
(1882- 47) 

(1888- 85-87- (1887- (1871- (1867- (1852- (1835- (1869- (1858- 
92) 89-90) 91) 72) 75) 54) 43) 72) 59) 



Winter 


218 


231 


239 


234 


239 


232 


201 


199 


185 


Spring 


262 


287 


289 


302 


245 


288 


283 


284 


281 


Summer 


277 


248 


232 


211 


278 


253 


306 


290 


315 


Autumn 


241 


232 


258 


253 


238 


227 


210 


227 


219 



PROPORTIONAL FIGURES FOR EACH SEASON EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF 

THE WINTER FIGURE REDUCED TO 100 
Paris Berlin Hamburg Vienna Frank- Geneva France Prussia Austria 

furt 



Winter 


100 


100 


100 


100 


100 


100 


100 


100 


100 


Spring 


120 


124 


120 


129 


102 


124 


140 


142 


151 


Summer 


127 


107 


107 


90 


112 


109 


152 


145 


168 


Autumn 


100 


100.3 


103 


108 


99 


97 


104 


114 


118 



migration of the chief public personages takes place and public life 
accordingly shows a slight tendency to slow down.^^ 

To recapitulate: we first showed that the direct action of cosmic 
factors could not explain the monthly or seasonal variations of sui- 
cide. We now see the nature of its real causes, the direction in which 
they must be sought, and this positive result confirms the conclusions 
of our abstract analysis. If voluntary deaths increase from January to 

^^ It should also be noticed that the proportional figures of the different seasons 
are substantially the same in the great cities compared, though different from those 
of the countries to which these cities belong. Thus, the suicide-rate is found every- 
where stable in the same social environments. The suicidal tendency varies in like 
manner at different times of the year in Berlin, Vienna, Geneva, Paris, etc. One 
thus realizes in some measure the full extent of its reality. 



122 SUICIDE 

July, it is not because heat disturbs the organism but because social 
life is more intense. To be sure, this greater intensity derives from 
the greater ease of development of social life in the Summer than 
in the Winter, owing to the sun's position on the ecliptic, the state of 
the atmosphere, etc. But the physical environment does not stimulate 
it directly; above all, it has no effect on the progression of suicide. 
The latter depends on social conditions. 

Of course, we are yet uncertain how collective life can have this 
effect. But it already appears that if it contains the causes of the varia- 
tion of the suicide-rate, the latter must increase or decrease as social 
life becomes more or less active. To determine these causes more 
exactly will be the purpose of the following book. 



CHAPTER 4 IMITATION i 



' UT before searching for the social causes of suicide, a final psy- 
chological factor remains, the influence of which must be determined 
because of the great importance attributed to it with respect to the 
origin of social facts in general and of suicide in particular. This 
factor is imitation. 

That imitation is a purely psychological phenomenon appears 
clearly from its occurrence between- individuals connected by no social 
bond. A man may imitate another with no link of either one with the 
other or with a common group on which both depend, and the imi- 
tative function when exercised has in itself no power to form a bond 
between them, A cough, a dance-motion, a homicidal impulse may 
be transferred from one person to another even though there is only 
chance and temporary contact between them. They need have no 
intellectual or moral community between them nor exchange services 
nor even speak the same language, nor are they any more related 
after the transfer than before. In short, our method of imitating 
human beings is the same method we use in reproducing natural 
sounds, the shapes of things, the movements of non-human beings. 
Since the latter group of cases contains no social element, there is 
none in the former case. It originates in certain qualities of our repre- 
sentational life not based upon any collective influence. If, therefore, 

"^Bibliography. — Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, Paris, 1833. — Despine, De la 
contagion morale, 1870. De l'imitation, 1871. — Moreau de Tours (Paul), De la 
contagion du suicide, Paris, 1875. — Aubry, Contagion du meurtre, Paris, 1888. — 
Tarde, Les Lois de l'imitation {passim). Philosophie pénale, p. 319 and ff. Paris, 
F. Alcan.- — Corre, Crime et suicide, p. 207 and ff. 

123 



124 SUICIDE 

imitation were shown to help in determining the suicide-rate, the 
latter would depend directly either in whole or in part upon indi- 
vidual causes. 

I 

But before examining the facts, let us determine the meaning of 
the word. Sociologists so commonly use terms without defining them, 
neither establishing nor methodically circumscribing the range of 
things they intend to discuss, that they constantly but unconsciously 
allow a given expression to be extended from the concept originally 
or apparently envisaged by it to other more or less kindred ideas. 
Thus, the idea finally becomes too ambiguous to permit discussion. 
Having no clear outline, it is changeable almost at will according to 
momentary needs of argument without the possibility of critical fore- 
knowledge of all its different potential aspects. Such is notably the 
case with what is called the instinct of imitation. 

This word is currently used to mean simultaneously the three fol- 
lowing groups of facts: 

1. In the midst of the same social group, all the elements of which 
undergo the action of a single cause or number of similar causes, a 
sort of levelling occurs in the consciousness of different individuals 
which leads everyone to think or feel in unison. The name of imita- 
tion has very often been given the whole number of operations result- 
ing in this harmony. It then designates the quality of the states of 
consciousness simultaneously felt by a given number of different per- 
sons leading them so to act upon one another or combine among 
themselves as to produce a new state. Using the word in this sense, 
we mean that this combination results from reciprocal imitation of 
each of them by all and of all by each.^ "In the noisy gatherings of 
our cities, in the great scenes of our revolutions," ^ it has been said, 
best appears the nature of imitation thus defined. There one sees best 
how men in union can mutually transform one another by their recip- 
rocal influence. 

2. The same name has been given the impulse which drives us to 
seek harmony with the society to which we belong, and, with this 
purpose, to adopt the ways of thought or action which surround us. 
Thus we follow manners and customs, and — as legal and moral prac- 

^Bordier, Vie des sociétés, Paris, 1887, p. 77 — Tarde, Philosophie pénale, p. 321. 
3 Tarde, Ibid., pp. 319-320. 



IMITATION 125 

tices are merely defined and well-established customs — we usually act 
thus when we act morally. Whenever we are ignorant of the reasons 
for the moral maxim we obey, we conform solely because it pos- 
sesses social authority. In this sense the imitation of manners is dis- 
tinguished from that of customs, depending on whether our models 
are our ancestors or our contemporaries. 

3. Finally, we may happen to reproduce an act which has occurred 
in our presence or to our knowledge, just because it has occurred in 
our presence or because we have heard it spoken of. It has no intrin- 
sic character of its own causing us to repeat it. We copy it just to copy 
it, not because we think it useful nor to be in harmony with a model. 
Our conception of it automatically determines the movements which 
recreate it. Thus we yawn, laugh, weep, because we see someone 
yawn,, laugh or weep. Thus also the thought of homicide passes from 
one to another consciousness. It is ape-like imitation for its own sake. 

Now these three sorts of facts are very different from one another. 

To begin with, the first cannot be confused with the others, be- 
cause it involves no act of genuine reproduction, but syntheses sui 
generis of different states or at least of states of different origins. The 
term "imitation" cannot therefore be used in speaking of it without 
losing all clear meaning. 

Let us analyze the phenomenon. A number of men in assembly are 
similarly affected by the same occurrence and perceive this at least 
partial unanimity by the identical signs through which each individ- 
ual feeling is expressed. What happens then? Each one imperfectly 
imagines the state of those about him. Images expressing the various 
manifestations emanating, with their different shades, from all parts 
of the crowd, are formed in the minds of all. Nothing to be called 
imitation has thus far occurred; there have been merely perceptible 
impressions, then sensations wholly identical with those produced in 
us by external bodies.^ What happens then? Once aroused in my 
consciousness, these various representations combine with one another 

* In attributing these images to a process of imitation, would we mean that they 
are mere copies of the states they express? First, this would be a very crude meta- 
phor, taken from the old inacceptable theory of perceptible types. Also, if we use 
the word imitation thus, it must be extended to all our sensations and ideas indis- 
criminately; for of all we may say, using the same metaphor, that they reproduce 
the object to which they refer. Thereupon all intellectual life becomes a product 
of imitation. 



126 SUICIDE 

and with my own feeling. A new state is thus formed, less my own 
than its predecessor, less tainted with individuality and more and more 
freed, by a series of repeated elaborations analogous to the foregoing, 
from all excessive particularity. Such combinations could also not be 
called facts of imitation, unless the name were accepted for all intel- 
lectual activity through which two or more similar states of conscious- 
ness appeal to one another by their likeness, then blend and fuse in a 
compound absorbing them but different from them. True, all defini- 
tions of words are permissible. But this, it must be recognized, would 
be extremely arbitrary and could thus be only a source of confusion, 
since it leaves the word none of its customary meaning. One should 
say creation rather than imitation, since this combination of forces 
results in something new. This is indeed the only procedure by which 
the mind has the power of creation. 

This creation may be said to amount merely to an intensification of 
the original state. But first, a quantitative change need not fail to be 
a novelty. Moreover, the quantity of things cannot change without 
changing their quality; a feeling alters its nature completely on be- 
coming two or three times as violent. We know in fact that the 
mutual reactions of men in assembly may transform a gathering of 
peaceful citizens into a fearful monster. What a strange imitation to 
produce such metamorphoses! A term so inadequate to express the 
phenomenon can have been used only by vaguely imagining that each 
individual feeling models itself after somebody else's feelings. Actu- 
ally, there are here neither models nor copies. There is a penetration, 
a fusion of a number of states within another, distinct from them: 
that is the collective state. 

To be sure, the cause of this state might properly be called imita- 
tion if a leader were admitted always to have inspired the crowd with 
it. But not only has this assertion never even begun to be proved, and 
not only is it contradicted by very many cases, where the leader is 
clearly the product of the crowd rather than its informing cause; but, 
indeed, in so far as this directive action is real, it has no relation to 
what is called reciprocal imitation, being unilateral; thus there can 
be no question of imitation in this sense. We must guard most care- 
fully against those confusions of meaning which have so obscured the 
subject. Similarly, if one said that an assemblage always contains per- 
sons who cling to the common opinion, not through spontaneous 



IMITATION 127 

impulse but through its imposition upon them, this would undeni- 
ably be true. We even believe that there is no individual conscious- 
ness in such cases which does not feel such constraint to some degree. 
But since this constraint originates in the force sut generis investing 
common practices or beliefs, once they are constituted, it belongs to 
the second category of facts distinguished above. Let us examine this, 
therefore, and see how far it deserves to be called imitation. 

At least it differs from its predecessor in implying a reproduction. 
In following a manner or observing a custom one does what others 
have done and do, daily. But the definition itself implies that this 
repetition is not owing to the so-called instinct of imitation, but on 
the one hand, to the sympathy constraining us not to wound the feel- 
ings of our fellows, lest we forfeit their intercourse, and on the other, 
to the respect we feel for collective ways of acting and thinking and 
the direct or indirect pressure exerted on us by this collectivity to 
avoid dissension and maintain in us this sense of respect. The act is 
not reproduced because it took place in our presence or to our knowl- 
edge and because we like the reproduction in and for itself, but be- 
cause it seems obligatory to us and to some extent useful. We perform 
it not merely because it has been performed but because it bears a 
social stamp and because we defer to this necessarily on pain of seri- 
ous inconvenience. That is, to act through respect or fear of opinion 
is not to act through imitation. Such acts differ little from those we 
agree upon whenever we innovate. They occur in fact because of a 
quality inherent in them — a quality which makes us consider them 
as necessary to do. But when instead of following customs we revolt, 
we are moved in the same way; if we adopt a new idea or an original 
practice, it is because of its intrinsic qualities making us feel that it 
should be adopted. Certainly, our motives are not the same in both 
cases; but the psychological mechanism is exactly the same. In each, 
an intellectual operation intrudes between the representation and the 
execution of the act, consisting of a clear or unclear, rapid or slow 
awareness of the determining characteristic, whatever it may be. Our 
way of conforming to the morals or manners of our country has 
nothing in common,^ therefore, with the mechanical, ape-like repeti- 

^ In these particular cases, a manner or tradition may indeed be reproduced 
through mere ape-like imitation; but then it is not reproduced as a manner or 
tradition as such. 



128 SUICIDE 

tion causing us to reproduce motions which we witness. Between the 
two ways of acting, is all the difference between reasonable, deliber- 
ate behaviour and automatic reflex. The former has motives even 
when not expressed as explicit judgments. The latter has not; it re- 
sults directly from the mere sight of an act, with no other mental 
intermediary. 

It is thus clear what mistakes arise when two such different sets of 
facts are given the same name. Let us be on our guard; when we 
speak of imitation the phenomenon of contagion is implicitly under- 
stood, and reasonably enough we pass from one idea to the other very 
readily. But what is contagious in the accomplishment of a moral 
precept, in deference to the authority of tradition or to public opinion? 
Thus, while thinking that we have reduced two realities to one we 
have actually only confused very distinct ideas. In pathological biol- 
ogy, a disease is called contagious when it rises wholly or mainly 
from the development of a germ introduced into the organism from 
outside. Inversely, in so far as this germ has been able to develop 
thanks only to the active cooperation of the field in which it has 
taken root, the term "contagion" becomes inexact. Likewise, for an 
act to be attributed to a moral contagion it is not enough that the 
idea be inspired by a similar act. Once introduced into the mind, it 
must automatically and of itself have become active. Then contagion 
really exists, because the external act is reproduced by itself, entering 
into us by way of a representation. Imitation likewise exists, since the 
new act is wholly itself by virtue of the model it copies. But if the 
impression upon us of the latter takes effect only through our consent 
and participation, contagion is only figuratively present and the figure 
is inexact. For the reasons making us consent are the determining 
causes of our action, not the example before our eyes. "We are its 
authors, even though not its inventors.® Consequently, all these oft- 
repeated expressions about imitative propagation and contagious ex- 
pansion are inapplicable and must be discarded. They deform instead 
of defining the facts; they obscure rather than clarify the question. 

In short, if we are to think clearly we cannot use one and the same 

^ To be sure, everything not original invention is sometimes called imitation. As 
such, almost all human acts are clearly acts of imitation ; for true inventions are very 
rare. But the term imitation then has no definite meaning, just because it means al- 
most everything. Such terminology can only breed confusion. 



IMITATION 129 

name for the process by which a collective sentiment develops among 
a gathering, for the process causing our adhesion to common or tradi- 
tional rules of behavior, and, finally, for the one causing Panurge's 
sheep to cast themselves into the water because one of them began 
it. It is one thing to share a common feeling, another to yield to the 
authority of opinion, and a third to repeat automatically what others 
have done. No reproduction occurs in the first case; in the second it 
results only from logical operations,'^ judgments and reasonings, im- 
plicit or explicit, but themselves the essence of the phenomenon; and 
thus reproduction cannot be the definition. It becomes all embracing 
only in the third case. There it is all-comprehensive; the new act is 
a mere echo of the original. Not merely does it repeat, but this repeti- 
tion has no cause for existence outside itself, only the total of char- 
acteristics which make us imitative creatures under certain circum- 
stances. The name of imitation must then be reserved solely for such 
facts if it is to have clear meaning, and we shall say: Imitation exists 
when the immediate antecedent of an act is the representation of a 
like act, previously performed by someone else; with no explicit or 
implicit mental operation which hears upon the intrinsic nature of the 
act reproduced intervening between representation and execution. 

So, when we ask what is the influence of imitation on the suicide- 
rate, we must use the word in this sense. ^ If its sense is not thus 
defined, we risk mistaking a purely verbal expression for an explana- 
tion. In fact, when a way of acting or thinking is called an act of 
imitation we mean that imitation explains it and thus think we have 
told everything by uttering this magical word. Actually, only in cases 

^ It is true there is a so-called logical imitation (See Tarde, Lois de l'imitation, 
I. éd., p. 158) ; this reproduces an act because it serves a definite end. But such 
imitation obviously has nothing to do with the imitative impulse; facts due to one 
must be carefully distinguished from those due to the other. They have quite differ- 
ent explanations. On the other hand, as we have just shown, manner-imitation and 
custom-imitation are as logical as the others, although having their special logic in 
some respects. 

^ Acts imitated because of the moral or intellectual prestige of the original actor, 
whether individual or collective, that serves as a model, belong rather to the second 
class. For such imitation has no automatic quality. It implies reasoning: one acts 
like a person possessing one's confidence because his recognized superiority guaran- 
tees the propriety of his acts. One has the same reasons to follow him as to respect 
him. No explanation has therefore been given of such acts when they are said merely 
to have been imitated. What matters is the cause of the confidence or respect deter- 
mining this obedience. 



130 SUICIDE 

of automatic reproduction does it have this quality. There imitation 
itself may be a sufficient explanation,^ because all that takes place 
results from imitative contagion. But when a custom is followed, a 
moral practice conformed to, the reasons for docility are found in the 
nature of this practice, the special qualities of the custom and the 
feelings they inspire. Thus when imitation is mentioned apropos of 
this sort of act, nothing is explained; we are told simply that the fact 
we reproduce is not new, that is, that it is reproduced, without being 
told at all why it was produced nor why we reproduce it. Much less 
can this word take the place of analysis of the complex process 
whence come collective sentiments and of which we have been able 
to supply only a conjectural and approximate description above.^® 
Thus the misuse of the term may be thought to offer a solution or 
partial solution of these questions, whereas it has merely succeeded in 
concealing them. 

Only on condition of defining imitation thus, shall we also have 
the right to consider it a psychological factor of suicide. Actually, so- 
called reciprocal imitation is a highly social phenomenon, since it 
is cooperative elaboration of a common sentiment. The repetition of 
customs and traditions is similarly a result of social causes, being 
due to the obligatory nature and special prestige investing collective 
beliefs and practices by virtue of the very fact of their being collec- 
tive beliefs and practices. Insofar, therefore, as suicide is admittedly 
disseminated by one or the other of these methods, it would be de- 
pendent on social causes and not on individual conditions. 

Having thus defined the terms of the problem, let us examine the 
facts. 

^ Yet imitation itself alone, as we shall see below, is a sufficient explanation only 
in rare instances. 

1*" For we must confess that we have only a vague idea of what it is. Exactly how 
the combinations occur resulting in the collective state, what are its constituent ele- 
ments, how the dominant state is produced are questions too complex to be solved 
solely by introspection. Manifold experiments and observations would be required 
and have not been made. We know little as yet how and according to what laws 
mental states of even the single individual combine; much less do we know of the 
mechanism of the far more complicated combinations produced by group-existence. 
Our explanations are often mere metaphors. Our words are therefore not meant as 
an exact expression of the phenomenon; we have tried only to show that there is 
something else here than imitation. 



IMITATION 131 

II 

The idea of suicide may undoubtedly be communicated by con- 
tagion. The corridor has already been mentioned where fifteen in- 
valids hung themselves in succession and also the famous sentry-box 
of the camp at Boulogne, the scene of several suicides in quick suc- 
cession. Such facts have often been observed in the army: in the 4th 
regiment of chasseurs at Provins in 1862, in the 15th of the line in 
1864, in the 41st, first at Montpellier, then at Nîmes, in 1868, etc. 
In 181 3 in the little village of Saint-Pierre-Monjau, a woman hanged 
herself from a tree and several others did likewise at a little distance 
away. Pinel tells of a priest's hanging himself in the neighborhood 
of Etampes; some days later two others killed themselves and several 
laymen imitated them.^^ When Lord Castelreagh threw himself into 
Vesuvius, several of his companions followed his example. The tree 
of Timon of Athens has become proverbial. The frequency of such 
cases of contagion in prisons is likewise affirmed by many observers.^^ 

Certain facts, however, usually referred to this class and ascribed 
to imitation seem to us to have a different origin. Such is notably the 
case with what has sometimes been called the suicides of the besieged. 
In his History of the War of the Jews against the Romans,^^ Josephus 
relates that during the assault on Jerusalem some of the besieged 
committed suicide with their own hands. More especially forty Jews, 
having taken refuge underground, decided to choose death and killed 
one another. According to Montaigne, the Xanthians, besieged by 
Brutus, "rushed about pell-mell, men, women and children, with 
such a furious longing to die, that nothing can be done to fly from 
death which they did not do to fly from life; so that Brutus had much 
difficulty in saving a small number of them." ^^ It does not appear 
that these mass suicides originated in one or two individual cases 
which they merely repeated. They seem to spring from a collective 
resolve, a genuine social consensus rather than a simple contagious 
impulse. The idea does not spring up in one particular person and 
then spread to others; but is developed by the whole group which, 

^^ See the detailed facts in Legoyt, op. cit., p. 227 fF. 
^^ See similar facts in Ebrard, op. cit., p. 376. 
13 III, 26. 

1* Essais, II, 3. [Translation from vol. I, p. 40, The Essays of Michel de Montaigne, 
New York, 1934. — Ed.} 



132 suicroE 

in a situation desperate for all, collectively decides upon death. Such 
is the course of events whenever a social group, of whatever nature, 
reacts in common under the influence of a common pressure. The 
agreement is no difl^erent because of being arrived at in a passionate 
impulse; it would be substantially the same if it were more method- 
ical and deliberate. One cannot therefore properly speak of imitation. 

We might say as much of several other similar facts. Thus Esquirol 
reports: "Historians declare that the Peruvians and Mexicans, ren- 
dered desperate by the destruction of their religious worship . . . 
killed themselves in such numbers that more perished by their own 
hands than by the swords and muskets of their barbarous conquer- 
ors." In a wider sense, to justify the appeal to imitation, numerous 
suicides must not only be shown to occur at the same time and place. 
For they may be due to a general state of the social environment 
resulting in a collective group disposition that takes the form of mul- 
tiple suicide. Finally, it would perhaps be interesting, to make the 
terminology precise, to distinguish moral epidemics from moral con- 
tagions; these two words used carelessly for one another actually 
denote two very different sorts of things. An epidemic is a social fact, 
produced by social causes; contagion consists only in more or less 
repeated repercussions of individual phenomena.^^ 

Once admitted, such a distinction would certainly reduce the list of 
suicides imputable to imitation; yet they are, it is true, very numerous. 
Perhaps no other phenomenon is more readily contagious. Not even 
the homicidal impulse is so apt to spread. Cases where it spreads 
automatically are less frequent, and the role of imitation especially is 
generally less prominent; contrary to common opinion, the instinct of 
self-preservation would seem less strongly rooted in consciousness 
than the fundamental moral sentiments, since it shows less resistance 
to the same influences. But granted this, the question proposed at the 
beginning of this chapter is unsolved. It does not follow a priori 
from the fact that suicide may be communicated from person to per- 
son that this contagious quality has social effects, that is, that it affects 
the social suicide-rate, our object of study. Undeniable as it is, it may 

^^ It will appear below that there is always and normally, in every society, a col- 
lective disposition taking the form of suicide. This differs from what we shall call 
epidemic by being chronic and a normal element of the moral temper of the society. 
Epidemics are also collective dispositions, but which rarely make their appearance, 
since they come from abnormal and usually transient causes. 



IMITATION 133 

have only individual, sporadic consequences. The above observations 
accordingly do not solve the problem; but they make its extent clearer. 
If, as has been said, imitation is really an original and specially 
fecund source of social phenomena, it should show its influence espe- 
cially in suicide since no field exists over which it has more sway. 
Suicide will thus help us to verify by decisive experience the reality 
of the wonderful power ascribed to imitation. 

Ill 

If this influence exists, it must appear above all in the geographic 
distribution of suicides. In certain cases, the rate characteristic of a 
country or locality should be transmitted, so to speak, to neighboring 
localities. We must thus consult the map. But methodically. 

Certain authors have felt that they might appeal to imitation when- 
ever two or more contiguous departments showed an equally strong 
tendency to suicide. Yet this diffusion within a single region may 
well spring from an equal diffusion of certain causes favorable to the 
development of suicide, and from the fact that the social environ- 
ment is the same throughout the region. To be assured that imitation 
causes the spread of a tendency or idea, one must see it leave the 
environments of its birthplace and invade regions not themselves cal- 
culated to encourage it. For, as we have shown, imitative propagation 
exists only where the fact imitated, and it alone, determines the acts 
that reproduce it, automatically and without assistance from other 
factors. A criterion less simple than that often accepted is therefore 
needed to prove the share of imitation in the phenomenon under 
investigation. 

First of all, no imitation can exist without a model to imitate; no 
contagion without a central hearth in which it necessarily displays its 
maximum intensity. Nor can the suicidal tendency justifiably be de- 
clared to pass from one part of society to another unless observation 
uncovers the existence of certain centers of radiation. By what tokens 
shall they be known? 

First, they must have greater aptitude for suicide than all sur- 
rounding points; they must show a deeper tinge on the map than 
neighboring regions. Since, as is natural, imitation acts simultane- 
ously with causes truly productive of suicide, cases must be more 
numerous there. Secondly, for these centers to play the part ascribed 



134 SUICIDE 

to them and justify reference of events occurring outside their sphere 
to their influence, each must be something of a cynosure for outlying 
districts. Clearly, it cannot be imitated without being seen. If atten- 
tion swerves elsewhere, no matter how many the suicides, they will 
be as good as non-existent because ignored; so they will not be repro- 
duced. Peoples' eyes can be thus fixed only on a point of importance 
to the regional life. In other words, phenomena of contagion are 
bound to be most pronounced near capitals and large cities. They 
may even be more anticipated there because in this case the propaga- 
tive power of imitation is assisted and reenforced by such other fac- 
tors as the moral authority of great centers, which at times gives such 
expansive power to their ways of acting. There, accordingly, imita- 
tion must have social effects if anywhere. Finally, since as is com- 
monly held, other things being equal, the power of example weakens 
with distance, surrounding regions should be less afflicted the further 
they are from the focal hearth, and inversely. The map of suicides 
must at least satisfy these three conditions to have its contour even 
partially ascribed to imitation. There will always be occasion to ques- 
tion also whether or not this geographical disposition is not due to a 
parallel distribution of living conditions conducive to suicide. 

Having established these rules, let us apply them. 

The customary maps, where, so far as France is concerned, the 
suicide-rate is indicated only by departments, are inadequate for this 
investigation. They do not actually permit the observation of the pos- 
sible effects of imitation where they must be most perceptible, among 
the different portions of a single department. Moreover, the presence 
of a district (arrondissement) more or less fertile in suicides may 
artificially raise or lower the departmental average and thus cause an 
apparent discontinuity between the other districts and those of neigh- 
boring departments, or even, contrariwise, conceal a real discontinu- 
ity. Finally, the influence of great cities is too much obscured in this 
manner to be easily perceived. So we have drawn a map by districts 
specially for the study of this question, referring to the five-year 
period 1 887-1 891. Its study has given most unexpected results.^^ 

What is first noticeable is the presence toward the North of a large 
area, the greater part of which occupies the place of the former Ile- 
de-France, but which enters deep into Champagne and extends into 

1^ See Appendix II. 



IMITATION 135 

Lorraine. If it were due to imitation, its focus would have to be in 
Paris, the only conspicuous center of the entire area. Indeed, it is 
usually imputed to the influence of Paris; Guerry even declared that 
starting from any point in the periphery of the country (with the 
exception of Marseilles) and moving toward the capital, suicides are 
found to increase more and more the nearer one comes. But if the 
map by departments might seem to confirm this view, the map by 
districts thoroughly belies it. The Seine, indeed, is found to have a 
suicide-rate less than all neighboring arrondissements. It has only 
471 per million inhabitants, while Coulommiers has 500, Versailles 
514, Melun 518, Meaux 525, Corbeil 559, Pontoise 561, Provins 
562. Even the districts of Champagne far surpass those most adja- 
cent to the Seine: Reims has 501 suicides, Epernay 537, Arcis-sur- 
Aube 548, Château-Thierry 623. In his study, Le suicide en Seine-et- 
Marne, Dr. Leroy had already noted with surprise that the district of 
Meaux had relatively more suicides than the Seine, ^'^ Here are his 
figures: 

Period 1851-63 Period 1865-66 

Arrondissement of Meaux 1 suicide to 2,418 iniiabitonts 1 to 2,547 inhabitants 

Seine 1 suicide to 2,750 inhabitants 1 to 2,822 inhabitants 

And the district of Meaux was not alone in this respect. The same 
author tells us the names of i66 communes of the same depart?nent 
where suicide at this time was more frequent than in Paris. A strange 
center, to be so inferior to the secondary centers it is supposed to 
nourish! Yet with the exception of the Seine no other center of radia- 
tion can be discovered. For it is still more difficult to make Paris a 
satellite of Corbeil or Pontoise. 

A little further north appears another area, less evenly distrib- 
uted but still deeply shaded; it corresponds to Normandy. If it were 
due to contagious expansion, it would therefore have to have Rouen 
as its center, the provincial capital and a very important city. Now, 
the two points of this region where suicide is most widespread are 
the district of Neufchâtel (509 suicides) and that of Pont-Audemer 
(537 P^"^ million inhabitants) ; and they are not even contiguous. Yet 

I'' Op. cit., p. 213. — According to the same author, even the entire departments 
of Marne and of Seine-et-Marne surpassed the Seine in 1865-66. Marne, he declares, 
then to have had i suicide to 2,791 inhabitants; Seine-et-Marne, i to 2,768; the 
Seine i to 2,822. 



136 SUICIDE 

the moral constitution of the province can certainly not be due to 
their influence. 

Far to the South-East, along the Mediterranean shores, we find a 
strip of territory reaching from the farthest limits of the Bouches-du- 
Rhône to the Italian frontier, where suicides are also very numerous. 
Here there is a genuine metropolis, Marseilles, and at the other end 
a great center of fashionable life, Nice. Yet the most stricken districts 
are those of Toulon and Forcalquier. No one will say, however, that 
Marseilles is influenced by them. On the west coast likewise, Roche- 
fort alone stands out with its rather dark shade from the elongated 
mass of the two Charentes, though a much larger city, Angoulême, 
lies within them. In general, there are a great many departments 
where it is not the district of the principal town which leads the way. 
In the Vosges we have Remirement and not Epinal; in Haute- Saône, 
Gray, a stagnant or semi-stagnant town, and not Vesoul; in Doubs, 
Dole and Poligny, not Besançon; in Gironde, not Bordeaux but La 
Réole and Bazas; in Maine-et-Loire, Saumur instead of Angers; in 
Sarthe, Saint-Calais instead of Le Mans; in Nord, Avesnes instead 
of Lille, etc. Yet in none of these cases does the district which thus 
surpasses the metropolis include the most important city of the 
department. 

It would be interesting to continue this comparison, not only from 
district to district but from commune to commune. Unfortunately, a 
map of suicides by communes cannot be made for the entire country. 
But in his interesting monograph Dr. Leroy performed this task for 
the department of Seine-et-Marne. Having classified all the com- 
munes of this department according to their suicide-rates, beginning 
with the highest, he reached the following results: "La Ferté-sous- 
Jouarre (4,482 inhabitants) the first important town on the list, is 
the 124th; Meaux (10,762 inhabitants), is 130th; Provins (7,547 
inhabitants) is 135th; Coulommiers (4,628 inhabitants) is 138th. 
Comparison of the rank of these cities representing their place in the 
series even suggests, curiously enough, a common influence upon 
them all.^^ Lagny (3,468 inhabitants) and so near Paris is only the 

18 of course, there is no question of contagious influence. These are three prin- 
cipal towns in the districts, of nearly equal importance, separated by many com- 
munes of very diff^erent rates. All the comparison proves is that social groups of like 
dimensions and with sufficiently similar living conditions, have a like suicide-rate 
without necessarily influencing one another. 



IMITATION 137 

219th; Montereau-Faut- Yonne (6,217 inhabitants), 245th; Fontaine- 
bleau (11,939 inhabitants), 247th. . . . Finally Melun (11,170 in- 
habitants), principal town of the department, is only the 279th. On 
the other hand, examining the 25 communes at the head of the list, 
one will find all but 2 of very small population." ^^ 

Outside of France we shall make identical discoveries. The part of 
Europe most infested with suicide is that including Denmark and 
central Germany. Now in this vast zone the country leading all others 
by far is the Kingdom of Saxony; it has 311 suicides per million 
inhabitants. The Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg follows next (303 sui- 
cides), while Brandenburg has only 204. These two little states, 
however, are far from being centers of importance in Germany. 
Neither Dresden nor Altenburg set the tone for Hamburg or Berlin. 
Of all the Italian provinces, likewise, Bologna and Livorno have pro- 
portionally most suicides (88 and 84); Milan, Genoa, Turin and 
Rome follow only at a distance according to averages reached by 
Morselli for the years 1 864-1 876. 

In short, all the maps show us that suicide, far from being 
grouped more or less concentrically around certain centers from 
which it radiates more and more weakly, occurs in great roughly 
(but only roughly) homogeneous masses and with no central nucleus. 
Such a configuration indicates nothing with respect to the influence 
of imitation. It merely shows that suicide is not restricted to local 
circumstances varying from city to city, but that its determining con- 
ditions are always of a certain general nature. There are here neither 

1^ op. cit., pp. 193-194. The very small commune at the head (Lesche) has i sui- 
cide to 630 inhabitants, or 1,587 suicides per million, four to five times as many as 
Paris. Nor are these cases peculiar to Seine-et-Marne. We are indebted to Dr. Legou- 
pils of Trouville for the information concerning three tiny communes of the district 
of Pont-l'Evêque, Villerville (978 inhabitants), Cricqueboeuf (150 inhabitants) and 
Pennedepie (333 inhabitants). The suicide-rates calculated for periods ranging from 
14 to 25 years are respectively 429,800 and 1,081 per million inhabitants. 

Of course, it is true that large cities generally have more suicides than small ones 
or country districts. But the proposition is only broadly true and has many excep- 
tions. Besides, the preceding facts which seem to contradict it may be reconciled 
with it. We need only agree that large cities are formed and develop under the in- 
fluence of the same causes which themselves determine the development of suicide 
more than the cities do themselves. Thus these cities are naturally numerous in 
regions rich in suicides, but without having any monopoly in them; such cities are 
few, on the contrary, where suicides are few without the small number of the latter 
being due to their absence. Thus their average rate would generally be superior to 
that of country districts, though inferior to it in certain cases. 



138 suicroE 

imitators nor imitated, but relative identity in the effects, due to rela- 
tive identity in the causes. And this is readily understandable if, as 
is foreshadowed by all the preceding remarks, suicide depends essen- 
tially on certain states of the social environment. For the latter gen- 
erally retains the same constitution over very considerable areas. 
Thus, wherever it is the same, it naturally has the same consequences 
without contagion having anything to do with it. This is why the 
suicide-rate in a given region usually remains at very much the same 
level. On the other hand, since its generating causes can never be 
quite evenly distributed, inevitably it occasionally shows more or less 
important variations, from one place to another, from one district 
to a neighboring district such as those we have indicated. 

The proof that this explanation is true is that the suicide-rate 
changes abruptly and completely whenever there is an abrupt change 
in social environment. Never does the environment exert influence 
beyond its natural limits. Never does a country very predisposed to 
suicide by special conditions cast its influence over its neighbors by 
dint of mere example, unless the same or similar conditions exist 
there to the same extent. Thus in Germany suicide is endemic and 
its ravages have been mentioned; we shall show later that Protestant- 
ism is the chief cause of this exceptional aptitude. Yet three regions 
are exceptions to the general rule; the Rhenish provinces with West- 
phalia, Bavaria and especially Bavarian Swabia, and finally Posnania. 
These alone in all Germany have less than 100 suicides per million 
inhabitants. On the map ^o they seem like three lost islands and their 
clear areas contrast with the surrounding darker shades. They are all 
three Catholic. Thus the very intense suicidal current which flows 
about them, has no influence upon them; it stops at their frontiers 
simply because it fails to find conditions favorable to its development 
beyond. Likewise the entire South of Switzerland is Catholic; all 
Protestant elements are in the North. From the contrast of these two 
districts on the map ^i of suicides, one would think that they be- 
longed to different societies. Although they are everywhere contigu- 
ous and in uninterrupted relations with one another, each maintains 
its individuality with respect to suicide. The average is as low on 

20 See Appendix III. 

21 See Appendix III and for details of figures by cantons, Bk. II, Chap. V, 
Table XXVI. 



IMITATION 139 

one hand as it is high on the other. Likewise, within northern 
Switzerland, Lucern, Uri, Unterwalden, Schwyz and Zug, Catholic 
cantons, have at most 100 suicides per million, though surrounded 
by Protestant cantons having many more. 

Another experiment might be attempted which should, we be- 
lieve, confirm the above proofs. Moral contagion can be spread 
in only two ways : either the event which serves as a model is spread 
orally by what we call public report, or the newspapers disseminate 
it. Generally the latter are blamed; undoubtedly they do form a 
powerful diffusive instrument. If imitation plays a part in the de- 
velopment of suicide, therefore, suicides should vary with the impor- 
tance that newspapers have in public opinion. 

Unfortunately this importance is quite hard to determine. Not the 
number of papers but rather that of their readers is the measure 
of the extent of their influence. In a relatively decentralized country 
like Switzerland, papers may be numerous because each locality has 
its own and yet, since each is little read, its power of propagation 
is slight. On the contrary, a single journal such as the London Times, 
the New York Herald, the Petit Journal, etc., affects an immense 
public. It even seems that the press can hardly have the influence 
attributed to it without a certain centralization. For where each re- 
gion has its own way of life, less interest is felt for what passes 
beyond its small horizon; distant facts are less observed and, con- 
sequently, are read more carelessly. Thus there are fewer examples 
to stimulate imitation. Quite otherwise is the case where a wider 
field of action is open to sympathy and curiosity by the levelling 
of local environments and where, accordingly, great papers daily 
report all important events of their own and neighboring countries, 
distributing the news in all directions. The accumulating examples 
reenforce each other. But, of course, one cannot compare the read- 
ing public of the different European newspapers and especially 
evaluate the more or less local character of their news. Yet without 
being able positively to prove our statement, we doubt that France 
and England are inferior in these two respects to Denmark, Saxony 
and even the various districts of Germany. Yet suicides are far fewer 
in the two countries first named. Nor can it be supposed that within 
France far fewer papers are read south than north of the Loire; 
but the difference with respect to suicide between these two regions 



140 suicroE 

is known. Without wishing to attach more importance than it de- 
serves to an argument that we cannot rest on established facts, we 
nevertheless believe it has enough probability to merit some attention. 

IV 

In short, certain as the contagion of suicide is from individual to 
individual, imitation never seems to propagate it so as to aflfect the 
social suicide-rate. Imitation may give rise to more or less numerous 
individual cases, but it does not contribute to the unequal tendency 
in different societies to self-destruction, or to that of smaller social 
groups within each society. Its radiating influence is always very 
restricted; and what is more, intermittent. Its attainment of a certain 
degree of intensity is always brief. 

But a more general reason explains why the effects of imitation 
are imperceptible in statistics. It is because imitation all by itself 
has no effect on suicide. Except in the very rare instances of a more 
or less complete "fixed idea," the thought of an act is not sufficient 
to produce a similar act itself in an adult, unless he is a person 
himself specially so inclined. "I have always noticed," writes Morel, 
"that, powerful as the influence of imitation is, neither it nor the 
impression left by the recital or reading of an unusual crime proved 
strong enough to provoke similar acts among persons of perfectly 
sound mind." ^^ Likewise, Dr. Paul Moreau de Tours thought his 
personal observations proved that contagious suicide occurs only 
among individuals strongly predisposed to it.^^ 

To be sure, as this predisposition seemed to him to depend essen- 
tially on organic causes, he found it hard to explain certain cases 
not referable to this origin without admitting combinations of quite 
improbable, fairly miraculous causes. How improbable that the fif- 
teen patients above referred to were all simultaneously afflicted with 
nervous weakness! And so with the contagious events so often 
noticed in the army or in prisons. But the facts are easily explicable 
once it is acknowledged that the suicidal tendency can be created 
by the social environment. Then they may well be attributed not to a 
blind chance which from all points of the compass assembled in one 
barracks or penetentiary a fairly large number of persons all with 

22 Traité des maladies mentales, p. 243. 
^^ De la contagion du suicide, p. 42. 



IMITATION 141 

the same mental affliction, but to the influence of the common en- 
vironment in which they live. In fact we shall see that a collective 
state exists in prisons and in regiments disposing the soldiers and 
prisoners as directly to suicide as the most violent neurosis. An 
example furnishes the occasion which causes the impulse to break 
out, but it does not create the impulse and would have no effect if 
it did not exist. 

With very rare exceptions, then, it may be said that imitation is 
not an original factor of suicide. It only exposes a state which is 
the true generating cause of the act and which probably would have 
produced its natural effect even had imitation not intervened; for the 
predisposition must be very strong to enable so slight a matter to 
translate it into action. It is not surprising, therefore, that the acts 
fail to show the stamp of imitation, since it has no iiîflueïice of its 
own, and what it does exert is very slight. 

A practical remark may serve as corollary to this conclusion. 

Certain authors, ascribing to imitation a power it does not possess, 
have demanded that the printing of reports of suicides and crimes 
in the newspapers be prohibited.^"* Such a prohibition might possibly 
succeed in slightly reducing the annual total of such acts. But it could 
hardly modify their social rate. The strength of the collective tend- 
ency would be unchanged, since the moral state of the groups would 
be unaffected by this. Weighing the doubtful and very slight possible 
advantages of such a measure against the serious objections to the 
suppression of all judicial publicity, the legislator may well hesitate 
to follow the advice of such specialists. Actually, what may con- 
tribute to the growth of suicide or murder is not talking of it but 
how it is talked of. Where such acts are loathed, the feelings they 
arouse penetrate the recital of them and thus offset rather than en- 
courage individual inclinations. But inversely, when society is morally 
decadent, its state of uncertainty inspires in it an indulgence for 
immoral acts frankly expressed whenever they are discussed, and 
which obscures their immorality. Then example becomes truly dan- 
gerous not as example but because the revulsion it should inspire 
is reduced by social tolerance or indifference. 

But what this chapter chiefly shows is the weakness of the theory 
that imitation is the main source of all collective life. No fact is 

24 See especially Aubry, Contagion du meurtre, ist éd., p. 87. 



142 suicroE 

more readily transmissible by contagion than suicide, yet we have 
just seen that this contagiousness has no social effects. If imitation 
is so much without social influence in this case, it cannot have more 
in others; the virtues ascribed to it are therefore imaginary. Within 
a narrow circle it may well occasion the repetition of a single thought 
or action, but never are its repercussions sufficiently deep or exten- 
sive to reach and modify the heart of society. Thanks to the almost 
unanimous and generally ancient predominance of collective states, 
they are far too resistant to be offset by an individual innovation. 
How could an individual, who is nothing more than an individual,^'' 
be strong enough to mould society to his image? If we were not still 
reduced to conceiving of the social world almost as crudely as the 
primitive does the physical world; if, regardless of all scientific 
induction, we were not still reduced at least tacitly and unconsciously 
to admitting that social phenomena are not proportionate to their 
causes, we would not even pause to consider a conception which, 
though of biblical simplicity, is at the same time in flagrant contra- 
diction to the fundamental principles of thought. We no longer 
believe that zoological species are only individual variations heredi- 
tarily transmitted; ^^ it is equally inadmissible that a social fact is 
merely a generalized individual fact. But most imtenable of all is 
the idea that this generalization may be due to some blind contagion 
or other. We should even be amazed at the continuing necessity of 
discussing an hypothesis which, aside from the serious objections it 
suggests, has never even begun to receive experimental proof. For 
it has never been shown that imitation can account for a definite 
order of social facts and, even less, that it alone can account for 
them. The proposition has merely been stated as an aphorism, resting 
on vaguely metaphysical considerations. But sociology can only claim 
to be treated as a science when those who pursue it are forbidden 
to dogmatize in this fashion, so patently eluding the regular require- 
ments of proof. 

25 By this, we mean an individual stripped of all power possibly acquired by col- 
lective confidence or admiration. Clearly, a functionary or a popular man embodies 
not merely his individually inherited powers but social powers resulting from the 
collective sentiments of which they are the object, which give him influence over 
the progress of society. But only in so far as he is more than an individual does 
he possess this influence. 

2' See Delage, La structure du protoplasme et les théories de l'hérédité, Paris, 
1895, p. 813 ff. 



BOOK TWO SOCIAL CAUSES AND SOCIAL TYPES 



CHAPTER I HOW TO DETERMINE SOCIAL CAUSES AND 
SOCIAL TYPES 



'he results of the preceding book are not wholly negative. We 
have in fact shown that for each social group there is a specific 
tendency to suicide explained neither by the organic-psychic constitu- 
tion of individuals nor the nature of the physical environment. 
Consequently, by elimination, it must necessarily depend upon social 
causes and be in itself a collective phenomenon; some of the facts 
examined, especially the geographic and seasonal variations of sui-- 
cide, had definitely led us to this conclusion. We must now study 
this tendency more closely. 



To accomplish this it would seem to be best to inquire first whether 
the tendency is single and indestructible or whether it does not rather 
consist of several different tendencies, which may be isolated by 
analysis and which should be separately studied. If so, we should 
proceed as follows. As the tendency, single or not, is observable 
only in its individual manifestations, we should have to begin with 
the latter. Thus we should observe and describe as many as possible, 
of course omitting those due to mental alienation. If all were found 
to have the same essential characteristics, they should be grouped in 
a single class; otherwise, which is much more likely — for they are 
too different not to include several varieties — a certain number of 
species should be determined according to their resemblances and 
differences. One would admit as many suicidal currents as there were 
distinct types, then seek to determine their causes and respective im- 

145 



146 SUICIDE 

portance. We have pursued some such method in our brief study of 
the suicide of insanity. 

Unfortunately, no classification of the suicides of sane persons^ can 
be made in terms of their morphological types or characteristics, 
from almost complete lack of the necessary data. To be attempted, it 
would require good descriptions of many individual cases. One 
would have to know the psychological condition of the suicide at 
the moment of forming his resolve, how he prepared to accomplish 
it, how he finally performed it, whether he were agitated or de- 
pressed, calm or exalted, anxious or irritated, etc. Now we have such 
data practically only for some cases of insane suicide, and just such 
observations and descriptions by alienists have enabled us to estab- 
lish the chief types of suicide where insanity is the determining 
cause. We have almost no such information for others. Brierre de 
Boismont alone has tried to do this descriptive work for 1,328 cases 
where the suicide left letters or other records summarized by the 
author in his book. But, first, this summary is much too brief, llien, 
the patient's revelations of his condition are usually insufficient, if 
not suspect. He is only too apt to be mistaken concerning himself 
and the state of his feelings; he may believe that he is acting calmly, 
though at the peak of nervous excitement. Finally, besides being 
insufficiently objective, these observations cover too few facts to 
permit definite conclusions. Some very vague dividing lines are per- 
ceptible and their suggestions may be utilized; but they are too 
indefinite to provide a regular classification. Furthermore, in view of 
the manner of execution of most suicides, proper observations arc 
next to impossible. 

But our aim may be achieved by another methad. Let us reverse 
the order of study. Only in so far as the effective causes differ can 
there be different types of suicide. For each to have its own nature, 
it must also have special conditions of existence. The same ante- 
cedent or group of antecedents cannot sometimes produce one result 
and sometimes another, for, if so, the difference of the second from 
the first would itself be without cause, which would contradict the 
principle of causality. Every proved specific difference between causes 
therefore implies a similar difference between effects. Consequently, 
we shall be able to determine the social types of suicide by classify- 
ing them not directly by their preliminarily described characteristics. 



HOW TO DETERMINE SOCIAL CAUSES AND SOCIAL TYPES 147 

but by the causes which produce them. Without asking why they 
differ from one another, we will first seek the social conditions re- 
sponsible for them; then group these conditions in a number of sepa- 
rate classes by their resemblances and differences, and we shall be 
sure that a specific type of suicide will correspond to each of these 
classes. In a word, instead of being morphological, our classification 
will from the start be aetiological. Nor is this a sign of inferiority, r^ 
for the nature of a phenomenon is much more profoundly got at by -% 
knowing its cause than by knowing its characteristics only, even the 
essential ones. 

The defect of this method, of course, is to assume the diversity 
of types without being able to identify them. It may prove their 
existence and number but not their special characteristics. But this 
drawback may be obviated, at least in a certain measure. Once the 
nature of the causes is known we shall try to deduce the nature of 
the effects, since they will be both qualified and classified by their 
attachment to their respective sources. Of course, if this deduction 
were not at all guided by facts, it might be lost in purely imaginary 
constructions. But with the aid of some data on the morphology of 
suicides it may be made clearer. Alone, these data are too incom- 
plete and unsure to provide a principle of classification; but once 
the outlines of this classification are found, the data may be used. 
They will indicate what direction the deduction should take and, by 
the examples they offer, the deductively established species may be 
shown not to be imaginary. Thus we shall descend from causes to 
effects and our aetiological classification will be completed by a mor- 
phological one which can verify the former and vice versa. 

In all respects this reverse method is the only fitting one for the 
special problem that we have set ourselves. Indeed we must not 
forget that what we are studying is the ^cial suiciderate. The only 
types of interest to us, accordingly, are those contributing to its 
formation and influencing its variation. Now, it is not sure that all 
individual sorts of voluntary death have this quality. Some, though 
general to a certain degree, are not bound or not sufficiently bound 
to the moral temper of society to enter as a characteristic element 
into the special physiognomy of each people with respect to suicide. 
For instance, we have seen that alcoholism is not a determining fac- 
tor of the particular aptitude of each society, yet alcoholic suicides 



148 suicroE 

evidently exist and in great numbers. No description, however good, 
of particular cases will ever tell us which ones have a sociological 
character. If one wants to know the several tributaries of suicide 
as a collective phenomenon one must regard it in its collective form, 
that is, through statistical data, from the start. The social rate must 
be taken directly as the object of analysis; progress must be from 
the whole to the parts. Clearly, it can only be analyzed with refer- 
ence to its different causes, for in themselves the units composing it 
are homogeneous, without qualitative difference. We must then im- 
mediately discover its causes and later consider their repercussions 
among individuals. 

II 

But how reach these causes? 

The legal establishments of fact always accompanying suicide 
include the motive (family' trouble, physical or other pain, remorse, 
drunkenness, etc.), which seems to have been the determining cause, 
and in the statistical reports of almost all countries is found a special 
table containing the results of these inquiries under the title: pre- 
sumptive motives of suicides. It seems natural to profit by this already 
accomplished work and begin our study by a comparison of such 
records. They apparently show us the immediate antecedents of 
different suicides; and is it not good methodology for understand- 
ing the phenomenon we are studying to seek first its nearest causes, 
and then retrace our steps further in the series of phenomena if it 
appears needful? 

But as Wagner long ago remarked, what are called-st^Jiistics oî\ 
the motives of suicides are actually statistics of the opinionsNconcern- 
X j\ ing such motives of officials, often of lower officials, in cnarge of 
VV 'a this information service. Unfortunately, official establishments of fact 
.y\\ are known to be often defective even when applied to obvious ma- 
r terial facts comprehensible to any conscientious observer and leaving 

no room for evaluation. How suspect must they be considered when 
applied not simply to recording an accomplished fact but to its inter- 
pretation and explanation! To determine the cause of a phenome- 
non is always a difficult problem. The scholar requires all sorts of 
observations and experiments to solve even one question. Now, 
human volition is the most complex of all phenomena. The value 



HOW TO DETERMINE SOCIAL CAUSES AND SOCIAL TYPES 149 

of improvised judgments, attempting to assign a definite origin 
for each special case from a few hastily collected bits of information 
is, therefore, obviously slight. As soon as some of the facts com--^- 
monly supposed to lead to despair are thought to have been discov- 
ered in the victim's past, further search is considered useless, and 
his drunkenness or domestic unhappiness or business troubles are 
blamed, depending on whether he is supposed recently to have lost 
money, had home troubles or indulged a taste for liquor. Such un- 
certain data cannot be considered a basis of explanation for suicide. 

Moreover, even if more credible, such data could not be very 
useful, for the motive^' thus attributed to the suicides, whether 
rightly or wronglyT^re not their true causes^'^he proof is that the 
proportional numbers of cases assigned^Bystatistics to each of these 
presumed causes remain almost identically the same, whereas the 
absolute figures, on the contrary, show the greatest variations. In 
France, from 1856 to 1878, suicide rises about 40 per cent, and 
more than 100 per cent in Saxony in the period 185 4- 1880 (1,171 
cases in place of 547). Now, in both countries each category of 
motives retains the same respective importance from one period to 
another. This appears in Table XVII on page 150. 

If we consider that the figures here reported are, and can be, only 
grossly approximate and therefore do not attach too much importance 
to slight difi^erences, they will clearly appear to be practically stable. 
But for the contributory share of each presumed reason to remain 
proportionally the same while suicide has doubled its extent, each 
must be supposed to have doubled its effect. It cannot be by coinci- 
dence that all at the same time become doubly fatal. The conclusion 
is forced that they all depend on a more general state, which all 
more or less faithfully reflect. This it is which makes them more 
or less productive of suicide and which is thus the truly determining 
cause of it. We must then investigate this state without wasting time 
on its distant repercussions in the consciousness of individuals. 

Another fact, taken from Legoyt,^ shows still better the worth 
of the causal action ascribed to these different motives. No two occu- 
pations are more different from each other than agriculture and 
the liberal professions. The life of an artist, a scholar, a lawyer, an 
officer, a judge has no resemblance whatever to that of a farmer. 

1 Op. cit., p. 358. 



I50 



SUICIDE 



TABLE XYli — Share of Each Category of Motives in 100 An- 
nual Suicides of Each Sex 







FRANCE* 










Men 




Women 






1856-60 




1874-78 


1856-60 


1874-78 


Poverty ond losses 


13.30 




11.79 


5.38 


5.77 


Family troubles 


11.68 




12.53 


12.79 


16.00 


Love, jeo lousy, debauchery. 












misconduct 


15.48 




16.98 


13.16 


12.20 


Various types of distress 


23.70 




23.43 


17.16 


20.22 


Mental sickness 


25.67 




27.09 


45.75 


41.81 


Remorse, feor of criminal 












sentence 


0.84 






0.19 




Other causes and unknown 












couses 


9.33 




8.18 


5.51 


4.00 


Totals 


100.00 


100.00 


100.00 


100.00 






SAXONY t 










Men 




Women 






1854-78 




1880 


1854-78 


1880 


Physical pain 


5.64 




5.86 


7.43 


7.98 


Family troubles 


2.39 




3.30 


3.18 


1.72 


Losses and poverty 


9.52 




11.28 


2.80 


4.42 


Debauchery, gambling 


11.15 




10.74 


1.59 


0.44 


Remorse, fear of prosecution, 












etc. 


10.41 




8.51 


10.44 


6.21 


Unhappy love 


1.79 




1.50 


3.74 


6.20 


Mental troubles, religious 












mania 


27.94 




30.27 


50.64 


54.43 


Anger 


2.00 




3.29 


3.04 


3.09 


Disgust with life 


9.58 




6.67 


5.37 


5.76 


Unknown causes 


19.58 




18.58 


11.77 


9.75 



100.00 



Totals 100.00 

• According to Legoyt, p. 342. 
t According to Oettingen, Morahtatistik, Tables appended, p. 110. 



100.00 



100.00 



It is practically certain, then, that the social causes for suicide are not 
the same for both. Now, not only are the suicides of these two cate- 
gories of persons attributed to the same reasons, but the respective 
importance of these different reasons is supposed to be almost ex- 
actly the same in both. Following are the actual percentile shares 
of the chief motives for suicide in these two occupations in France 
during the years 1874-78: 



Loss of employment, financial losses, poverty 

Family troubles 

Disappointed love, jealousy 

Intoxication and drunkenness 

Suicides of criminals or minor offenders 

Physical sufferings 

Mental sickness 

Disgust with life, varied disappointments 

Unknown causes 



Agriculture 


Liberal Profe 


8.15 


8.87 


14.45 


13.14 


1.48 


2.01 


13.23 


6.41 


4.09 


4.73 


15.91 


19.89 


35.80 


34.04 


2.93 


4.94 


3.96 


5.97 



100.00 



100.00 



HOW TO DETERMINE SOCIAL CAUSES AND SOCIAL TYPES 151 

Except for intoxication and drunkenness, the figures, especially 
those of most numerical importance, differ little from column to 
column. Thus, through consideration of motives only, one might 
think that the causes of suicide are not, to be sure, of the same inten- 
sity but of the same sort in both cases. Yet actually, the forces impell- 
ing the farm laborer and the cultivated man of the city to suicide are 
widely different. The reasons ascribed for suicide, therefore, or those 
to which the suicide himself ascribes his act, are usually only apparent 
causes. Not only are the reasons merely individual repercussions of 
a general state, but they express the general state very unfaithfully, 
since they are identical while it is not. They may be said to indicate 
the individual's weak points, where the outside current bearing the 
impulse to self-destruction most easily finds introduction. But they 
are no part of this current itself and consequently cannot help us 
to understand it. 

"We therefore do not regret that certain countries like England and 
Austria are abandoning the collection of such supposed causes of 
suicide. Statistical efforts should take quite a different direction. 
Instead of trying to solve these insoluble problems of moral casuistry, 
they should notice more carefully the social concomitants of suicide. 
For our own part, at least, we make it a rule not to employ in our 
studies such uncertain and uninstructive data; no law of any interest 
has in fact ever been drawn from them by students of suicide. We 
shall thus refer to them only rarely, when they seem to have special 
meaning and to offer special assurance. We shall try to determine 
the productive causes of suicide directly, without concerning our- 
selves with the forms they can assume in particular individuals. 
Disregarding the individual as such, his motives and his ideas, we 
shall seek directly the states of the various social environments (re- 
ligious confessions, family, political society, occupational groups, 
etc.), in terms of which the variations of suicide occur. Only then 
returning to the individual, shall we study how these general causes 
become individualized so as to produce the homicidal results in- 
volved. 



CHAPTER 2 EGOISTIC SUICIDE 



aRST let us see how the different rehgious confessions affect 
suicide. 



If one casts a glance at the map of European suicide, it is at once 
clear that in purely Catholic countries like Spain, Portugal, Italy, 
suicide is very little developed, while it is at its maximum in Protes- 
tant countries, in Prussia, Saxony, Denmark. The following averages 
compiled by Morselli confirm this first conclusion: 

Average of Suicides 

per 
Million Inhabitants 



Protestant- stotes 190 

Mixed states (Protestant and Catholic) 96 

Catholic states 58 

Greek Catholic states 40 

The low proportion of the Greek Catholics cannot be surely attrib- 
uted to religion; for as their civilization is very different from that 
of the other European nations, this difference of culture may be the 
cause of their lesser aptitude. But this is not the case with most 
Catholic or Protestant societies. To be sure, they are not all on the 
same intellectual and moral level; yet the resemblances are suffi- 
ciently essential to make it possible to ascribe to confessional differ- 
ences the marked contrast they offer in respect to suicide. 

Nevertheless, this first comparison is still too summary. In spite 
of undeniable similarities, the social environments of the inhabitants 
of these different countries are not identical. The civilizations of 
Spain and Portugal are far below that of Germany and this inferiority 

152 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 



153 



may conceivably be the reason for the lesser development of suicide 
which we have just mentioned. If one wishes to avoid this source of 
error and determine more definitely the influence of Catholicism and 
Protestantism on the suicidal tendency, the two religions must be 
compared in the heart of a single society. 

Of all the great states of Germany, Bavaria has by far the fewest 
suicides. There have been barely 90 per million inhabitants yearly 
since 1874, while Prussia has 133 (1871-75), the duchy of Baden 
156, Wurttemberg 162, Saxony 300. Now, Bavaria also has most 
Catholics, 713.2 to 1,000 inhabitants. On the other hand, if one com- 

Bayarian Provinces (1867-75)* 



Provinces w. 




Provinces w. 




Provinces w. 




Catholic 


Suicides 


Catholic 


Suicides 


More Than 


Suicides 


Minority (less 


per Million 


Majority (50 


Per Million 


900/o 


Per Million 


thon 5096) 


Inhabitants 


to 90%) 


Inhabitants 


Catholic 


Inhabitants 


Rhenish 








Upper 




Palatinate 


167 


Lower Franconia 


157 


Palatinate 


64 


Central 








Upper 




Franconia 


207. 


Swobia 


118 


Bavaria 


114 


Upper 








Lower 




Franconia 


204 






Bavaria 


19 



Average 192 Averoge 

The population below 15 years has been omitted. 



135 



Average 



75 



pares the different provinces of Bavaria, suicides are found to be in 
direct proportion to the number of Protestants and in inverse pro- 
portion to that of Catholics (See Table above). Not only the pro- 
portions of averages to one another confirm the law but all the 
numbers of the first colum are higher than those of the second and 
those of the second higher than those of the third without exception. 
It is the same with Prussia: 

Prussian Provinces (1883-90) 



Provinces with 

More Than 90% 

Protestant 


Suicides 
per Million 
Inhabitants 


Provinces with 

from 89 to 68% 

Protestant 


Suicides 
per Million 
Inhabitants 


Saxony 

Schleswig 

Pomerania 

Average 

Provinces with 

from 40 to 50% 

Protestant 


309.4 
312.9 
171.5 

264.6 

Suicides 
per Million 
Inhabitants 


Hanover 

Hesse 

Brodenburg and Berlin 

E. Prussia 

Average 

Provinces with 

from 32 to 28% 

Protestant 


212.3 
200.3 
296.3 
171.3 

220.0 

Suicides 
per Million 
Inhabitants 


W. Prussia 

Silesia 

Westphalia 


123.9 
260.2 
107.5 


Posen 

Rhineland 

Hohenzollern 


96.4 

100.3 

90.1 



Average 



163.6 



Average 



95.6 



154 



SUICIDE 



There are only two slight irregularities among the 14 provinces 
thus compared, so far as detail is concerned; Silesia, which because 
of its relatively high number of suicides should be in the second 
category, is only in the third, while on the contrary Pomerania would 
be more in its place in the second than in the first colum. 

Switzerland forms an interesting study from this same point of 
view. For as both French and German populations exist there, the 
influence of the confession is observable separately on each race. 
Now, its influence is the same on both. Catholic cantons show four 
and five times fewer suicides than Protestant, of whichever na- 
tionality. 



French Cantons 



German Cantons 



Total of Cantons of 
All Nationalities 



Catholics 



Protestants 



83 suicides 
per million 
Inhabitants 

453 suicides 
per million 



Catholics 



87 suicides 



Protestants 293 suicides 



Catholics 
Mixed 

Protestants 



86.7 suicides 
212.0 suicides 

326.3 suicides 



Confessional influence is therefore so great as to dominate all 
others. 

Besides, in a fairly large number of cases the number of suicides 
per million inhabitants of the population of each confession has been 
directly determined. The following figures were obtained by various 
observers : 



TABLE XVIII — Suicides in Different Countries per Million 
Persons of Each Confession 















Names of 








Protestants 


Catholics 


Jews 


Observers 


Austria 




(1852-59) 


79.5 


51.3 


20.7 


Wagner 


Prussia 




(1849-55) 


159.9 


49.6 


46.4 


Id. 


Prussia 




(1869-72) 


187 


69 


96 


Morselli 


Prussia 




(1890) 


240 


100 


180 


Prinzing 


Baden 




(1852-62) 


139 


117 


87 


Legoyt 


Baden 




(1870-74) 


171 


136.7 


124 


Morselli 


Baden 




(1878-88) 


242 


170 


210 


Prinzing 


Bavaria 




(1844-56) 


135.4 


49.1 


105.9 


Morselli 


Bavaria 




(1884-91) 


224 


94 


193 


Prinzing 


Wurtten 


iberg 


(1846-60) 


113.5 


77.9 


65.6 


Wogner 


Wurtten' 


iberg 


(1873-76) 


190 


120 


60 


Durkheim 


Wurtten- 


iberg 


(1881-90) 


170 


119 


142 


Id. 



Thus, everywhere without exception,^ Protestants show far more 
suicides than the followers of other confessions. The difference varies 

^ We have no data on confessional influence in France, Leroy, however, tells us 
the following in his study on Seine-et-Marne: in the communes of Quincy, Nanteuil- 
les-Meaux, Mareuil, Protestants show one suicide to 310 inhabitants, Catholics i to 
678 {op. cit., p. 203). 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 55 

between a minimum of 20 to 30 per cent and a maximum of 300 
per cent. It is useless to invoke with Mayr ^ against such a unani- 
mous agreement of facts, the isolated case of Norway and Sweden 
which, though Protestant, have only an average number of suicides. 
First, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, these interna- 
tional comparisons are not significant unless bearing on a consider- 
able number of countries, and even in this case are not conclusive. 
There are sufficiently great differences between the peoples of the 
Scandinavian peninsula and those of Central Europe for it to be 
reasonable that Protestantism does not produce exactly the same 
effects on both. But furthermore, if the suicide-rate is not in itself 
very high in these two countries, it seems relatively so if one con- 
siders their modest rank among the civilized peoples of Europe. 
There is no reason to suppose that they have reached an intellectual 
level above Italy, to say the least, yet self-destruction occurs from 
twice to three times as often (90 to 100 suicides per million in- 
habitants as against 40). May Protestantism not be the cause of this 
relatively higher figure.'' Thus the fact not only does not tell against 
the law just established on the basis of so many observations, but 
rather tends to confirm it.^ 

The aptitude of Jews for suicide is always less than that of Protes- 
tants; in a very general way it is also, though to a lesser degree, lower 
than that of Catholics. Occasionally however, the latter relation is 
reversed; such cases occur especially in recent times. Up to the middle 
of the century, Jews killed themselves less frequently than Catholics 
in all countries but Bavaria; ^ only towards 1870 do they begin to lose 
their ancient immunity. They still very rarely greatly exceed the rate 
for Catholics. Besides, it must be remembered that Jews live more 
exclusively than other confessional groups in cities and are in intellec- 
tual occupations. On this account they are more inclined to suicide 
than the members of other confessions, for reasons other than their 
religion. If therefore the rate for Judaism is so low, in spite of this 

^ Handworterbuch der Staatswissenschaften, Supplement, Vol. I, p. 702. 

3 The case of England is exceptional, a non-Catholic country where suicide is in- 
frequent. It will be explained below. 

* Bavaria is still the only exception: Jews there kill themselves twice as often as 
Catholics. Is there something exceptional about the position of Judaism in this 
country? We do not know. 



156 SUICIDE 

aggravating circumstance, it may be assumed that other things being 
equal, their rehgion has the fewest suicides of all. 
These facts established, what is their explanation? 

II 

If we consider that the Jews are everywhere in a very small minor- 
ity and that in most societies where the foregoing observations were 
made, Catholics are in the minority, we are tempted to find in these 
facts the cause explaining the relative rarity of voluntary deaths in 
these two confessions.^ Obviously, the less numerous confessions, 
facing the hostility of the surrounding populations, in order to main- 
tain themselves are obliged to exercise severe control over themselves 
and subject themselves to an espcially rigorous discipline. To justify 
the always precarious tolerance granted them, they have to practice 
greater morality. Besides these considerations, certain facts seem 
really to imply that this special factor has some influence. In Prussia, 
the minority status of Catholics is very pronounced, since they are 
only a third of the whole population. They kill themselves only one 
third as often as the Protestants. The difference decreases in Bavaria 
where two thirds of the inhabitants are Catholics; the voluntary 
deaths of the latter are here only in the proportion of 100 to 275 
of those of Protestants or else of 100 to 238, according to the period. 
Finally, in the almost entirely Catholic Empire of Austria, only 155 
Protestant to 100 Catholic suicides are found. It would seem then 
that where Protestantism becomes a minority its tendency to suicide 
decreases. 

But first, suicide is too little an object of public condemnation 
for the slight measure of blame attaching to it to have such influence, 
even on minorities obliged by their situation to pay special heed to 
public opinion. As it is an act without offense to others, it involves 
no great reproach to the groups more inclined to it than others, and 
is not apt to increase greatly their relative ostracism as would cer- 
tainly be the case with a greater frequency of crime and misdemeanor. 
Besides, when religious intolerance is very pronounced, it often pro- 
duces an opposite effect. Instead of exciting the dissenters to respect 
opinion more, it accustoms them to disregard it. When one feels him- 
self an object of inescapable hostility, one abandons the idea of con- 

5 Legoyt, op. cit., p. 205: Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 654. 



J 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 57 

ciliating it and is the more resolute in his most unpopular observ- 
ances. This has frequently happened to the Jews and thus their 
exceptional immunity probably has another cause. 

Anyway, this explanation would not account for the respective 
situation of Protestants and Catholics. For though the protective in- 
fluence of Catholicism is less in Austria and Bavaria, where it is in 
the majority, it is still considerable. Catholicism does not therefore 
owe this solely to its minority status. More generally, whatever the 
proportional share of these two confessions in the total population," 
wherever their comparison has been possible from the point of view 
of suicide, Protestants are found to kill themselves much more often 
than Catholics. There are even countries like the Upper Palatinate 
and Upper Bavaria, where the population is almost wholly Catholic 
(92 and 96 per cent) and where there are nevertheless 300 and 423 
Protestant suicides to 100 Catholic suicides. The proportion even 
rises to 528 per cent in Lower Bavaria where the reformed religion 
has not quite one follower to 100 inhabitants. Therefore, even if the 
prudence incumbent on minorities were a partial cause of the great 
difference between the two religions, the greatest share is certainly 
due to other causes. 

We shall find these other causes in the nature of these two reli- 
gious systems. Yet they both prohibit suicide with equal emphasis; 
not only do they penalize it morally with great severity, but both 
teach that a new life begins beyond the tomb where men are pun- 
ished for their evil actions, and Protestantism just as well as Catholi- 
cism numbers suicide among them. Finally, in both cults these pro- 
hibitions are of divine origin; they are represented not as the logical 
jzonclusion of correct reason, but God Himself is their authority. 
Therefore, if Protestantism is less unfavorable to the development of 
suicide, it is not because of a different attitude from that of Catholi- 
cism. Thus, if both religions have the same precepts with respect to 
this particular matter, their dissimilar influence on suicide must pro- 
ceed from one of the more general characteristics differentiating them. 

The only essential difference between Catholicism and Protes-'l 
tantism is that the second permits free inquiry to a far greater \ 
degree than the first. Of course, Catholicism by the very fact that it J 
is an idealistic religion concedes a far greater place to thought and 
reflection than Greco-Latin polytheism or Hebrew monotheism. It is 



-^ 



158 SUICIDE 

not restricted to mechanical ceremonies but seeks the control of the 
conscience. So it appeals to conscience, and even when demanding 
blind submission of reason, does so by employing the language of 

P reason. None the less, the Catholic accepts his faith ready made, with- 

j out scrutiny. He may not even submit it to historical examination 
since the original texts that serve as its basis are proscribed. A whole 

\ hierarchical system of authority is devised, with marvelous ingenuity, 

(, to render tradition invariable. All variation is abhorrent to Catholic 
thought. The Protestant is far more the author of his faith. The Bible 

: is put in his hands and no interpretation is imposed upon him. The 
very structure of the reformed cult stresses this state of religious in- 

L-dividualism. Nowhere but in England is the Protestant clergy a 
hierarchy; like the worshippers, the priest has no other source but 
himself and his conscience. He is a more instructed guide than the 
run of worshippers but with no special authority for fixing dogma. 
But what best proves that this freedom of inquiry proclaimed by the 
founders of the Reformation has not remained a Platonic affirmation 
is the increasing multiplicity of all sorts of sects so strikingly in 
contrast with the indivisible unity of the Catholic Church. 

\ We thus reach our first conclusion, that the proclivity of Protes- 
tantism for suicide must relate to the spirit of free inquiry that 
animates this religion. Let us understand this relationship correctly. 
Free inquiry itself is only the effect of another cause. When it 
appears, when men, after having long received their ready made faith 
from tradition, claim the right to shape it for themselves, this is not 
because of the intrinsic desirability of free inquiry, for the latter in- 
volves as much sorrow as happiness. But it is because men henceforth 
need this liberty. This very need can have only one cause: the over- 
throw of traditional beliefs. If they still asserted themselves with 
equal energy, it would never occur to men to criticize them. If they 
still had the same authority, men would not demand the right to 
verify the source of this authority. Reflection develops only if its de- 
velopment becomes imperative, that is, if certain ideas and instinctive 
sentiments which have hitherto adequately guided conduct are found 
to have lost their efficacy. Then reflection intervenes to fill the gap 
that has appeared, but which it has not created. Just as reflection dis- 
appears to the extent that thought and action take the form of auto- 
matic habits, it awakes only when accepted habits become disorgan- 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 159 

ized. It asserts its rights against public opinion only when the latter 
loses strength, that is, when it is no longer prevalent to the same 
extent. If these assertions occur not merely occasionally and as pass- 
ing crises, but become chronic; if individual consciences keep re- 
affirming their autonomy, it is because they are constantly subject to 
conflicting impulses, because a new opinion has not been formed to 
replace the one no longer existing. If a new system of beliefs were 
constituted which seemed as indisputable to everyone as the old, no 
one would think of discussing it any longer. Its discussion would no 
longer even be permitted; for ideas shared by an entire society draw 
from this consensus an authority that makes them sacrosanct and 
raises them above dispute. For them to have become more tolerant, 
they must first already have become the object of less general and 
complete assent and been weakened by preliminary controversy. 

Thus, if it is correct to say that free inquiry once proclaimed, 
multiplies schisms, it must be added that it presupposes them and 
derives from them, for it is claimed and instituted as a principle only 
in order to permit latent or half-declared schisms to develop more 
freely. So if Protestantism concedes a greater freedom to individual 
thought than Catholicism, it is because it has fewer common beliefs 
and practices. Now, a religious society cannot exist without a col- 
lective credo and the more extensive the credo the more unified and 
strong is the society. For it does not unite men by an exchange 
and reciprocity of services, a temporal bond of union which permits 
and even presupposes differences, but which a religious society cannot 
form. It socializes men only by attaching them completely to an iden- \ 
tical body of doctrine and socializes them in proportion as this body 
of doctrine is extensive and firm. The more numerous the manners 
of action and thought of a religious character are, which are accord- 
ingly removed from free inquiry, the more the idea of God presents 
itself in all details of existence, and makes individual wills converge 
to one identical goal. Inversely, the greater concessions a confessional 
group makes to individual judgment, the less it dominates lives, the 
less its cohesion and vitality. We thus reach the conclusion that the 
superiority of Protestantism with respect to suicide results from its 
being a less strongly integrated church than the Catholic church. 

This also explains the situation of Judaism. Indeed, the reproach 
to which the Jews have for so long been exposed by Christianity has 



l6o SUICIDE 

created feelings of unusual solidarity among them. Their need of re- 
sisting a general hostility, the very impossibility of free communica- 
tion with the rest of the population, has forced them to strict union 
among themselves. Consequently, each community became a small, 
compact and coherent society with a strong feeling of self-conscious- 
ness and unity. Everyone thought and lived alike; individual di- 
vergences were made almost impossible by the community of exist- 
ence and the close and constant surveillance of all over each. The 
Jewish church has thus been more strongly united than any other, 
from its dependence on itself because of being the object of intol- 
erance. By analogy with what has just been observed apropos of 
Protestantism, the same cause must therefore be assumed for the 
slight tendency of the Jews to suicide in spite of all sorts of circum- 
stances which might on- the contrary incline them to it. Doubtless 
they owe this immunity in a sense to the hostility surrounding them. 
But if this is its influence, it is not because it imposes a higher mo- 
rality but because it obliges them to live in greater union. They are 
immune to this degree because their religious society is of such soli- 
darity. Besides, the ostracism to which they are subject is only one of 
the causes producing this result; the very nature of Jewish beliefs 
must contribute largely to it. Judaism, in fact, like all early religions, 
consists basically of a body of practices minutely governing all the 
details of life and leaving little free room to individual judgment. 

Ill 

Several facts confirm this explanation. 

First, of all great Protestant countries, England is the one where 
suicide is least developed. In fact, only about 80 suicides per million 
inhabitants are found there, whereas the reformed societies of Ger- 
many have from 140 to 400; and yet the general activity of ideas and 
business seems no less great there than elsewhere.^ Now, it happens 
at the same time that the Anglican church is far more powerfully in- 
tegrated than other Protestant churches. To be sure, England has 
been customarily regarded as the classic land of individual freedom; 

^ To be sure, the statistics of English suicides are not very exact. Because of the 
penalties attached to suicide, many cases are reported as accidental death. However, 
this inexactitude is not enough to explain the extent of the difference between this 
country and Germany. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE l6l 

but actually many facts indicate that the number of common, obliga- 
tory beliefs and practices, which are thus withdrawn from free 
inquiry by individuals, is greater than in Germany. First, the law 
still sanctions many religious requirements: such as the law of the 
observance of Sunday, that forbidding stage representations of any 
character from Holy Scripture; the one until recently requiring some 
profession of faith from every member of political representative 
bodies, etc. Next, respect for tradition is known to be general and 
powerful in England : it must extend to matters of religion as well as 
others. But a highly developed traditionalism always more or less re- 
stricts activity of the individual. Finally, the Anglican clergy is the 
only Protestant clergy organized in a hierarchy. This external organi- 
zation clearly shows an inner unity incompatible with a pronounced 
religious individualism. 

Besides, England has the largest number of clergymen of any 
Protestant country. In 1876 there averaged 908 church-goers for 
every minister, compared with 932 in Hungary, 1,100 in Holland, 
1,300 in Denmark, 1,440 in Switzerland and 1,600 in Germany.''' 
The number of priests is not an insignificant detail nor a superficial 
characteristic but one related to the intrinsic nature of religion. The 
proof of this is that the Catholic clergy is everywhere much more 
numerous than the Protestant. In Italy there is a priest for every 267 
Catholics, in Spain for 419, in Portugal for 536, in Switzerland for 
540, in France for 823, in Belgium for 1,050. This is because the 
priest is the natural organ of faith and tradition and because here as 
elsewhere the organ inevitably develops in exact proportion to its 
function. The more intense religious life, the more men are needed 
to direct it. The greater the number of dogmas and precepts the inter- 
pretation of which is not left to individual consciences, the more au- 
thorities are required to tell their meaning; moreover, the more nu- 
merous these authorities, the more closely they surround and the 
better they restrain the individual. Thus, far from weakening our 
theory, the case of England verifies it. If Protestantism there does not 
produce the same results as on the continent, it is because religious 
society there is much more strongly constituted and to this extent re- 
sembles the Catholic church. 

^ Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 626. 



^ 



162 SUICIDE 

Here, however, is a more general proof in confirmation of our 
thesis. 

The taste for free inquiry can be aroused only if accompanied 
by that for learning. Knowledge is free thought's only means of 
achieving its purposes. When irrational beliefs or practices have lost 
their hold, appeal must be made, in the search for others, to the en- 
lightened consciousness of which knowledge is only the highest 
form. Fundamentally, these two tendencies are one and spring from 
the same source. Men generally have the desire for self-instruction 
only in so far as they are freed from the yoke of tradition; for as 
long as the latter governs intelligence it is all-sufficient and jealous 
of any rival. On the other hand, light is sought as soon as customs 
whose origins are lost in obscurity no longer correspond to new ne- 
cessities. This is why philosophy, the first, synthetic form of knowl- 
edge, appears as soon as religion has lost its sway, and only then; and 
is then followed progressively by the many single sciences with the 
further development of the very need which produced philosophy. 
Unless we are mistaken, if the progressive weakening of collective 
and customary prejudices produces a trend to suicide and if Protes- 
tantism derives thence its special pre-disposition to it, the two fol- 
lowing facts should be noted: i, the desire for learning must be 
stronger among Protestants than among Catholics; 2, in so far as this 
denotes a weakening of common beliefs it should vary with suicide, 
fairly generally. Do facts confirm this twofold hypothesis? 

If Catholic France is compared with Protestant Germany merely 
at their highest levels, that is, if only the upper classes of both are 
compared, it seems that France may bear the comparison. In the 
great centers of our country, knowledge is no less honored or wide- 
spread than among our neighbors; we even decidedly outdistance 
several Protestant countries in this respect. But if the desire for learn- 
ing is equally felt in the upper reaches of the two societies, it is not 
so on their lower levels; and whereas the maximal intensity is ap- 
proximately the same in both, the average intensity is less among us. 
The same is true of the aggregate of Catholic nations compared with 
Protestant nations. Even assuming that the highest culture of the for- 
mer is about the same as the latter's, the situation is quite otherwise 
as regards popular education. Whereas among the Protestant peoples 
of Saxony, Norway, Sweden, Baden, Denmark and Prussia, from 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 63 

1 877-1 878 among 1,000 children of school age, that is, from 6 to 
12 years, an average of 957 attended school, the Catholic peoples, 
France, Austria-Hungary, Spain and Italy, had only 667, or 31 per 
cent less. Proportions are the same for the periods of 1874-75 and 
1860-61.^ Prussia, the Protestant country having the lowest figure 
here, is yet far above France at the head of the Catholic countries; 
the former has 897 pupils per 1,000 children, the latter only 766.^ 
In all of Germany, Bavaria has most Catholics and also most illit- 
erates. Of all Bavarian provinces, the Upper Palatinate is one of the 
most profoundly Catholic and has also the most conscripted men who 
do not know how to read or write (15 per cent in 1871 ) . In Prussia 
the same is true for the duchy of Posen and the province of Prussia.^^ 
Finally, in the whole kingdom there numbered in 1871, 66 illiterates 
to every 1,000 Protestants and 152 to 1,000 Catholics. The relation 
is the same for the women of both faiths. ^^ 

Perhaps it will be objected that primary instruction can be no 
measure of general education. The degree of a people's education, it 
is often said, does not depend on the greater or smaller number of 
illiterates. Let us agree to this qualification, though the various de- 
grees of education are perhaps more closely interrelated than seems 
to be the case and the development of one is difficult without the si- 
multaneous growth of the others. ^^ In any case, although the level of 
primary instruction may only imperfectly reflect that of scientific cul- 
ture, it has a certain reference to the extent of the desire for knowl- 
edge of a people as a whole. A people must feel this need very 
keenly to try to spread its elements even among the lowest classes. 
Thus to place the means of learning within everyone's reach, and 
even legally to forbid ignorance, shows a national awareness of the 
indispensability of broadened and enlightened intelligence of the in- 
dividual for the nation's own existence. Actually, Protestant nations 
have so stressed primary instruction because they held that each indi- 
vidual must be able to understand the Bible. Our present search is 

^ Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 586. 

^Bavaria slightly, exceeds Prussia in one of these periods (1877-78); but only 
this once. 

I'' Oettingen, ibid., p. 582. 

1^ Morselli, op. cit., p. 223. 

^2 Moreover it will appear below that both secondary and higher education are 
more developed among Protestants than among Catholics. 



164 suicroE 

for the average intensity of this need, the value attached by each peo- 
ple to knowledge, not the standing of its scholars and their discov- 
eries. From this special point of view, the state of advanced learning 
and truly scientiJSc production would be a poor criterion; for it would 
show only what goes on in a limited sector of society. Popular and 
general education is a more accurate index. 

Having thus proved our first proposition, let us attack the second. 
Does the craving for knowledge to the degree that it corresponds to 
a weakening of common faith really develop as does suicide? The 
very facts that Protestants are better educated and commit suicide 
more than Catholics is a first presumption for this. But the law can 
not only be verified by comparison of one faith with the other but 
also be observed within each religious confession. 

Italy is wholly Catholic. Public instruction and suicide are identi- 
cally distributed (See Table XIX). 

TABLE XIX * — Comparison of Italian Provinces with Refer- 
ence to Suicide and Education 

Per Cent- of Marriages with 
First Group of Both Husbond and Wife Suicides per 

Provinces Literate Million Inhabitants 



Piedmont 


53.09 


35.6 


Lombardy 


44.29 


40.4 


Liguria 


41.15 


47.3 


Rome 


32.61 


41.7 


Tuscany 


24.33 


40,6 


Averages 


39.09 


41.1 


Second Group of 






Provinces 






Venice 


19.56 


32.0 


Emilia 


19.31 


62.9 


Umbria 


15.46 


30.7 


Marches 


14.46 


34.6 


Campana 


12.45 


21.6 


Sardinia 


10.14 


13.3 


Averages 


15.23 


32.5 


Third Group of 






Provinces 







Sicily 8.98 18.5 

AbruzzI 6.35 15.7 

Apulia 6.81 16.3 

Calabria 4.67 8.1 

Basilicata 4.35 15.0 

Averages 6.23 14.7 

* The figures for literate couples are from Oettingen, Moratstatisiik, supplement. Table 85; 

they refer to the years 1872-78, suicides to the period 1864-76. 

Not only do the averages correspond exactly, but the agreement 
extends to details. There is a single exception; Emilia, where under 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 65 

the influence of local causes suicides have no relation to the extent of 
literacy. Similar observations may be made in France. The depart- 
ments containing most illiterate couples (above 20 per cent) are Cor- 
rèze, Corsica, Côtes-du-Nord, Dordogne, Finisterre, Landes, Morbi- 
han, Haute- Vienne; all relatively free from suicides. More generally, 
among departments with more than 10 per cent of couples unable 
either to read or write, not one belongs to the northeastern region 
which is classical territory for French suicides. ^^ 

If Protestant countries are compared with one another, the same 
parallelism will be found. More suicides occur in Saxony than in 
Prussia; Prussia has more illiterates than Saxony (5.52 per cent com- 
pared with 1.3 in 1865). Saxony is even peculiar in that the school 
population is above the legal requirement. For 1,000 children of 
school age in 1877-78, 1,031 attended school: that is, many children 
continued their studies after the required time. The fact is not met 
with in any other country. ^"^ Finally England, as we know, is the one 
Protestant country with the fewest suicides; it also most resembles 
Catholic countries with respect to education. In 1865 there were still 
23 per cent of naval seamen who could not read and 27 per cent 
unable to write. 

Still other facts may be compared with the foregoing and confirm 
them. 

The liberal professions and in a wider sense the well-to-do classes 
are certainly those with the liveliest taste for knowledge and the most 
active intellectual life. Now, although the statistics of suicide by oc- 
cupations and classes cannot always be obtained with sufficient ac- 
curacy, it is undeniably exceptionally frequent in the highest classes 
of society. In France from 1826 to 1880 the liberal professions lead, 
with 550 suicides per million of the professional group, while serv- 
ants, immediately following, have only 290.^^ In Italy, Morselli suc- 
ceeded in computing the groups exclusively devoted to letters and 
found that they far surpass all others in their relative contribution. 
Indeed, for 1868-76, he estimates it as 482.6 per million members 
of this profession; the army follows with only 404.1 and the general 
average of the country is only 32. In Prussia (1883-90) the corps of 

13 See Annuaire statistique de la France, 1892-94, p. 50 and 51. 

1^ Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 586. 

15 General report of criminal justice for 1882, p. CXV. 



1 66 suicroE 

public officials, which is most carefully recruited and forms an intel- 
lectual elite, surpasses all other professions with 832 suicides; the 
health services and public instruction, though much lower, still have 
very high figures (439 and 301). Bavaria shows the same picture. 
Omitting the army, the position of which is exceptional from the 
point of view of suicide for reasons to be given below, public offi- 
cials hold second place with 454 suicides and almost achieve first 
place, for they are barely exceeded by business, with the rate of 465; 
the arts, literature and the press follow closely with 416.^^ To be 
sure, the educated classes in Belgium and Wurttemberg seem less 
gravely afflicted; but professional nomenclature in these countries is 
too imprecise to permit much importance being attributed to the two 
irregularities. 

Further, we have seen that in all the countries of the world women 
commit suicide much lesss than men. They are also much less edu- 
cated. Fundamentally traditionalist by nature, they govern their con- 
duct by fixed beliefs and have no great intellectual needs. In Italy, 
between 1878-79, there were 4,808 married men out of 10,000 who 
could not sign their marriage contract; of 10,000 married women, 
7,029 could not.^^ In France, the proportion in 1879 ^^^ ^99 hus- 
bands and 310 wives per 1,000 couples. In Prussia the same differ- 
ence is found between the sexes, among Protestants as well as among 
Catholics. ^^ In England it is much less than in other European coun- 
tries. In 1879, 138 illiterate husbands were found per thousand to 
185 wives, and since 185 1 the proportion has been practically the 
same.^^ But England is also the country where women come closer to 
men with respect to suicide. To 1,000 suicides of women there were 
2,546 of men in 1858-60, 2,745 i^ 1863-67, 2,861 in 1872-76, 
while everywhere else ^^ suicides of women are four, five or six times 
less frequent than those of men. Finally, circumstances are almost 
reversed in the United States, which makes them particularly instruc- 

^^ See Prinzing, op. cit., pp. 28-31. It is noteworthy that in Prussia journalism 
and the arts show a rather ordinary figure (279 suicides). 

1^ Oettingen, Moralstatistik, supplement, Table 83. 

^^ Morselli, p. 223. 

1^ Oettingen, ibid., p. 577. 

2" Except Spain. But not only is the accuracy of Spanish statistics open to doubt, 
but Spain cannot compare with the great nations of Central and Northern Europe. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 167 

tive. Negro women, it seems, are equally or more highly educated 
than their husbands. Several observers report ^^ that they are also 
very strongly predisposed to suicide, at times even surpassing white 
women. The proportion in certain places is said to be 350 per cent. 

There is one case, however, in which our law might seem not to 
be verified. 

Of all religions, Judaism counts the fewest suicides, yet in none 
other is education so general. Even in elementary education the Jews 
are at least on a level with the Protestants, In fact, in Prussia ( 1871), 
to 1,000 Jews of each sex there were 66 illiterate men and 125 
women; for the Protestants the numbers were practically the same, 
66 and 114. But the Jews participate proportionally more, particu- 
larly in secondary and higher learning, than the members of other 
religions, as the following figures taken from Prussian statistics 
(years 1875-76)^^ show. 



Catholics Protestants Jews 



Share of eac)i religion in 100 inhabitants 

of ail sorts 33.8 64.9 1.3 

Share of each religion in 100 secondary 

school pupils 17.3 73.1 9.6 

Taking into account differences of population, Jews attend Gym- 
nasia, Realschulen, etc, about 14 times as often as Catholics and 7 
times as often as Protestants, It is the same with higher education. 
Among 1,000 young Catholics attending institutions of learning of 
every sort, there are only 1.3 at a university; among 1,000 Protes- 
tants, 2.5; for the Jews the proportion increases to 16.^^ 

But if the Jew manages to be both well instructed and very dis- 
inclined to suicide, it is because of the special origin of his desire for 
knowledge. It is a general law that religious minorities, in order to 
protect themselves better against the hate to which they are exposed 
or merely through a sort of emulation, try to surpass in knowledge 
the populations surrounding them. Thus Protestants themselves show 
m.ore desire for knowledge when they are a minority of the general 

21 Baly and Boudin. We quote from Morselli, p. 225. 

22 According to Alwin Petersilie, Zur Statistik der hoheren Lehranstalten in 
Preussen. In Zeitschr. d. preus. stat. Bureau, 1887, P- 109 ff. 

^^Zeitschr. d. pr. stat. Bureau, 1889, P- XX. 



1 68 SUICIDE 

population.^* The Jew, therefore, seeks to learn, not in order to re- 
place his collective prejudices by reflective thought, but merely to be 
better armed for the struggle. For him it is a means of offsetting the 
unfavorable position imposed on him by opinion and sometimes by 
law. And since knowledge by itself has no influence upon a tradition 
in full vigor, he superimposes this intellectual life upon his habitual 
routine with no eflfect of the former upon the latter. This is the rea- 
son for the complexity he presents. Primitive in certain respects, in 
others he is an intellectual and man of culture. He thus combines the 
advantages of the severe discipline characteristic of small and an- 
cient groups with the benefits of the intense culture enjoyed by our 
great societies. He has all the intelligence of modern man without 
sharing his despair. 

Accordingly, if in this case intellectual development bears no re- 
lation to the number of voluntary deaths, it is because its origin and 
significance are not the usual ones. So the exception is only appar- 
ent; it even confirms the law. Indeed, it proves that if the suicidal 
tendency is great in educated circles, this is due, as we have said, to 
the weakening of traditional beliefs and to the state of moral indi- 
vidualism resulting from this; for it disappears when education has 
another cause and responds to other needs. 

IV 

Two important conclusions derive from this chapter. 
First, we see why as a rule suicide increases with knowledge. 
Knowledge does not determine this progress. It is innocent; nothing 

2* In fact, the following shows the variation of Protestant enrollment in secondary 
schools in the different provinces of Prussia: 

Average Proportion of Difference 

Proportion of Protestant Protestant Pupils to Between 

Population to Total Total No. of Pupils First and Second 

1st group 98.7-87.2% Average 94.6 90.8 — 3.8 

2nd group 80 -50 % Average 70.3 75.3 -f 5 

3rd group 50 -40 % Average 46.4 56.0 +10.4 

4th group Below 40% Averoge 29.2 61.0 4-31.8 

Thus, where Protestantism is in a great majority, its scholastic population is not 
in proportion to its total population. With the increase of the Catholic minority, the 
difference between the two populations, from being negative, becomes positive, and 
this positive difference becomes larger in proportion as the Protestants become fewer. 
The Catholic faith also shows more intellectual curiosity when in the minority. 
(See Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 650). 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 69 

is more unjust than to accuse it, and the example of the Jews proves 
this conclusively. But these two facts result simultaneously from a 
single general state which they translate into different forms. Man ^^^^ 

^ seeks to learn and man kills himself because of the loss of cohesion 
in his religious society; he does not kill himself because of his learn- ^ 
ing. It is certainly not the learning he acquires that disorganizes re- s y 
ligion; but the desire for knowledge wakens because religion becomes 
disorganized. Knowledge is not sought as a means to destroy ac- I 

^cepted opinions but because their destruction has commenced. To be 
sure, once knowledge exists, it may battle in its own name and in its 
own cause, and set up as an antagonist to traditional sentiments. But 
its attacks would be ineffective if these sentiments still possessed vi- 
tality; or rather, would not even take place. Faith is not uprooted by 
dialectic proof; it must already be deeply shaken by other causes to 
be unable to withstand the shock of argument. 

Far from knowledge being the source of the evil, it is its remedy, 
the only remedy we have. Once established beliefs have been carried 
away by the current of affairs, they cannot be artificially reestablished; 
only reflection can guide us in life, after this. Once the social instinct 
is blunted, intelligence is the only guide left us and we have to re- 
construct a conscience by its means. Dangerous as is the undertaking 
there can be no hesitation, for we have no choice. Let those who 
view anxiously and sadly the ruins of ancient beliefs, who feel all 
the difficulties of these critical times, not ascribe to science an evil it 
has not caused but rather which it tries to cure! Beware of treating 
it as an enemy! It has not the dissolvent effect ascribed to it, but is j 
the only weapon for our battle against the dissolution which gives I 
birth to science itself. It is no answer to denounce it. The authority/ 
of vanished traditions will never be restored by silencing it; we shall 
be only more powerless to replace them. We must, to be sure, be 
equally careful to avoid seeing a self-sufficient end in education, 
whereas it is only a means. If minds cannot be made to lose the de- 
sire for freedom by artificially enslaving them, neither can they re- 
cover their equilibrium by mere freedom. They must use this free- 
dom fittingly. 

Secondly, we see why, generally speaking, religion has a prophy- 
lactic effect upon suicide. It is not, as has sometimes been said, 
because it condemns it more unhesitatingly than secular morality, 



1 70 SUICIDE 

nor because the idea of God gives its precepts exceptional authority 
which subdues the will, nor because the prospect of a future life and 
the terrible punishments there awaiting the guilty give its proscrip- 
tions a greater sanction than that of human laws. The Protestant be- 
lieves in God and the immorality of the soul no less than the Catho- 
lic. More than this, the religion with least inclination to suicide, 
Judaism, is the very one not formally proscribing it and also the one 
in which the idea of immortality plays the least role. Indeed, the 
Bible contains no law forbidding man to kill himself ^^ and, on the 
other hand, its beliefs in a future life are most vague. Doubtless, in 
both matters, rabbinical teaching has gradually supplied the omissions 
of the sacred book; but they have not its authority. The beneficent 
influence of religion is therefore not due to the special nature of re- 
ligious conceptions. If religion protects man against the desire for 
self-destruction, it is not that it preaches the respect for his own per- 
son to him with arguments sut generis; but because it is a,.society. 
/What constitutes this society is the existence of a certain number of 
beliefs and practices common to all the faithful, traditional and thus 
obligatory. The more numerous and strong these collective states of 
mind are, fhp-sfmrip;FTjJTgJntpgra^^^^ nF The religio us comm unity, 
afid'alsoThe greate r its pr eservative value. The details of dogmas 
anid rites arèTécondary. The essentid^tHing is that they be capable of 
supporting a sufficiently intens e collec tiv e lif e. And because the 
Protestant church has less consistency than the others it has less 
moderating effect upon suicide. 

25 The only penal proscription known to us is that mentioned by Flavius Josephus 
in his History of the War of the Jews against the Romans (III, 25), which says 
simply that "the bodies of those who kill themselves voluntarily remain unburied 
until after sunset, although those who have been killed in battle may be buried 
earlier." This is not even definitely a penal measure. 



CHAPTER 3 EGOISTIC SUICIDE (continued) 



^UT if religion preserves men from suicide only because and in 
so far as it is a society, other societies probably have the same effect. 
From this point of view let us consider the family and political 
society. 

I 

If one consults only the absolute figures, unmarried persons seem - \J- 
to commit suicide less than married ones. Thus in France, during the 
period 1873-78, there were 16,264 suicides of married persons while 
unmarried persons had only 11,709. The former number is to the 
second as 132 to 100.^ As the same proportion appears at other pe- 
riods and in other countries, certain authors had once taught that 
marriage and family life multiply the chances of suicide. Certainly, 
if in accordance with current opinion one regards suicide primarily 
as an act of despair caused by the difficulties of existence, this opin- 
ion has all the appearance of probability. An unmarried person has 
in fact an easier life than a married one. Does not marriage entail all 
sorts of burdens and responsibilities.^ To assure the present and fu- 
ture of a family, are not more privations and sufferings required than 
to meet the needs of a single person? - Nevertheless, clear as it 
seems, this a priori reasoning is quite false and the facts only seem 
to support it because of being poorly analyzed. The elder Bertillon 

^ Durkheim's figure of 132 appears to be a misprint. The figure works out to 
139. — Ed. 

2 See Wagner, Die Gesetzmassigkeit, etc., p. 177. 



172 suicroE 

first established this by an ingenious calculation which we shall 
reproduce.^ 

Really to appreciate the figures given above, we must remember 
that a very large number of unmarried persons are less than 16 years 
old, while all married persons are older. Up to 16 years the tendency 
to suicide is very slight, due to age, without considering other fac- 
tors. In France only one or two suicides per million inhabitants are 
found at this time of life; at the following period there are twenty 
times as many. The inclusion of many children below 16 among un- 
married persons thus unduly reduces the average aptitude of "the lat- 
ter, since the reduction is due to age, not celibacy. If they seem to 
contribute fewer suicides, it is not because they are unmarried but be- 
cause many of them are yet immature. So, if one tries to compare the 
two populations to determine the influence of marital status and that 
alone, one must rid oneself of this disturbing element and compare 
with married persons only the unmarried above 16. When this sub- 
traction is made, it appears that between 1863-68 there were on the 
average 173 suicides in a million unmarried persons above 16 years 
and 154.5 for a million married persons. The ratio of the first to the 
second number is that of 112 to 100. 

There is thus a certain accretion due to celibacy. But it is much 
greater than the preceding figures show. Actually, we have assumed 
that all unmarried persons above 16 years and all married persons 
were of the same average age. This is not true. The majority of un- 
married men in France, exactly 58 per cent, are between 15 and 20 
years; the majority of unmarried women, exactly 57 per cent are less 
than 25 years. The average age of all unmarried men is 26.8, of all 
unmarried women 28.4. The average age of married persons, on the 
contrary, is between 40 and 45 years. For both sexes combined, sui- 
cide develops according to age as follows: 

From 16 to 21 years 45.9 suicides per million inhabitants 

From 21 to 30 years 97.9 suicides per million inhabitants 

From 31 to 40 years ii4-5 suicides per million inhabitants 

From 41 to 50 years 164.4 suicides per million inhabitants 

3 See article, Mariage, in Dictionnaire encyclopédique des sciences médicales, 2nd 
series. See p. 50 fF. — On this question cf. J. Bertilion, Jr., Les célibataires, les veufs 
et les divorcés au point de vue du mariage in Revue scientifique, February, 1879. — 
Also an article in the Bulletin de la société d'anthropologie, 1880, p. 280 ff. — 
Durkheim, Suicide et natalité, in Revue philosophique, November 1888. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 73 

These figures refer to the years 1848-57. If age were the only in- 
fluence, the aptitude of unmarried persons for suicide could not be 
above 97.9 and that of married persons would be between 114.5 and 
164.4, or about 140 suicides per million inhabitants. Suicides of mar- 
ried persons would be to those of unmarried as 100 to 69. The latter 
would be only two-thirds of the former whereas we know that they 
are actually more numerous. The effect of family life is thus to re- 
verse the relation. Whereas without the effect of family life married 
persons should kill themselves half again as often as unmarried by ^ 
'virtue of their age, they do so perceptibly less. Thus marriage may be ; 
said to reduce the danger of suicide by about half or, more exactly, // 
non-marriage produces an increase expressed by the proportion 
112/69, o^ ^•^- Thus, if we represent the suicidal tendency of mar- 
ried persons by unity, that of unmarried persons of the same average 
age must be estimated as 1.6. 

The relationships are practically the same in Italy. Due to their 
age, married persons (years 1873-77) should show 102 suicides per 
million and the unmarried above 16 years only 77; the first number 
is to the second as 100 to 75.^ Actually, married persons commit 
fewer suicides; they show only 71 cases to 86 of unmarried persons 
or 100 to 121. The aptitude of the unmarried is thus in the propor- 
tion of 121 to 75 for that of married persons, or 1.6, as in France. 
Similar figures might be obtained in other countries. The rate of mar- 
ried persons is everywhere to some degree below that of unmarried 
persons,^ whereas it ought, by virtue of age, to be higher. In Wurt- 
temberg, from 1846 to i860, these two figures were to one another 
as 100 to 143, in Prussia from 1873 to 1875 as 100 to iii. 

But if, with the data available, this method of calculation is the 
only one applicable in almost all cases, and if consequently it must be 
used to establish the general situation, its results can be only roughly 
approximate. Of course, it suffices to show that non-marriage in4 
creases the tendency to suicide; but it gives only a very inexact ideaf 
of the extent of this increase. Indeed, to distinguish the influence of 
age and that of marital status, we have taken as our starting point 

^ We assume that the average age of these groups is the same as in France. The 
error which may result from this assumption is very slight. 

^ If the two sexes are considered combined. The importance of this remark will 
appear below (Bk. II, Ch. 5, Par. 3). 



174 SUICIDE 

the relation between the suicide-rate at 30 years and that at 45. Un- 
fortunately, the influence of marital status has already left its own 
mark on this relation; for the contingent of each of the two ages was 
calculated for unmarried and married persons taken together. Of 
course, if the proportion of married and unmarried men were the 
same at the two periods, as well as that of unmarried and married 
women, they would compensate each other and the effect of age alone 
would be apparent. But this is not so. While at 30 unmarried men 
are slightly more numerous than married men (746,111 for the for- 
mer, 714,278 for the latter according to the census for 1891), at 45 
years, on the contrary, the former are only a slight minority (333,- 
033 to 1,864,401 married men); it is the same with the other sex. 
Because of this unequal distribution, their great aptitude for suicide 
does not produce the same eflPects in both cases. It increases the for- 
mer rate much more than the latter. The latter is consequently rela- 
tively too slight and the numerical superiority which it would show 
over the former if age alone were involved is artificially reduced. In 
other words, the difference as regards suicide, due merely to the fact 
of age, between the population of from 25 to 30 years and that of 
from 40 to 45 is certainly greater than appears from this way of 
figuring. Now the extent of this difference forms almost all the rela- 
tive immunity of married people. This immunity thus appears less 
than it is in reality. 

This method has caused even greater errors. Thus, to determine 
the influence of widowhood on suicide, the rate of widowed persons 
has sometimes merely been compared with that of persons of every 
marital status of the same average age, or about 65 years. Now a mil- 
lion widowers in 1863-68 showed 628 suicides; a million men aged 
65 (of every marital status combined) about 461. From these fig- 
ures one might judge that at the same age widowed persons kill 
themselves considerably more often than any other class of the popu- 
lation. In this way the assumption has arisen that widowhood is the 
most unlucky of all states from the point of view of suicide.^ Actu- 
ally, if the population of 65 years does not show more suicides, it is 
because it is almost entirely composed of married persons (997,198 
to 134,238 unmarried). So if this comparison suffices to prove that 

8 See Bertillon, art., Mariage, in Diet. Encycl., 2d series, see p. 52. Morselli, 
p. 348. — Corre, Crime et suicide, p. 472. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 175 

widowed persons kill themselves more than married persons of the 
same age, it shows nothing as to their tendency to suicide compared 
with that of unmarried persons. 

In short, when only averages are compared, the facts and their 
relations to one another appear only approximately. Thus it may very 
well be true that married persons kill themselves in general less often 
than unmarried persons, and that nevertheless this proportion may be 
exceptionally reversed at certain ages; in fact we shall see that this is 
so. Now these exceptions, possibly instructive for the explanation of 
the phenomenon, could not be shown by the preceding method. 
There may also be changes from age to age, which without achiev- 
ing complete inversion, have nevertheless an importance of their own 
and which should therefore be shown. 

The only way to avoid these difficulties is to determine the rate of 
each group separately, at each age. Under such conditions one may, 
for example, compare unmarried persons of from 25 to 30 years with 
married and widowed persons of the same age and similarly for 
other periods; the influence of marital status will thus be isolated 
from all the other influences and all its possible variations will ap- 
pear. Besides, this is the method which Bertillon first applied to mor- 
tality and the marriage rate. Unfortunately, official publications do 
not contain the necessary data for this comparison.'^ Actually, they 
show the age of suicides independently of their marital status. The 
only publication which to our knowledge has followed a dijfferent 
practice is that of the grand-duchy of Oldenburg (including the 
principalities of Liibeck and Birkenfeld).^ For the years 1871-85 
this publication gives us the distribution of suicides by age for each 
category of marital status considered separately. But this little State 
had only 1,369 suicides during these fifteen years. As nothing certain 
can be concluded from so few cases, we undertook to do the work 
ourselves for France with the aid of unpublished documents in the 
possession of the Ministry of Justice. We studied the years 1889, 
1890 and 1891. We classified about 25,000 suicides in this way. 

^ Yet the labor of assembling these data, considerable if undertaken by an indi- 
vidual, might easily be accomplished by the official bureaus of statistics. All sorts of 
valueless information is given and only that omitted which, as will be seen below, 
might show the state of family life in the different European societies. 

^ There are, to be sure, Swedish statistics reproduced in the Bulletin de démo- 
graphie internationale, 1878. p. 195, giving these data. But they are useless. In the 



176 suicroE 

Not only is such a figure sufficiently important in itself to serve as a 
basis for induction, but we assured ourselves that there was no need 

first place, widowed persons are there combined with unmarried persons, making 
the comparison relatively insignificant, for such diflFerent conditions must be distin- 
guished. Moreover, we believe these statistics to be inexact. Here for example are 
some of their figures: 

SUICIDES PER 100,000 INHABITANTS OF EACH SEX, OF LIKE MARITAL 
STATUS AND AGE 









Years of Age 










16-25 


26-35 


36-45 


46-55 


56-65 


66-75 


Above 75 








Men 










Married 


10.51 


10.58 


18.77 


24.08 


26.29 


20.76 


9.48 


Non-married 

(widowed included) 


5.69 


25.73 


66.95 
Women 


90.72 


150.08 


229.27 


333.35 


Morried 
Non-married 


2.63 
2.99 


2.76 
6.14 


4.15 
13.23 


5.55 
17.05 


7.09 
25.98 


4.67 
51.93 


7.64 
34.69 



HOW MUCH MORE FREQUENT ARE SUICIDES OF UNMARRIED THAN OF MARRIED 
PERSONS OF SAME SEX AND AGE 



0.5 


2.4 


3.5 


3.7 


5.7 


11 


37 


1.13 


2.22 


3.18 


3.04 


3.66 


11.12 


4.5 



Men 
Women 

These figures have from the first seemed suspicious with regard to the tremen- 
dous degree of relative immunity enjoyed by married persons of advanced age, since 
they diflFer so from all facts known to us. To achieve verification that we deem in- 
dispensable, we have examined the absolute numbers of suicides committed by each 
age-group in Sweden at the same period. For men they are as follows: 

16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 66-75 Above 75 

Married 16 220 567 640 383 140 15 

Non-morried 283 519 410 269 217 156 56 

Comparing these figures with the proportional numbers given above, the error 
committed becomes obvious. Actually, from 66 to 75 years, married and non-married 
persons show almost the same absolute number of suicides, whereas per 100,000 the 
former are supposed to kill themselves eleven times less often than the latter. For 
this to be true there would have to be at this age about ten times (exactly, 9.2 
times) more married than non-married persons, that is, than widowed and un- 
married combined. For the same reason, the married population above 75 should be 
exactly 10 times more numerous than the other. But that is impossible. At these 
advanced ages widowed persons are very numerous and, combined with unmarried 
persons, they are equal or even greater in number than married persons. This sug- 
gests what error has probably been committed. The suicides of unmarried and wid- 
owed persons must have been added together and the resulting total divided only 
by the figure for the unmarried population alone, while the suicides of married per- 
sons were divided by one for the widowed and married populations combined. What 
makes this probable is that the degree of immunity of married persons is extraordi- 
nary only at the advanced ages, or when the number of widowed persons becomes 
great enough seriously to falsify the resulting calculation. And the improbability is 
greatest after 75 years, or when widowed persons are very numerous. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 



177 



to extend our observations over a longer period. From one year to 
another the contingent of each age remains approximately the same 
in each group. There is therefore no need to fix the averages for a 
greater number of years. 

Tables XX and XXI contain these different figures. To make 
their meaning clearer we have placed for each age, beside the 
figure expressing the rate for widowed persons and that for mar- 
ried persons, what we call the coefficient of preservation, either of 
the latter by comparison with the former or of both by comparison 
with unmarried persons. By this phrase we mean the number show- 

TABLE XX — Grand-duchy of Oldenburg: Suicides Commif-ted, 
by Each Sex, per 10,000 Inhabitants of Each Age 
and Marital Status Group Throughout the Period 
1871-85 * 

Coeff/c/enfs of Preservafion of 
Married Widowed 

With Refer- With Refer- With Refer- 
ence to ence to ence to 



Age Ui 


nmarried 


Married 


Widowed 


Unmarried 


Widowed 


Ui 


nmarried 








Men 










From to 20 


7.2 


769.2 




0.09 








20 to 30 


70.6 


49.0 


285'.7 


1.40 


5.8 ■ 




6.24 


30 to 40 


130.4 


73.6 


76.9 


1.77 


1.04 




1.69 


40 to 50 


188.8 


95.0 


285.7 


1.97 


3.01 




0.66 


50 to 60 


263.6 


137.8 


271.4 


1.90 


1.90 




0.97 


60 to 70 


242.8 


148.3 


304.7 


1.63 


2.05 




0.79 


Above 70 


266.6 


114.2 


259.0 
Women 


2.30 


2.26 




1.02 


From to 20 


3.9 


95.2 




0.04 






. ••• 


20 to 30 


39.0 


17.4 




2.24 








30 to 40 


32.3 


16.8 


io.'o 


1.92 


1.78 




1.07 


40 to 50 


52.9 


18.6 


68.1 


2.85 


3.66 




0.77 


50 to 60 


66.6 


31.1 


50.0 


2.14 


1.60 




1.33 


60 to 70 


62.5 


37.2 


55.8 


1.68 


1.50 




1.12 


Above 70 




120 


91.4 




1.31 




.... 


* These figures 


therefore 


refer not to 


the overage yei 


or but to the 


total of suic 


ides 


committed 



during these fifteen years. 



ing how many times less frequent suicide is in one group than in an- 
other at the same age. Thus, when we say that the coefficient of pres- 
ervation of husbands of the age of 25 in relation to unmarried men 
is 3, we mean that if the tendency to suicide of married persons at 
this time of life is represented by i, that of unmarried persons the 
same period must be represented by 3. Of course, when the coeffi- 
cient of preservation sinks below unity, it really becomes a coefficient 
of aggravation. 



178 



SUICIDE 



The laws derived from these tables may be formulated thus: 
I. Too early marriages have an aggravating influence on suicide, 
especially as regards men. This result, to be sure, being calculated 
from a very small number of cases, should be confirmed; in France, 
from 15 to 20 years, in the average year barely one suicide is com- 
mitted among married persons, exactly 1.33. However, as the fact is 

TABLE XXI — France (1889-1891): Suicides Committed per 
1,000,000 Inhabitants of Each Age and Marital 
Status Group, Average Year 

Married Widowed 

Coefficients of Preservation of 
With Refer- With Refer- With Refer- 
ence to ence to enee to 



Ages 


Unmarried 


Married 


Widowed 


Unmarried 


Widowed 


Unmarried 








Men 








15 to 20 


113 


500 




0.22 






20 to 25 


237 


97 


■ 142 


2.40 


i."45 


1.66 


25 to 30 


394 


122 


412 


3.20 


3.37 


0.95 


30 to 40 


627 


226 


560 


2.77 


2.47 


1.12 


40 to 50 


975 


340 


721 


2.86 


2.12 


1.35 


50 to 60 


1,434 


520 


979 


2.75 


1.88 


1.46 


60 to 70 


1,768 


635 


1,166 


2.78 


1.83 


1.51 


70 to 80 


1,983 


704 


1,288 


2.81 


1.82 


1.54 


Above 80 


1,571 


770 


1,154 
Women 


2.04 


1.49 


1.36 


15 to 20 


79.4 


33 


333 


2.39 


10 


0.23 


20 to 25 


106 


53 


66 


2.00 


1.05 


1.60 


25 to 30 


151 


68 


178 


2.22 


2.61 


0.84 


30 to 40 


126 


82 


205 


1.53 


2.50 


0.61 


40 to 50 


171 


106 


168 


1.61 


1.58 


1.01 


50 to 60 


204 


151 


199 


1.35 


1.31 


1.02 


60 to 70 


189 


158 


257 


1.19 


1.62 


0.77 


70 to 80 


206 


209 


248 


0.98 


1.18 


0.83 


Above 80 


176 


110 


24A 


1.60 


2.18 


0.79 



likewise observed in the grand-duchy of Oldenburg, and even for 
women, it is probably not accidental. Even the Swedish statistics 
quoted above,^ show the same aggravation, at least for the male sex. 
If, now, for the reasons mentioned, we believe these statistics inexact 
for the advanced ages, we have no reason to doubt them for the first 
periods of life, when there are as yet no widowed persons. Besides, 
the mortality of very young husbands and wives is known to consid- 
erably exceed that of unmarried men and women of the same age. 
A thousand unmarried men between 15 and 20 give 8.9 deaths each 

9 See above p. 176. — To be sure, one might think that this unfavorable situation 
of married persons from 15 to 20 years is due to their average age being above that 
of unmarried persons in the same age-group. But what proves that there is a real 
aggravation is that the ratio of married persons of the following age-group (20 to 
25 years) is five times less. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 79 

year, a thousand married men of the same age, 51 deaths or 473 per 
cent more. The difference is less for the other sex, 9.9 deaths for 
wives, 8.3 for unmarried women; the former number is to the second 
only as 119 to loo.^*^ This greater mortality of young married per- 
sons is evidently due to social reasons, for if its principal cause were 
the immaturity of the organism this would be more marked in the 
female sex, due to the dangers involved in parturition. Thus every- 
thing tends to prove that premature marriages bring about a harmful 
moral state, especially to men. 

2. From 20 years, married persons of both sexes enjoy a coeffi- 
cient of preservation in comparison with unmarried persons. It is 
above that calculated by Bertillon, The figure 1.6 indicated by that 
observer is a minimum rather than an average. ^^ 

This coefficient changes with age. It soon reaches a maximum be- 
tween 25 and 30 years in France, between 30 and 40 in Oldenburg; 
from then on it decreases till the final period of life when a slight 
rise sometimes occurs. 

3. The coefficient of preservation of married persons by compari- 
son with unmarried persons varies with the sexes. In France it is men 
who are in the favorable position and the difference between the 
sexes is considerable; for married men the average is 2.73 while for 
married women it is only 1.56, or 43 per cent less. But in Oldenburg 
the opposite is true; the average for women is 2.16 and for men 
only 1.83. It is to be noted that at the same time the disproportion 
is less; the second number is only 16 per cent lower than the first. 
We shall say therefore that the sex enjoying the higher coefficient of 
preservation in the state of marriage varies from society to society» 
and that the extent of the difference between the rates of the sexes 
itself varies to the extent that the coefficient of preservation favors 
the favored sex. In the course of our work we shall encounter facts 
confirming this law. 

4. Widowhood diminishes the coefficient of married persons of 
each sex, but it rarely eliminates it entirely. Widowed persons kill 

1" See Bertillon, art. Mariage, p. 43 ff. 

11 There is a single exception; women of from 70 to 80 years, whose coefficient 
descends slightly below unity. The cause of this variation is the influence of the 
department of the Seine. In other departments (see Table XXII, p. 196), the co- 
efficient of women of this age is above unity; but it must be noted that even in 
the provinces it is less than that of other ages. 



l80 SUICIDE 

themselves more often than married persons but generally less than 
unmarried persons. Their coefficient in certain cases even rises to 
1.60 and 1.66. Like that of married persons it changes with age, but 
following an irregular evolution the law of which cannot be deter- 
mined. 

Just as for married persons, the coefficient of preservation of wid- 
owed persons compared with unmarried persons varies with the sex. 
In France men are in the favored position; their average coefficient is 
1.32 while for widows it falls below unity, 0.84, or 37 per cent less. 
But in Oldenburg women are favored, as in marriage; they have an 
average coefficient of 1.07, while that of widowers is below unity, 
0.89, or 17 per cent less. As in the state of marriage, when it is 
women who are most favored, the difference between the sexes is 
less than where men have the advantage. So we may say in the same 
terms that the sex enjoying the higher coefficient of preservation in 
the state of widowhood varies from society to society, and that the 
extent of the difference between the rates of the sexes, itself varies to 
the extent that the coefficient of preservation favors the favored sex. 

Facts being thus determined, let us seek explanations. 

II 

The immunity enjoyed by married persons can be attributed only 
to one of the two following causes: 

It may be due to the influence of the domestic environment. It 
would then be the influence of the family which neutralized the su- 
icidal tendency or prevented its outburst. 

Or this immunity is due to what may be called matrimonial selec- 
tion. Marriage in fact does make for some sort of selection among 
the population at large. Not everyone who wants to, gets married; one 
has little chance of founding a family successfully without certain 
qualities of health, fortune and morality. People without them, unless 
through a conjunction of exceptionally favorable circumstances, are 
thus involuntarily relegated to the unmarried class which conse- 
quently includes the human dregs of the country. The sick, the in- 
curable, the people of too little means or known weakness are found 
here. Hence, if this part of the population is so far inferior to the 
other, it naturally proves this inferiority by a higher mortality, a 
greater criminality, and finally by a stronger suicidal tendency. Ac- 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE l8l 

cording to this hypothesis, it would not be the family which was a 
protection against suicide, crime or sickness; the privileged position 
of married persons would be theirs simply because only those are 
admitted to family life who already provide considerable guaran- 
tees of physical and moral health. 

Bertillon seems to have vacillated between the two explanations 
and to have admitted both at once. Since then, M. Letourneau, in his 
Evolution du manage et de la famille, ^^ has categorically chosen the 
second. He refuses to acknowledge that the undeniable superiority 
of the married population is a result and proof of the superiority of 
marital life. He would have judged less precipitously had he ob- 
served the facts less hastily. 

Of course, it is quite probable that married people generally have 
a physical and moral constitution somewhat better than that of un- 
married persons. Matrimonial selection, however, does not bar all 
but the elite of the population from wedlock. It is especially doubt- 
ful that persons without means and position marry much less than 
others. As has been noted,^^ they usually have more children than 
the people with assured incomes. If, then, no forethought limits the 
imprudent increase of their family, why should it prevent their 
founding one? Besides, repeated proof will be given below that pov- 
erty is not one of the factors on which the social suicide-rate de- 
pends. As for the infirm, not merely are infirmities overlooked for 
many reasons, but it is not at all certain that suicides are most nu- 
merous among the infirm. The organic-psychic temperament most 
predisposing man to kill himself is neurasthenia in all its forms. 
Now today neurasthenia is rather considered a mark of distinction 
than a weakness. In our refined societies, enamoured of things intel- 
lectual, nervous members constitute almost a nobility. Only the 
clearly insane are apt to be refused admittance to marriage. This 
limited exclusion is not enough to account for the extensive im- 
munity of married persons.^* 

12 Paris, i8S8, p. 436. 

13 J. Bertillon, Jr., article cited in the Revue Htentijique. 

1* To reject the hypothesis that the privileged position of married persons is due 
to matrimonial selection, the aggravation, which is supposed to result from widow- 
hood, is sometimes mentioned. But we have just seen that no such aggravation exists 
by comparison with unmarried persons. Widowed persons kill themselves much less 
than non-married persons. Thus the argument does not carry. 



i82 suicroE 

Besides these somewhat a priori considerations, numerous facts 
show that the respective immunity of married and unmarried persons 
is due to quite other causes. 

If it were a result of matrimonial selection, it should grow from 
the start of this selection, or the age when young men and women 
begin to marry. At this point, a first difference should be noted which 
should increase with the progress of selection, or as marriageable 
persons marry and thus lose contact with the rabble naturally des- 
tined to be the class of the permanently unmarried. In short, the 
maximum should be reached when the good grain is completely 
separated from the tares, when the whole population admissible to 
marriage has actually been admitted, when only those are unmarried 
who are hopelessly committed to this condition by physical or moral 
inferiority. This maximum should occur between 30 and 40 years of 
age; few marriages are made later. 

Now, the coefficient of preservation actually evolves according to 
quite another law. At first it is often replaced by a coefficient of ag- 
gravation. Very young married persons are more inclined to commit 
suicide than unmarried ones; this would not be so if their immunity 
were inherent and inherited. Secondly, the maximum is achieved al- 
most at once. At the earliest age when the privileged position of 
married persons becomes perceptible (bet^'een 20 and 25 years), the 
coefficient reaches a figure which it is unlikely later to surpass. Now 
at this period there are only ^^ 148,000 married to 1,430,000 un- 
married men, and 626,000 married to 1,049,000 unmarried women 
(in round numbers). The ranks of the unmarried, therefore, at this 
time include the largest part of the elite which has been thought des- 
tined by its hereditary qualities to form later the aristocraq^ of the 
married; the difference from the point of view of suicide between 
the two classes should then be slight, whereas it is already consid- 
erable. Likewise, at the next age (bet^^een 25 and 30), more than a 
million of the two million married persons to appear between the 
ages of 30 and 40 are still unmarried; and yet far from the immunity 
of the unmarried profiting by this fact, this group cuts the poorest 
figure then. Never are the two parts of the population so far from 
one another as regards suicide. On the contrary, between the ages of 
30 and 40, when the separation is complete and the married class has 

15 These figures refer to France and the census of 1891. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 183 

about reached its full complement, instead of reaching its height 
and thus showing that conjugal selection itself has come to a stop, 
the coefficient of preservation undergoes an abrupt and considerable 
decline. For men it falls from 3.20 to 2.77; for women the regres- 
sion is still more pronounced, 1.53 instead of 2.22 or a reduction of 
32 per cent. 

On the other hand, however this selection is effected, it must 
occur equally for unmarried women as for unmarried men; for wives 
are recruited in the same manner as husbands. Thus, if the moral su- 
periority of married persons is merely a result of selection, it should 
be the same for both sexes, and consequently the immunity from 
suicide should be the same. Actually, husbands are definitely more 
protected in France than wives. For the former, the coefficient of pres- 
ervation rises as high as 3.20, falls only once below 2.04, and usually 
oscillates about 2.80, while for the latter the maximum does not ex- 
ceed 2.22 (or at most 2.39)^^ and the minimum is below unity 
(0.98), Moreover, women in France are closest to men with respect 
to suicide, in the married state. The share of each sex in suicides, for 
each category of marital status, for the years 1887-91, follows below: 



Share of Each Sex 

Per 100 Unmarried Suicides Per 100 Married Suicides 

at Different Ages at Different Ages 





Men 


Women 


Men 


Women 


From 20 to 25 years 


70 


30 


65 


35 


From 25 to 30 years 


73 


27 


65 


35 


From 30 to 40 years 


84 


16 


74 


26 


From 40 to 50 years 


86 


14 


77 


23 


From 50 to 60 years 


88 


12 


78 


22 


From 60 to 70 years 


91 


9 


81 


19 


From 70 to 80 years 


91 


9 


78 


22 


Above 80 years 


90 


10 


88 


12 



Thus at each age ^"^ the share of wives in the suicides of married 
persons is far higher than that of unmarried women in suicides of 

i^We make this reservation, because this coefficient of 2.39 relates to the period 
from 15 to 20 years and because, since the suicides of wives are very rare at this 
age, the small number of cases which form the basis of these figures makes their 
exactness somewhat uncertain. 

^^ Usually, when the respective situation of the sexes in the two different sorts 
of marital status is thus compared, the effect of age is not carefully eliminated; but 
this produces inexact results. Following the usual method, one would find in 1887- 
91, 21 suicides of married women to 79 of married men and 19 suicides of un- 
married women to 100 of unmarried persons of all ages. These figures would give 
a false impression of the situation. The above table shows that the difference be- 



1 84 suicroE 

unmarried persons. Certainly this is not because a wife is less pro- 
tected than an unmarried woman; Tables XX and XXI show the 
contrary. But if women do not lose by marriage, they gain less than 
men. But if immunity is here so unequal, family life must affect the 
moral constitution of the two sexes differently. What proves with 
real finality that the inequality has this origin is that its birth and 
growth may be observed under the influence of the domestic environ- 
ment. Indeed, Table XXI shows that in the beginning the coefficient 
of preservation for the two sexes is hardly different (for women, 

2.39 in the 15-20 age-group or 2.00 in the 20-25 ^^g^'gi^oup; for men, 

2.40 in the 20-25 age-group. ^^ Then, gradually, the difference in- 
creases, at first because the coefficient of married women grows less 
than that of married men up to the age of the maximum, and then 
because its decrease is swifter and greater.^^- 2° Thus, the coefficient 
of preservation evolves in accordance with the prolongation of 
family-life because it depends on this prolongation. 

Still better proof is that the relative situation of the sexes as to 
the degree of preservation enjoyed by married persons is not the 
same in all countries. In the grand-duchy of Oldenburg women are 
the favored sex and we shall find later another case of the same in- 
version. But on the whole, conjugal selection occurs everywhere in 
the same way. So it cannot be the essential factor in matrimonial im- 

tween the share of the married woman as against the unmarried woman is much 
greater at every age. Thus, for both the unmarried and married, the size of the 
difference between the sexes varies with the age-group, until in the age-group, 70 
to 80, the size of the difference is about twice what it was at 20. Now, the un- 
married population is almost wholly made up of persons below 30 years old. If, 
however, no account is taken of age, the difference resulting is actually that between 
unmarried men and women of about 30. But then, comparing this with the 
difference between married persons without respect to age, since the latter are on 
the average 50 years old, the comparison is really made with reference to married 
persons of this age. Thus the comparison is falsified and the error further aggra- 
vated by the fact that the difference between the sexes does not vary in the same 
way in both groups under the influence of age. Among the unmarried it increases 
more than among the married. 

18 Durkheim fails to mention that in the 15-20 age-group for men the coefficient 
of preservation in Table XXI is 0.22. — Ed. 

1^ Thus one can also see from the preceding Table that the proportional share of 
wives in the suicides of married persons increasingly surpasses, with age, the share 
of unmarried women in the suicides of unmarried persons. 

2" This statement by Durkheim must be carefully appraised in the light of Table 
XXI.— Ed. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 85 

munity; for how then would opposite results occur in different coun- 
tries? On the contrary, the family may very well be constituted in two 
different societies so as to affect the sexes differently. In the constitu- 
tion of the family group, accordingly, we must find the principal 
cause of the phenomenon of our study. 

But interesting as this result is, it must be further defined; for the 
family environment consists of different elements. For husband and 
wife alike the family includes: i. the wife or husband; 2. the chil- 
dren. Is the salutary effect of the family on the suicidal tendency due 
to the former or the latter? In other words, the family consists of 
two different associations: the conjugal group and the family group 
proper. These two societies have not the same origin, nor the same 
nature, nor consequently, in all probability, the same effects. One 
springs from a contract and elective affinity, the other from a natural 
phenomenon, consanguinity; the former unites two members of the 
same generation, the latter unites one generation to the next; the latter 
is as old as humanity, the former was organized at a relatively late date. 
Since they are here so different it is not a priori certain that both 
combine equally to produce the fact we are studying. Anyway, if 
both contribute to it this cannot be in the same manner, nor probably 
in the same measure. Thus, we must investigate whether both take 
part and, if so, the share of each. 

A proof of the slight effect of marriage is the fact that the mar- 
riage rate has changed very little since the first of the century, while 
suicide has tripled. From 1821 to 1830 there were 7.8 marriages 
annually per 1,000 inhabitants, 8 from 1831 to 1850, 7.9 in 
1851-60, 7.8 from 1861 to 1870, 8 from 1871 to 1880. During this 
time the suicide-rate per million inhabitants rose from 54 to 180. 
From 1880 to 1888 the marriage rate declined slightly (7.4 instead 
of 8 ) , but this decrease is unrelated to the enormous increase of sui- 
cides, which rose more than 16 per cent ^^ from 1880 to 1887. 

21 Legoyt (0/7. cit., p. 175) and Corre {Crime et suicide, p. 475) nevertheless 
thought they could establish a relation between the variations of suicide and the 
marriage rate. Their error proceeds first from having considered too short a period, 
secondly from having compared the most recent years u'ith an abnormal year, 1872, 
when the French marriage rate reached an unusual figure, unknown since 18 13, 
because the gaps in the ranks of the married population caused by the war of 1870 
had to be filled. No such reference can be a measure for the changes of the marriage 



l86 SUICIDE 

Besides, during the period 1865-88, the average marriage rate of 
France (7.7) is almost the same as that of Denmark (7.8) and Italy 
(7.6); yet these countries are as different as possible from the point 
of view of suicide.^^ 

But we have a much more certain way of measuring exactly the 
real influence of conjugal association upon suicide; that of observing 
it when reduced to its own isolated strength, or in families without 
children. 

During the years 1887-91, a million husbands without children 
accounted annually for 644 suicides.-^ To know how much the mar- 
riage status, alone and without reference to the family, insures against 
suicide, one has only to compare this figure with that of the unmar- 
ried men of the same average age. This comparison Table XXI 
permits us to make, as not the least important of its information. 
The average age of married men was then as now 46 years, 8 and 1/3 
months. A million unmarried men of this age have about 97^ sui- 
cides. Now 644 is to 975 as 100 is to 150, that is, sterile husbands 
have a coefficient of preservation of only 1.5; they commit suicide 
only a third less often than unmarried of the same age. Quite other- 
wise when there are children. A million husbands with children 
annually show during this period only 336 suicides. This number is 
to 975 as 100 is to 290; that is, when the marriage produces children 
the coefficient of preservation is almost doubled (2.90 instead of 
1.5). 

Conjugal society therefore plays only a slight role in the immunity 
of married men. We have in the preceding calculation even made 
this role somewhat larger than it really is. We have assumed that 
childless husbands have the same average age as husbands in general, 
whereas they are certainly younger. For among their ranks are all the 
youngest husbands, who are without children not because they are 
hopelessly sterile, but because they have married too recently to have 

rate. The same observation applies to Germany and to almost all the European coun- 
tries. Something like an electric shock seems to have affected the marriage rate at 
the time. A great and abrupt rise is seen, prolonged occasionally as late as 1873, in 
Italy, Switzerland, Belgium, England, Holland. All Europe might be said to have 
been contributing to repair the losses of the two war-stricken countries. A tremen- 
dous fall naturally succeeded after some time which has not the significance ascribed 
to it (See Oettingen, Moralstatistik, supplement. Tables i, 2 and 3). 

2- See Levasseur, Population française, vol. II, p. 208. 

23 According to the census of 1886, p. 123 of the Dénombrement. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE • 1 87 

any. On the average, a man has his first child not before 34 years of 
age,^^ and yet he marries at about 28 or 29 years of age. The part of 
the married population from 28 to 34 years of age is thus almost 
entirely in the category of the childless, which lowers the average age 
of these latter; therefore we must certainly have exaggerated in esti- 
mating it at 46. But in that case the unmarried men with whom they 
should have been compared are not those of 46 but younger, who 
consequently commit suicide less often than the others. So the coeffi- 
cient of 1.5 must be a little too high; if we knew exactly the average 
age of childless husbands, their aptitude for suicide would surely 
approach that of unmarried men still more than the above figures 
indicate. 

The limited influence of marriage is well shown, moreover, in that 
widowers with children are in a better situation than husbands with- 
out them. The former indeed, show 937 suicides per million. Now 
they are 61 years, 8 and 1/3 months on the average. The rate of 
unmarried men of the same age (see Table XXI) is between 1,434 
and 1,768, or about 1,504. This number is to 937 as 160 is to 100. 
Widowers, when they have children, thus have a coefficient of preser- 
vation of at least 1.6, superior to that of childless husbands. More- 
over, we have under rather than overestimated this figure. For widow- 
ers with children are certainly older than widowers in general. The 
latter, indeed, include all whose marriage was without issue only 
because of premature end by death, that is, the youngest. Widowers 
with children should therefore really be compared with unmarried 
men above 62 years (who, because of their age, have a stronger 
tendency to suicide). This comparison would clearly only emphasize 
their immunity.^^ 

To be sure, this coefficient of 1.6 is definitely below that of hus- 
bands with children, 2.9; the difference is not quite 45 per cent. 
Thus, matrimonial society by itself might be thought to have more 
effect than we have granted it, since at its conclusion the immunity 
of the husband surviving is so far reduced. But this loss is only in 
slight degree to be ascribed to the dissolution of marriage. Proof of 

2* See Annuaire statistique de la France, 15th vol., p. 43. 

25 For the same reason, the age of husbands with children is above that of hus- 
bands in general and, consequently, the coefficient of preservation 2.9 should be con- 
sidered somewhat below reality. 



1 88 suicroE 

this is that where there are no children widowhood produces far 
lesser eflFects. A million childless widowers show 1,258 suicides, a 
number related to 1,504, the contingent of sixty-two-year-old unmar- 
ried men, as 100 is to 119. Thus the coefficient of preservation is still 
about 1.2 which is little below that of husbands also childless, 1.5. 
The former of these figures is only 20 per cent less than the second. 
Accordingly, when a wife's death has no other effect than to break 
the conjugal bond, it has no strong repercussion on the suicidal 
tendency of the widower. Marriage during its existence must there- 
fore only slightly aid in restraining this tendency, since the latter 
shows no greater increase with the end of marriage. 

The reason why widowhood is relatively more disastrous when the 
union has been fruitful must be sought in the existence of the chil- 
dren.-^ Of course in a way the children attach the widower to life, 
but at the same time they make the crisis through which he is passing 
more intense. For not only is the conjugal relation destroyed; but 
precisely because a domestic society here exists, there is an impair- 
ment of its functioning too. An essential element is lacking and the 
whole machine is thrown out of gear. To reestablish the lost equi- 
librium the husband has to shoulder a double burden and perform 
functions for which he is unprepared. Thus he loses advantages 
which were his throughout the duration of the marriage. It is not 
because his marriage is ended but because the family which he heads 
is disorganized. VThe departure, not of the wife but of the mother, 
causes the disaster) 

But the slight effect of marriage appears with special clarity in the 
woman's case when it does not find its natural fulfillment in children. 
A million childless wives show 221 suicides; a million unmarried 
women of the same age (between 42 and 43 years) only 150. The 
first of these numbers is to the second as 100 is to 67; the coefficient 
of preservation thus falls below unity and equals .6-j, that is, it has 
really become a coefficient of aggravation. In France, then, married 
hut childless women commit suicide half again as often as unmarried 
women of the same age. We have already noticed that in general 
the wife profits less from family life than the husband. Now we see 

26 What Durkheim seems to mean here is that widowers with children compared 
to husbands with children are relatively worse off than widowers without children 
compared to husbands without children. — Ed. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 89 

the cause of this; in itself conjugal society is harmful to the woman 
and aggravates her tendency to suicide. 

If most wives have, nevertheless, seemed to enjoy a coefficient of / 
preservation, this is because childless households are the exception 
and consequently the presence of children in most cases corrects and 
reduces the evil effects of marriage. Even so these effects are only 
reduced, A million women having children show -jc} suicides; com- 
paring this figure with the one giving the suicide-rate of unmarried 
woman of 42 years of age as 150, the wife is found to benefit, even 
v/hen she is also a mother, only by a coefficient of preservation 1,80, 
35 per cent lower,^'^ therefore, than that of fathers. With respect to 
suicide, we must therefore disagree with the following proposition 
of Bertillon: "When woman enters the conjugal state she gains from 
the association more than man; but she necessarily suffers more than 
man when she leaves it." ^^ 

III 

The immunity of married persons in general is thus due, wholly I 
for one sex and largely for the other, to the influence not of conjugal ' 
society but of the family society. However, we have seen that even 
if there are no children, men at least are protected in the proportion 
of I to 1.5. A reduction of 50 suicides from 150, or 33 per cent, 
though considerably below that achieved when the family is com- 
plete, nevertheless is not a negligible quantity and its cause should be 
understood. Is it due to the special benefits bestowed by marriage on 
the male sex, or is it not rather a result of matrimonial selection? 
For although it has been shown that the latter does not play the 
dominant role attributed to it, it has not been proven to be wholly 
without influence. 

One fact at first sight even seems to prove this hypothesis. We 
know that the coefficient of preservation of childless husbands par- 
tially survives marriage; it falls merely from 1.5 to 1.2. Now, this 

27 A similar difference exists between the coefficient of childless husbands and 
childless wives; it is much greater. The second (0.67) is GG per cent lower than the 
first (1.5). The existence of children thus causes the wife to regain half the ground 
she loses by marriage. That is, if she benefits from marriage less than the man, she 
profits more than he from the family, that is, the children. She is more sensitive than 
he to their happy influence. 

28 Article Manage, Diet. Encycl., 2d series, vol. V, p. 36. 



190 SUICIDE 

immunity of childless widowers evidently cannot be attributed to 
widowhood, which in itself does not tend to reduce the proclivity to 
suicide but on the contrary to confirm it. It thus results from an 
anterior cause, though this seems unlikely to be marraige, since it 
continues to act even when marriage is dissolved by the wife's death. 
May it not then consist in some inherent quality of the husband 
which conjugal selection makes prominent but does not create.-' As it 
existed before marriage and is independent of it, it might well outlast 
the latter. If the population of husbands is an elite, the same must be 
true of widowers. To be sure, this congenital superiority has less 
effect upon the latter, since they are less protected against suicide. 
But the shock of widowhood may be considered as partially neutral- 
izing this preventive influence and blocking its full results. 

But for this explanation to be acceptable, it must be applicable to 
both sexes. Some trace at least of this natural predisposition should 
accordingly be found among married women, which, other things 
being equal, would preserve them from suicide more than the un- 
married. Now the very fact that they commit suicide, if childless, 
more than unmarried women of the same age, is opposed to the 
hypothesis that they are endowed from birth with a personal coeffi- 
cient of preservation. One might, however, grant that this coefficient 
exists for women as well as for men, but that it is wholly annulled 
during marriage by the unfortunate effect of marriage on the wife's 
moral constitution. But if its effects were only restrained and con- 
cealed by the sort of moral decline of women on entering into conju- 
gal society, they should reappear on the dissolution of this society, 
or in widowhood. Freed from the depressing influence of the matri- 
monial yoke, women should then recover all their advantages and 
finally assert their inherent superiority to those of their sisters who 
have not achieved marriage. In comparison with unmarried women, 
in other words, the childless widow should have a coefficient of pres- 
ervation at least approaching that of the childless widower. This is 
not so. A million childless widows show annually 322 suicides; a 
million unmarried women of 60 (the average age of widows) show 
only between 189 and 204, or about 196. The first is to the second 
number as 100 to 60. Widows without children thus have a coeffi- 
cient below unity, or a coefficient of aggravation; it is 0.60, slightly 
lower even than that of childless wives (0.67). It is therefore not 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 19I 

marriage which prevents childless wives from showing the natural 
indisposition to suicide attributed to them. 

Perhaps it will be objected that the obstacle to the complete re- 
establishment of the fortunate qualities whose expression is inter- 
rupted by marriage, is that widowhood is, for women, an even worse 
status. Indeed the idea is widespread that a widow is in a more criti- 
cal position than a widower. The moral and economic difficulties 
are stressed which face her when she is compelled to provide all by 
herself, for her own existence as well as for the needs of an entire 
family. This opinion has even been considered proved by facts. 
According to Morselli,^^ statistics prove that woman, during widow- 
hood, is closer to man in her aptitude for suicide than she is during 
marriage; and since, when married, she is already nearer the male sex 
in this respect than when unmarried, therefore widowhood results in 
placing woman in the most disadvantageous position. Supporting 
this thesis, Morselli cites the following figures relating only to 
France, but to be found among all European peoples with slight 
variations : 

Shore of Each Sex ;n 700 Share of Each Sex in TOO 

Suicides of Married Persons Suicides of Widowed Persons 





Percentage 


Percentage 


Percentage 


Percentage 


Years 


Men 


Women 


Men 


Women 


1871 


79 


21 


71 


29 


1872 


78 


22 


68 


32 


1873 


79 


21 


69 


31 


1874 


74 


26 


57 


43 


1875 


81 


19 


77 


23 


1876 


82 


18 


78 


22 



Woman's share in the suicides committed by both sexes in the state 
of widowhood seems in fact much greater than in the suicides of 
married persons. Does not this prove that widowhood is much more 
difficult for women than marriage? If so, it is not astonishing that, 
once a widow, the good effects of her qualities are even more pre- 
vented from appearing than before. 

Unfortunately, this supposed law is based on an error of fact. 
Morselli has forgotten that there are everywhere twice as many 
widows as widowers. In France, there are in round numbers two 
million of the former to only one million of the latter. In Prussia, 
according to the census of 1890, 450,000 widowers are found and 

2^ Op. cit., p. 342. 



192 SUICIDE 

1,319,000 widows; in Italy, 571,000 and 1,322,000 respectively. 
Under these conditions the share of widows is naturally higher than 
that of wives who are obviously of the same number as husbands. 
To obtain information from the comparison the two populations 
should be set up as equal. But if this precaution is taken, results 
contrary to those of Morselli are obtained. At the average age of the 
widowed or 60 years, a million wives show 154 suicides and a million 
husbands 577. Woman's share is therefore 21 per cent. It dimin- 
ishes perceptibly in widowhood. Indeed, a million widows show 210 
cases, a million widowers 1,017; whence it follows that of 100 sui- 
cides of widowed persons of both sexes women contribute only 17. 
The share of men on the contrary rises from 79 to 83 per cent. Man 
thus loses more than woman in passing from marriage to widow- 
hood, since he does not preserve certain of the advantages which he 
owed to the conjugal state. There is thus no reason to assume that 
this change of situation is less trying or disturbing for him than for 
her; the opposite is the case. Besides, we know that the mortality 
of widowers far exceeds that of widows; and the same is true of their 
marriage rates. That of widowers is at every age three or four times 
as great as the rate of unmarried men, while that of widows is only 
slightly above that of unmarried women. Women are therefore as 
reluctant to face second marriage as men are eager.^^ It would not be 
so if the state of widowhood sat lightly upon men and if women, on 
the contrary, had in that state to face as many difficulties as has been 
said to be the case.^^ 

But if nothing in widowhood particularly paralyzes woman's natu- 
ral advantages that pertain to her solely as matrimonially elect, and if 
these advantages do not manifest themselves by any definite sign, 
there is no reason for assuming their existence. The hypothesis of 
matrimonial selection is therefore wholly inapplicable to the female 
sex. Nothing justifies the supposition that a woman entering marriage 
has a constitutional advantage which preserves her to a certain degree 

^^ See Bertillon, Les célibataires, les veufs, etc., Rev. scient., 1879. 

31 Morselli also mentions in support of his thesis that on the morrow of war the 
suicides of widows show a much greater rise than those of unmarried women or 
wives. But it is merely that then the population of widows increases disproportion- 
ately; thus it naturally produces more suicides and this rise naturally persists until 
the restoration of equilibrium and the return to their normal level of the different 
sorts of marital status. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 93 

from suicide. Consequently the same supposition is just as unfounded 
for men. The coefficient of 1.5 of childless husbands does not result 
from their belonging to the healthiest portion of the population; it 
can only be an effect of marriage. Conjugal society, so disadvan- 
tageous for women, must, even in the absence of children, be ad- 
mitted to be advantageous for men. Those who enter it are not an 
aristocracy of birth; they do not bring to marriage, as an existing 
quality, a temperament disinclining them to suicide, but acquire it 
by living the conjugal life. At least, if they have some natural advan- 
tages these can be only very vague and indeterminate; for they are 
without influence until the advent of certain other conditions. So 
true is it that suicide does not principally depend upon the congenital 
qualities of individuals but upon causes exterior to and dominating 
them! 

There is, however, a final difficulty to be solved. If this coefficient 
of 1.5, independent of the family, is due to marriage, how does it 
survive marriage and reappear at least in attenuated form (1.2) in 
the childless widower.^ If the theory of matrimonial selection which 
accounted for this survival is rejected, with what shall it be replaced? 

It is sufficient to assume that the habits, tastes, and tendencies 
formed during marriage do not disappear on its dissolution; and 
nothing is more plausible than this hypothesis. If the married man, 
then, even if childless, feels a relative security from suicide, he must 
inevitably preserve some of this feeling when a widower. Only, as 
widowhood does involve a certain moral shock and since, as we shall 
see later, any loss of equilibrium inclines to suicide, this disposition, 
though remaining, is weakened. Inversely, but for the same reason, 
since a childless wife more often commits suicide than if she had 
remained unmarried, once become a widow she retains this stronger 
propensity for suicide, even slightly reenforced by the distress and 
loss of equilibrium always accompanying widowhood. But, since the 
ill effects that marriage had upon her make this change of status 
more acceptable, the aggravation is very slight. The coefficient is 
lowered by only a few per cent (0.60 instead of 0.67).^^ 

^2 When there are children, the lowering of coefficient incident to both sexes due 
to widowhood is almost the same. The coefficient of husbands with children is 2.9; 
it becomes 1.6. That of women in the same circumstances from 1.89 becomes 1.06. 
The diminution is 45 per cent for the former, 44 per cent for the latter. That is, as 



194 suicroE 

This explanation is confirmed by the fact that it is only a particular 
instance of a more general proposition which may be formulated 
thus: In an identical society, the tendency to suicide in the state of 
îvidowhood is for each sex a junction of the suicidal tendency of the 
same sex in the state of marriage. If the husband is highly protected, 
the widower is too, although of course to a lesser degree; if the 
former is only slightly protected from suicide, the latter is not thus 
protected at all or only very little. To assure ourselves of the accuracy 
of this proposition we need only refer to Tables XX and XXI and 
the conclusions drawn from them. We there found that one sex is 
always more favored than the other in both marriage and widow- 
hood. Now, the one more privileged in the first of these conditions 
preserves its privilege in the second. In France, husbands have a 
higher coefficient of preservation than wives; that of widowers is 
similarly higher than that of widows. In Oldenburg the opposite is 
true among married couples: the wife has a higher immunity than 
the husband. The same inversion occurs between widowers and 
widows. 

But as these two single cases might with some justice be considered 
an insufficient proof and as, on the other hand, statistical publications 
do not give us the necessary data to verify our proposition in other 
countries, we have resorted to the following procedure to extend the 
scope of our comparisons: we have calculated separately the suicide- 
rate for each age-group and marital status in the department of the 
Seine on the one hand, and on the other in all the rest of the depart- 
ments combined. The two social groups, thus isolated from each 
other, are sufficiently difi^erent for us to expect their comparison to 
be instructive. And family life actually does have very different 
effects upon suicide in them (see Table XXII). In the departments 
the husband has much more immunity than the wife. In only four 

we have said, widowhood produces two different effects; it disturbs i. the conjugal 
society, 2. the family society. The former disturbance is much less felt by the woman 
than by the man, just because she profits less from marriage. But the second is felt 
far more by her; for she often finds it harder to take the husband's place in the 
direction of the family than he does to replace her in her domestic functions. When 
there are children, therefore, a sort of compensation occurs which makes the suicidal 
tendency of the two sexes vary, as a result of widowhood, in the same proportions. 
Thus it is especially when there are no children that a widowed woman partially 
recovers the ground lost in the state of marriage. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 95 

age-groups does the former's coefficient descend below 3,^^ while 
the wife's never reaches 2; the average is in one case 2.88, in the 
other 1.49. In the Seine the reverse is true; for husbands the coeffi- 
cient averages only 1.56 while it is 1.79^^ for wives. The very same 
inversion is found between widowers and widows. In the provinces 
the average coefficient of widowers is high (1.45), that of widows 
much lower (0.78). In the Seine, on the contrary, the second is 
higher, rising to 0.93, close to unity, while the other falls to 0.75. 
Thus, whichever the favored sex, widowhood regularly corresponds 
to marriage. 

More than this, if the key is sought to the variation of the coeffi- 
cient of husbands from one social group to another and if the same 
study is then made for widowers, the following surprising results 
are obtained: 



Husbands' coefficient in provinces 2.88 

Husbands' coefficient in the Seine 1.56 

Widowers' coefficient in provinces 1.45 

Widowers' coefficient in the Seine c.75 



= 1.84 



= 1.93 



and for women: 



Wives' coefficient in the Seine 1.79 
— ^^ ^ 1.20 



Wives' coefficient in provinces 1.49 

Widows' coefficient in the Seine 0.93 

Widows' coefficient in provinces 0.78 



= 1. 19 



The numerical proportions are for each sex pretty nearly equal; 
for women, the equality, in fact, is almost absolute. Thus, not only 
does the coefficient of widowers follow suit when that of husbands 
rises or sinks, but it even increases or decreases in exactly the same 
measure. These relations may be expressed in a form still more clearly 
confirmative of the law we have stated. They imply, in fact, that 

23 From Table XXII it appears that in Paris, as in the provinces, the coefficient of 
husbands below 20 years is below unity; that is, for them there is aggravation. This 
confirms the law formulated above. 

3* Evidently, when the female sex is the one more favored by marriage, the dispro- 
portion between the sexes is much less than when the husband has the advantage; a 
new confirmation of a remark made above. 



196 



SUICIDE 



TABLE XXII — Comparison of the Suicide Rate per Million 
Inhabitants of Each Age-group and Marital 
Status in the Seine and the Provinces (1889- 
1891) 













Coefficienf of 








Coeffici 


fenf of 












Preservofion 








Preservation 












with Respecf to 








with Respect to 












Unmarried 








Unmarried 






Men (Provinces) 


Persons 


Women (Provinces) 


Persons 






Un- 










Un- 














mar- 


Hus- 


Wid- 


Hus- 


Wid- 


mar- 




Wid- 




Wid- 


Ages 




ried 


bands 


owers 


bands 


owers 


ried 


Wives 


ows 


Wives 


ows 


15-20 




100 


400 




0.25 




67 


36 


375 


1.86 


0.17 


20-25 




214 


95 


■ Ï53 


2.25 


i.'39 


95 


52 


76 


1.82 


1.25 


25-30 




365 


103 


373 


3.54 


0.97 


122 


64 


156 


1.90 


0.78 


30-40 




590 


202 


511 


2.92 


1.15 


101 


74 


174 


1.36 


0.58 


40-50 




976 


295 


633 


3.30 


1.54 


147 


95 


149 


1.54 


0.98 


50-60 




1,445 


470 


852 


3.07 


1.69 


178 


136 


174 


1.30 


1.02 


60-70 




1,790 


582 


1,047 


3.07 


1.70 


163 


142 


221 


1.14 


0.73 


70-80 




2,000 


664 


1,252 


3.01 


1.59 


200 


191 


233 


1.04 


0.85 


Above 


80 


1,458 


762 


1,129 


1.91 


1.29 


160 


108 


221 


1.48 


0.72 
















Averages of 


coeffi- 






Averog 


es 


of coefficients 








cients of 


preser- 






of preservotion 






2.88 


1.45 


vation 




1.49 


0.78 








Men (Seine] 


1 








Women (Seine) 






15-20 




280 


2,000 




0.14 




224 








. ... 


20-25 




487 


128 




3.80 




196 


"64 




3.06 




25-30 




599 


298 


"714 


2.01 


6.83 


328 


103 


296 


3.18 


i.ïô 


30-40 




869 


436 


912 


1.99 


0.95 


281 


156 


373 


1.80 


0.75 


40-50 




985 


808 


1,459 


1.21 


0.67 


357 


217 


289 


1.64 


1.23 


50-60 




1,367 


1,152 


2,321 


1.18 


0.58 


456 


353 


410 


1.29 


1.11 


60-70 




1,500 


1,559 


2,902 


0.96 


0.51 


515 


471 


637 


1.09 


0.80 


70-80 




1,783 


1,741 


2,082 


1.02 


0.85 


326 


677 


464 


0.48 


0.70 


Above 


80 


1,923 


1,111 


2,089 


1.73 


0.92 


508 


277 


591 


1.83 


0.85 
















Avero 


iges of 


coeffi- 






Averages 


of coeffi 


cienfs 








cients of 


preser- 






of prest 


:rvation 






1.56 


0.75 


vation 




1.79 


0.93 



everywhere, whichever the sex, widowhood decreases the immunity 
of the surviving partner in a constant proportion: 

Husbands in provinces 2.88 „ Husbands in Seine 

Widowers in provinces 1.45 

Wives in provinces 1.49 

0.78 



= 1.98 



= 1.91 



Widowers in Seine 

Wives in Seine 
Widows in Seine 



= 1.92 



Widows in provinces 

The coefficient of widowed persons is about half that of married 
persons. It is thus no exaggeration to say that the aptitude for suicide 
of widowed persons is a function of the corresponding aptitude of 
married persons; in other words, the former is in part a consequence 
of the latter. But since marriage adds to the husband's immunity, 
even without children, it is not surprising that the widower should 
retain a portion of this fortunate disposition. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 1 97 

At the same time that it solves the question we had asked our- 
selves, this result casts some light on the nature of widowhood. In 
fact, it teaches us that widowhood in itself is not a hopelessly dis- 
advantageous condition. It is very often better than bachelorhood. To 
be truthful, the moral constitution of widowers and of widows is 
not at all specific, but depends on that of married people of the same 
sex and in the same country. It is only a prolongation of this. If you 
will tell me how marriage and family life in a given society affect 
men and women, I will tell you what widowhood does for each. 
Although the crisis of widowhood is more grievous where marriage 
and domestic society are both felicitous, by fortunate compensation 
people are better equipped to face it; and, inversely, this crisis is less 
grave where the matrimonial and family constitution leave more to 
be desired, but in return people are less equipped to resist it. Thus, 
in societies where man benefits more from the family than woman, 
he suffers more when left alone but is at the same time better able 
to endure it, because the salutary influences which he has undergone 
have made him more averse to desperate resolutions. 

IV 

The following table summarizes the facts just established: '^ 



INFLUENCE OF THE 


FAMILY ON SUICIDE 
Men 

Suicide-rate 


BY SEX 

Coefficient' of Preserva- 
tion in Relation to 
Unmarried Men 


Unmarried men 45 years old 
Husbands with children 
Husbands without children 
Unmarried men 60 years old 
Widowers with children 
Widowers without children 




975 
336 
644 

1.504 
937 

1,258 




2!9 
1.5 

i!6 

1.2 



25 M. Bertillon (article cited in the Revue scientifique), had already given the sui- 
cide-rate for the different categories of marital status with and without children. He 
found the following results: 

Husbands w. children 205 suicides per million Widowers w. chil. 526 

Husbands w. no chil. 478 suicides per million Widowers w. no chil. 1,004 

Wives w. children 45 suicides per million Widows w. children 104 

Wives w. no children 158 suicides per million Widows w. no chil. 238 

These figures refer to the years 1861-68. Given the general increase in suicides, they 
confirm our own figures. But as the lack of such a table as our Table XXI allowed 





Coefficient of Preserva- 




tion 


in Relation to 


Suieide-rafe 


Unm 


larried Women 


150 






79 




i.'89 


221 




0.67 


196 






186 




1.06 


322 




0.60 



198 suicroE 

INFLUENCE OF THE FAMILY ON SUICIDE BY SEX-Continued 
Women 



Unmarried women 42 years old 
Wives with children 
Wives without children 
Unmarried women 60 years old 
Widows with children 
Widows without children 

From this table and the preceding remarks it appears that mar- 
riage has indeed a preservative effect of its own against suicide. But 
it is very limited and also benefits one sex only. Useful as it has been 
to attest its existence — and this usefulness will be better understood 
in a later chapter ^^ — the fact remains that the family is the essential 
factor in the immimity of married persons, that is, the family as the 
whole group of parents and children. Of course, since husband and 
wife are members, they too share in producing this result, however 
not as husband or wife but as father or mother, as functionaries of 
the family association. If the disappearance of one increases the 
chances that the other may commit suicide, it is not because the bonds 
uniting them personally are broken, but because a family disaster 
occurs, the shock of which the survivor undergoes. Reserving the 
special effect of marriage for later study, we shall say that domestic 
society, like religious society is a powerful counteragent against 
suicide. 

This immunity even increases with the density of the family, that 
is with the increase in the number of its elements. 

This proposition we have already stated and proved in an article 
appearing in the Revue philosophique of November 1888. But the 
insufficiency of statistical data then at our disposal did not permit as 
strict a proof as was desirable. We did not know the average num- 
ber in family establishments either throughout France or in each de- 
partment. Thus we had to assume that family density depended solely 

no comparison of husbands and widowers with unmarried persons of the same age, 
no precise conclusion could be drawn as to the coefficients of preservation. We are 
also in doubt as to whether they refer to the entire country. Actually the French 
Bureau of Statistics assures us that the distinction between childless couples and 
those with children was never made in the census before 1886, except in 1855 for 
the departments exclusive of the Seine. 
36 See Book II, Chap. V, 3. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE I99 

on the number of children and — this number itself not being indi- 
cated in the census — we had to estimate it indirectly by employing 
what demography terms the physiological increase, or the annual 
excess of births over a thousand deaths. To be sure, this substitution 
was not unreasonable, for where the increase is high, families in 
general can hardly be other than dense. However, this consequence is 
not inescapable and often does not occur. Where children habitually 
leave their parents early, either to emigrate, or to settle elsewhere, or 
for other reasons, the family density has no reference to their number. 
In fact, the home may be deserted no matter how fruitful the mar- 
riage has been. This happens both in cultured surroundings where 
the child is early sent away from home to commence or complete his 
education, and in impoverished neighborhoods where premature dis- 
persion is necessitated by the hardships of existence. On the other 
hand, the family may include a moderate or even a large number of 
elements in spite of a merely average birth rate if the unmarried 
adults or even the married children continue to live with their parents 
and form a single domestic society. For all these reasons no exact 
measure is possible of the relative density of family groups without 
knowledge of their actual composition. 

The census of 1886, the results of which were not published until 
the end of 1888, gave us this knowledge. If we study from its data the 
relation in the different French departments between suicide and the 
actual average of family members, the following are the results: 









Suicides per 


Average Membership 








Million 


of Family Households 








Inhabitants 


per 


100 Households 








(1878-1887) 




(1886) 


1st 


group 


(11 departments) 


From 430 to 380 




347 


2nd 


group 


( 6 departments) 


From 300 to 240 




360 


3rd 


group 


(15 departments) 


From 230 to 180 




376 


4th 


group 


(18 departments) 


From 170 to 130 




393 


5th 


group 


(26 departments) 


From 120 to 80 




41 S 


6th 


group 


(10 departments) 


From 70 to 30 




434 



As suicides diminish, family density regularly increases. 

Instead of comparing averages, if we analyze the content of each 
group we shall find only confirmation of this conclusion. In fact, 
for all France, the average membership is 39 persons per 10 fami- 
lies. If then we ask how many departments there arc above or below 
the average in each of these 6 classes, we shall find them to be com- 
posed as follows: 



200 










suicroE 








What Per Cent of Each Group of Departments * 








Below Average No. 


Above Average 


No. 




1st 


group 


100 









2nd 


group 


84 


16 






3rd 


group 


60 


30 






4th 


group 


33 


63 






5th 


group 


19 


81 






6th 


group 





100 





* Figures reproduced as in original text, since errors could not be corrected. — Ed. 

The group with most suicides includes only departments with 
family numbers below the average. Gradually and most regularly, the 
relation is reversed until the inversion is complete. In the last class, 
where suicides are few, all the departments have a family density 
above average. 

The two maps (Appendices) also have the same general configura- 
tion. The region where families have least density definitely has the 
same limits as that of most frequent suicides. It also occupies the 
North and East and extends, on one side, to Brittany, on the other 
to the Loire. In the West and South, on the contrary, where there are 
few suicides, the family generally has large numbers. This relation 
even recurs in certain details. In the northern region, two departments 
are notable for their low aptitude for suicide, the Nord and Pas-de- 
Calais, a fact so much the more surprising as the Nord is highly 
industrial and intense industrialization favors suicide. The same 
peculiarity appears on the other map. In these two departments 
family density is high, though very low in all neighboring depart- 
ments. In the South, we find on both maps the same dark area formed 
by the Bouches-du-Rhône, the Var, Alpes-Maritimes, and, to the 
West, the same light area formed by Brittany. The irregularities are 
exceptional and never prominent; considering the great number of 
factors which can affect so complex a phenomenon, such a general 
agreement is significant. 

The same inverse relation reappears in the way both phenomena 
have evolved in time. Suicide has constantly increased since 1826 
and the birth-rate has decreased. From 1821 to 1830 the latter was 
still 308 births for 10,000 inhabitants; during the period 1881-88 
it was only 240, and the decrease was uninterrupted in the interval. 
At the same time, there appears a tendency for the family to break 
up and disperse more and more. From 1856 to 1886, the number of 
households increased by 2 millions in roimd figures; regularly and 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 20I 

steadily it rose from 8,796,276 to 10,662,423. Yet, during the same 
time-interval, the population increased only by two million persons. 
Each family therefore includes a smaller membership. ^'^ 

Facts thus are far from confirming the current idea that suicide is 
due especially to life's burdens, since, on the contrary, it diminishes 
as these burdens increase. This is a consequence of Mathusianism not 
foreseen by its author. When he urged control of the numbers in 
families, he felt that this restriction was at least in some cases neces- 
sary to general well-being. Actually, it is so much a source of the 
reverse condition that it diminishes the human desire to live. Far 
from dense families being a sort of unnecessary luxury appropriate 
only to the rich, they are actually an indispensable staff of daily life. 
However poor one is, and even solely from the point of view of 
personal interest, it is the worst of investments to substitute wealth 
for a portion of one's offspring. 

This result agrees with the one we had reached before. Why does 
family density have this effect upon suicide? In reply one could not 
refer to the organic factor; for though absolute sterility has primarily 
physiological causes, insufficient fecundity has not, being usually 
voluntary and depending on a certain state of mind. Family density, 
moreover, measured as we have measured it, does not depend exclu- 
sively on the birth-rate; we have seen that where there are few chil- 
dren other elements may take their place and, vice versa, that their 
number may be of no significance if they do not actually and con- 
sistently share in the group life. Nor should this preservative virtue 
be ascribed to the special feelings of parents for their immediate 
descendants. Indeed, to be effective these very feelings presuppose 
a certain state of domestic society. They cannot be powerful if the 
family has broken up. It is therefore because the functioning of the 
family varies with its greater or less density, that the number of its 
component elements affects the suicidal tendency. 

That is, the density of a group cannot sink without its vitality 
diminishing. Where collective sentiments are strong, it is because the 
force with which they affect each individual conscience is echoed in 
all the others, and reciprocally. The intensity they attain therefore 
depends on the number of consciences which react to them in com- / 

^^ See Dénombrement de 1886, p. 106. 



202 SUICIDE 

mon. For the same reason, the larger a crowd, the more capable of 
violence the passions vented by it. Consequently, in a family of 
small numbers, common sentiments and memories cannot be very 
intense; for there are not enough consciences in which they can be 
represented and reenforced by sharing them. No such powerful tradi- 
tions can be formed there as unite the members of a single group, 
even surviving it and attaching successive generations to one another. 
Small families are also inevitably short-lived; and without duration 
no society can be stable. Not only are collective states weak in such 
a group, but they cannot be numerous; for their number depends on 
the active interchange of views and impressions, on the circulation of 
these views and impressions from one person to another; and, on the 
other hand, this very exchange is the more rapid the more persons 
there are participating in it. In a sufficiently dense society, this cir- 
culation is uninterrupted; for some social units are always in contact, 
whereas if there are few their relations can only be intermittent and 
there will be moments when the common life is suspended. Likewise, 
when the family is small, few relatives are ever together; so that 
domestic life languishes and the home is occasionally deserted. 
] But for a group to be said to have less common life than another 
i means that it is less powerfully integrated; for the state of integra- 
I tion of a social aggregate can only reflect the intensity of the collec- 
Ltive life circulating in it. It is more unified and powerful the more 
active and constant is the intercourse among its members. Our previ- 
ous conclusion may thus be completed to read: just as the family 
is a powerful safeguard against suicide, so the more strongly it is 
constituted the greater its protection.^^ 



b° 



V 

If statistics had not developed so late, it would be easy to show 
by the same method that this law applies to political societies. His- 

^^ The word "density" has just been used in a somewhat different sense from that 
usually given it in sociology. Generally, the density of a group is defined not as a 
function of the absolute number of associated individuals (which is rather called 
"volume"), but of the number of individuals actually in reciprocal relationship in 
one and the same social volume. (See Durkheim, E., Regies de la Meth. soc'tol., 
p. 139). But in the case of the family the distinction between volume and density 
has no interest, since, due to the smallness of the group, all associated persons are 
in actual relationship. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 203 

tory indeed teaches us that suicide, generally rare in young ^^ socie- / 
ties in process of evolution and concentration, increases as they dis- i 
integrate. In Greece and Rome it makes its appearance with the 
overthrow of the old city-state organization and its progress marks 
successive stages of decadence. The same is observed in the Ottoman 
Empire. In France, on the eve of the Revolution, the turmoil which 
shook society with the disintegration of the older social system took 
shape in a sudden rush of suicides mentioned by contemporary 
authors. ^^ 

But beside these historical data, suicide statistics, though hardly 
existing for longer than the past seventy years, supply us with some 
proofs of this proposition which are more precise than those given 
above. 

Great political upheavals are sometimes said to increase the num- 
ber of suicides. But Morselli has conclusively shown that facts con- 
tradict this view. All the revolutions which have occurred in France 
during this century reduced the number of suicides at the moment 
of their occurrence. In 1830, the total fell to 1,756 from 1,904 in 
1829, amounting to a sudden drop of nearly 10 per cent. In 1848 
the drop is no less; the annual figure changes from 3,647 to 3,301. 
Then, during the years 1848-49, the crisis which has just shaken 
France spreads through Europe; everywhere suicides decrease, and 
this decrease is more and more perceptible the more serious and pro- 
longed the crisis. This appears in the following table: 

Kingdom 
Denmark Prussia Bavaria of Saxony Austria 

1847 345 1,852 217 77. 611 (in 1846) 

1848 305 1,649 215 398 

1849 337 1,527 189 328 452 

In Germany public feeling ran much higher than in Denmark 
and the struggle lasted longer even than in France, where a new 
government was immediately formed; accordingly, the decrease is 

39 Let us not confuse young societies capable of development with lower societies ; 
in the latter, on the contrary, suicides are very frequent, as will appear in the fol- 
lowing chapter. 

^0 Helvetius wrote in 1781: "Financial disorder and the change in the constitu- 
tion of the state spread general fear. Numerous suicides in the capital give sad proof 
of this." Quoted from Legoyt, p. 30. Mercier in his Tableau de Paris (1782) says 
that within 25 years the number of suicides tripled in Paris. 



204 suicroE 

prolonged in the German states up to 1849. For that year, the de- 
crease is 13 per cent in Bavaria, 18 per cent in Prussia; in Saxony, 
in a single year from 1848 to 1849, it is likewise 18 per cent. 

In 185 1, the same phenomenon does not occur in France, nor does 
it occur in 1852. Suicides remain stationary. But in France the coup 
d'etat of Louis Bonaparte has the usual effect; although it took place 
in December, the number of suicides fell from 483 in 185 1 to 446 
in 1852 (8 per cent), and even in 1853 they were 463.^^ This fact 
would seem to prove that this governmental revolution disturbed 
Paris much more than the provinces, where it seems to have had 
little effect. Besides, generally speaking, the influence of such crises 
is always more noticeable in the capital than in the departments. 
In 1830, the decrease in Paris was 13 per cent (269 cases instead of 
307 the year before and 359 the year after); in 1848, 32 per cent 
(481 cases instead of 698).^^ 

Mild as they are, mere election crises sometimes have the same 
result. Thus, in France the suicide record clearly shows the mark of 
the parliamentary crisis of May 16, 1877 and the resulting popular 
agitation, as well as of the 1889 elections which ended the Boulanger 
agitation. In proof, we need only compare the monthly distribution 
of suicides in these two years with that of the years immediately 
before and after. 





1876 


1877 


1878 


1888 


1889 


1890 


Moy 


604 


649 


717 


924 


919 


819 


June 


662 


692 


682 


851 


829 


822 


July 


625 


540 


693 


825 


818 


888 


August 


482 


496 


547 


786 


694 


734 


September 


394 


378 


512 


673 


597 


720 


October 


464 


423 


468 


603 


648 


675 


November 


400 


413 


415 


589 


618 


571 


December 


389 


386 


335 


574 


482 


475 



During the first months of 1877 suicides were more numerous 
than in 1876 (1,945 cases from January to April instead of 1,784) 
and the rise continues in May and June. Only at the end of the last- 
named month are the Chambers dissolved, the electoral period actu- 
ally if not legally begun; this is probably the moment when political 
passions were most excited, for they were bound subsequently to 
subside somewhat due to time and weariness. Accordingly, in July, 

*i According to Legoyt, p. 252. 

* 2 According to Masaryck, Der Selbstmord, p. 137. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 205 

instead of continuing to surpass those of the preceding year, suicides 
are 14 per cent below them. Except for a slight pause in August, the 
drop continues to October, though less strongly. The crisis is ending. 
Immediately upon its conclusion, the rise, momentarily interrupted, is 
resumed. In 1889 the phenomenon is yet more pronounced. The 
Chamber is dissolved at the beginning of August; the excitement of 
the election period begins at once and lasts to the end of September, 
the time of the elections. An abrupt decrease of 12 per cent, com- 
pared with the corresponding month of 1888, occurs in August and 
lasts into September but stops abruptly in October when the struggle 
is ended. 

Great national wars have the same effect as political disturbances. 
In 1866 war breaks out between Austria and Italy, and suicides drop 
14 per cent in both countries. 

1865 1866 1867 

Italy 678 588 657 

Austria 1,464 1,265 1,407 

In 1864 it was the turn of Denmark and Saxony. In the latter 
state suicides, which numbered 643 in 1863, fell to 545 in 1864 
(16 per cent), only to return to 619 in 1865. As to Denmark, 
since we do not know the number of suicides for 1863, we cannot 
compare that of 1864 with it; but we do know that the figure for the 
second year (411) is the lowest since 1852. And as there is a rise to 
451 in 1865, this figure of 411 very probably betokens a considerable 
drop. a 

The war of 1 870-1 871 had the same results in France and Ger- 
many: 

1869 1870 1871 1872 

2,963 2,723 2,950 

657 653 687 

4,157 4,490 5,275 

This decrease might perhaps be considered due to the drafting of 
a part of the civilian population in war-time and the fact that it 
is very hard to keep track of suicides in an army in the field. But 
women as well as men contribute to this decrease. In Italy, suicides 
of women drop from 130 in 1864 to 117 in 1866; in Saxony, from 
133 in 1863 to 120 in 1864 and 114 in 1865 (15 per cent). In 



Prussia 


3,186 


Saxony 


710 


France 


5,114 



2o6 suicroE 

the same country there is a no less considerable drop in 1870; from 
130 in 1869 suicides fall to 114 in 1870 and remain at the same 
level in 1871; the decrease is 13 per cent, more than that of con- 
temporary suicides of men. While 616 women had killed them- 
selves in Prussia in 1869, there were only 540 such suicides in 1871 
(13 per cent). It is common knowledge, besides, that young men 
capable of bearing arms furnish only a small contingent of suicides. 
Only six months of 1870 were occupied by the war; at this period, 
in time of peace, a million Frenchmen of from 25 to 30 years of age 
would have showed at most about 100 suicides,^^ whereas the reduc- 
tion between 1870 and 1869 is 1,057 cases.^* 

The question has also been raised whether the cause of this 
momentary drop at a time of crisis might not be that the record of 
suicides was less exactly kept because of the paralysis of administra- 
tive authority. Numerous facts, however, show that this accidental 
cause does not adequately explain the matter. First, the widespread 
occurrence of the phenomenon. It appears among conquerors as well 
as vanquished, invaders and invaded alike. Furthermore, when the 
shock was very violent, its effects persisted for a considerable time 
after the event. Suicides increase slowly; some years pass before their 
return to their point of departure; this is true even in countries where 
in normal times they increase with annual regularity. Though partial 
omissions are of course possible and even likely at such times of 
trouble, the drop revealed by the statistics is too steady to be attrib- 
uted to a brief inadvertence of administration as its principal cause. 
P' But the best proof that we confront a phenomenon of social psy- 
I chology and not a mistake in accounting, is that not all political or 
national crises have this influence. Only those do which excite the 
passions. We have already noted that revolutions in France have 
always had more affect on suicide in Paris than in the departments; 
yet the administrative upheaval was the same in the provinces and 
in the capital. But this sort of event always has much less interest 
for the provincial than for the Parisian, its author and partici- 
pant from a closer vantage point. Likewise, while great national wars 

^3 Actually, the annual rate at this age in 1889-91 was only 396; the semi-annual 
rate about 200. From 1870 to 1890 the number of suicides at every age doubled. 

^■* Durkheim's figures show a reduction from 5,114 in 1869 to 4,157 in 1870, 
which amounts to 957, not 1,057. — Ed. 



I 

j_n 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 2O7 

such as that of 1870-71 have had a strong influence on the current 
of suicide in both France and Germany, purely dynastic wars such as 
the Crimean or Italian, which have not violently moved the masses, 
have had no appreciable effect. There even occurred a considerable 
rise in 1854 (3>700 cases against 3,415 in 1853). The same fact is 
observed in Prussia at the time of the wars of 1864 and 1866. The 
figures are stationary in 1864 and rise slightly in 1866. These wars 
were due wholly to the initiative of politicians and had not aroused 
public feeling like that of 1870. 

From this point of view it is interesting to note that in Bavaria 
the year 1870 did not have the same effects as in the other countries 
of Germany, especially North Germany. More suicides were recorded 
in 1870 in Bavaria than in 1869 (452 against 425). Only in 1871 
is there a slight decrease; it continues somewhat in 1872 when 
there are only 412 cases, which, however, entails a lowering of only 
9 per cent by comparison with 1869 and 4 per cent with 1870. Yet 
Bavaria took the same important part as Prussia in military events; 
it, too, mobilized its whole army and the administrative disturbance 
m.ust have been no less. It simply did not take the same moral share 
in events. Actually it is well known that Catholic Bavaria is, of all 
Germany, the country which has always lived a life most its own and 
been most jealous of its autonomy. It shared in the war through 
the will of its king but without enthusiasm. Therefore it resisted the 
great social movement then agitating Germany much more than the 
other allies; and so the reaction was felt there only later and less 
strongly. Enthusiasm was delayed and inconsiderable. It required 
the breath of glory wafted over Germany on the morrow of the 
victory of 1870 to warm somewhat the hitherto cold and unre- 
sponsive land of Bavaria.^^ 

This fact may be compared with the following, of similar signifi- 

*5 Nor is it certain that this diminution of 1872 was caused by the events of 1870. 
The reduction of suicides scarcely made itself felt outside of Prussia beyond the 
actual period of hostilities. In Saxony the reduction of 1870, only 8 per cent, is not 
continued in 1871 and almost completely comes to an end in 1872. In the duchy of 
Baden it was confined to 1870; 1871, with its 244 cases, exceeds 1869 by 10 per 
cent. It thus seems that Prussia alone was seized with a sort of collective euphoria 
on the morrow of victory. The other states had less feeling for the increased glory 
and power resulting from the war, and social passions subsided with the end of the 
great national crisis. 



208 SUICIDE 

cance. In France during the years 1870-71, suicide diminished only 
in the cities: 

Suicides per Million Inhabitants 
Urban Population Rural Population 

1866-69 202 104 

1870-72 161 110 

Recordings of suicides must, however, have been more difficult 
in the country than in the city. The true reason for this difference 
accordingly lies elsewhere. The war produced its full moral effect 
only on the urban population, more sensitive, impressionable and 
also better informed on current events than the rural population. 

These facts are therefore susceptible of only one interpretation; 
namely, that great social disturbances and great popular wars rouse 
collective sentiments, stimulate partisan spirit and patriotism, politi- 
cal and national faith, alike, and concentrating activity toward a 
single end, at least temporarily cause a stronger integration of society. 
The salutary influence which we have just shown to exist is due not 
to the crisis but to the struggles it occasions. As they force men to 
close ranks and confront the common danger, the individual thinks 
I less of himself and more of the common cause. Besides, it is com- 
prehensible that this integration may not be purely momentary but 
may sometimes outlive its immediate causes, especially when it is 
intense. 

VI 

We have thus successively set up the three following propositions : 

Suicide varies inversely with the degree of integration of 

religious society. 
Suicide varies inversely with the degree of integration of 

domestic society. 
Suicide varies inversely with the degree of integration of 

political society. 

This grouping shows that whereas these different societies have a 
moderating influence upon suicide, this is due not to special charac- 
teristics of each but to a characteristic common to all. Religion does 
not owe its efficacy to the special nature of religious sentiments, since 
domestic and political societies both produce the same effects when 

I 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 209 

strongly integrated. This, moreover, we have already proved when 
studying directly the manner of action of different religions upon 
suicide.^^ Inversely, it is not the specific nature of the domestic or 
political tie which can explain the immunity they confer, since 
religious society has the same advantage. The cause can only be found 
in a single quality possessed by all these social groups, though per- 
haps to varying degrees. The only quality satisfying this condition l 
is that they are all strongly integrat e d social gr oups. So we reach the / 
generaf 'conclusion : suicide varies inversely wltji the_.degree_of inte- / 
gration of the social groups of which the individual forms a plït.-)-J 

-Stî^-soeiety cannot disintegrate without the individual simultane- 
ously detachinghimself from social iTîe^ without .his^own goals be- 
coming preponderant over those of the co mmunity, in a word with- 
out his personalit y tending to surmount the collective personali ty. 
The more weakened the groups to which he belongs, the less he j 
depends on them, the more he consequently depends only on himself I 
and recognizes no other rules of conduct than what are founded on 
his private interests, ^f we agree to call this state egoism, in which* 
the individual ego asserts itself to excess in the face of the social 
ego and at its expense, we may call egoistic the special type of suicide 
springing from excessive individualismt\ 
B\it how can suicide have such an origin? 

/First of all, it can be said that, as collective force is one of the 
obstacles best calculated to restrain suicide, its weakening involves 
a development of suicide. When society is strongly integrated, itf ' 
holds individuals under its control, considers them at its service' 
and thus forbids them to dispose wilfully of themselves. Accordingly 
it opposes their evading their duties to it through death. But how 
could society impose its supremacy upon them when they refuse to 
accept this subordination as legitimate? It no longer then possesses 
the requisite authority to retain them in their duty if they wish to 
desert; and conscious of its own weakness, it even recognizes their 
right to do freely what it can no longer prevent. So far as they are 
the admitted masters of their destinies, it is their privilege to end 
their lives. They, on their part, have no reason to endure life's suffer- 
ings patiently. For they cling to life more resolutely when belonging" 
to a group they love, so as not to betray interests they put before their 

** See above, Book II, Ch. 2. 



2IO suicroE 

own. The bond that unites them with the common cause attaches 
them to life and the lofty goal they envisage prevents their feeling 
personal troubles so deeply. There isJin short, in a cohesive and 
animated society a constant interchange of ideas and feelings from all 
to each and each to all, something like a mutual moral support, which 
instead of throwing the individual on his own resources, leads him 
to share in the collective energy and supports his own when ex- 
l hausted.""^ 

^ But these reasons are purely secondary. Excessive individualism 
not only results in favoring the action of suicidogenic causes, but it 
is itself such a cause. It not only frees man's inclination to do away 
with himself from a protective obstacle, but creates this inclination 
out of whole cloth and thus gives birth to a special suicide which 
bears its mark. This must be clearly understood for this is what con- 
stitutes the special character of the type of suicide just distinguished 
and justifies the name we have given it. What is there then in in- 
dividualism that explains this result? 

It has been sometimes said that because of his psychological con- 
stitution, man cannot live without attachment to some object which 
transcends and survives him, and that the reason for this necessity 
is a need we must have not to perish entirely. Life is said to be in- 
tolerable unless some reason for existing is involved, some purpose 
justifying life's trials. The individual alone is not a sufficient end for 
his activity. He is too little. He is not only hemmed in spatially; he 
is also strictly limited temporally. When, therefore, we have no 
other object than ourselves we cannot avoid the thought that our 
efforts will finally end in nothingness, since we ourselves disappear. 
But annihilation terrifies us. Under these conditions one would lose 
1 courage to live, that is, to act and struggle, since nothing will remain 
I of our exertions. The state of egoism, in other words, is supposed 
\ to be contradictory to human nature and, consequently, too uncer- 
\ tain to have chances of permanence. 

In this absolute formulation the proposition is vulnerable. If the 
thought of the end of our personality were really so hateful, we 
could consent to live only by blinding ourselves voluntarily as to 
life's value. For if we may in a measure avoid the prospect of an- 
nihilation we cannot extirpate it; it is inevitable, whatever we do. We 
may push back the frontier for some generations, force our name to 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 211 

endure for some years or centuries longer than our body; a moment, 
too soon for most men, always comes when it will be nothing. For 
the groups we join in order to prolong our existence by their means 
are themselves mortal; they too must dissolve, carrying with them 
all our deposit of ourselves. Those are few whose memories are 
closely enough bound to the very history of humanity to be assured 
of living until its death. So, if we really thus thirsted after immor- 
tality, no such brief perspectives could ever appease us. Besides, what 
of us is it that lives? A word, a sound, an imperceptible trace, most 
often anonymous,^^ therefore nothing comparable to the violence of 
our efforts or able to justify them to us. In actuality, though a child 
is naturally an egoist who feels not the slightest craving to survive 
himself, and the old man is very often a child in this and so many 
other respects, neither ceases to cling to life as much or more than 
the adult; indeed we have seen that suicide is very rare for the first 
fifteen years and tends to decrease at the other extreme of life. Such 
too is the case with animals, whose psychological constitution differs 
from that of men only in degree. It is therefore untrue that life is 
only possible by its possessing its rationale outside of itself. 

Indeed, a whole range of functions concern only the individual; 
these are the ones indispensable for physical life. Since they are made 
for this purpose only, they are perfected by its attainment. In every- 
thing concerning them, therefore, man can act reasonably without 
thought of transcendental purposes. These functions s erve by merely 
servi ng him. In so far as he has no other needs, he is therefore self- 



suffici ent and can live happily with no other objec tive than livin g. 
This is not the ra:> e,_h owever, with the civilized adult. He .has man y 
ideas, feel ings and practices unrelated to organic needs. The roles of 
art, morality, religion, political faith, science itself are not to repair 
organic exhaustion nor to provide sound functioning of the organs. 
All this supra-physical life is built and expanded not because of the 
demands of the cosmic environment but because of the demands of 
the social environment. The influence of society is what has aroused 
in us the sentiments of sympathy and solidarity drawing us toward 

*^ We say nothing of the ideal protraction of life involved in the belief in im- 
mortality of the soul, for (i) this cannot explain why the family or attachment to 
political society preserves us from suicide; and (2) it is not even this belief which 
forms religion's prophylactic influence, as we have shown above. 



212 SUICIDE 

others; it is society which, fashioning us in its image, fills us with 
religious, political and moral beliefs that control our actions. To 
play our social role we have striven to extend our intelligence and 
it is still society that has supplied us with tools for this development 
by transmitting to us its trust fund of knowledge. 

Through the very fact that these superior forms of human activity 
have a collective origin, they have a collective purpose. As they de- 
rive from society they have reference to it; rather they are society 
itself incarnated and individualized in each one of us. But for them 
to have a raison d'etre in our eyes, the purpose they envisage must 
be one not indifferent to us. We can cling to these forms of human 
activity only to the degree that we cling to society itself. Contrari- 
wise, in the same measure as we feel detached from society we be- 
come detached from that life whose source and airn ^s socIe^ For 
wharpTlfpose do these rules of moralit y^these precepts of law bind- 
ing us to all sorts of sacrifices, these restrictive dogmas exist, if there 
is no being outside us whom they serve and in whom we participate? 
What is the purpose of science itself? If its only use is to increase 
our chances for survival, it does not deserve the trouble it entails. 
Instinct acquits itself better of this role; animals prove this. Why 
substitute for it a more hesitant and uncertain reflection? What is the 
end of suffering, above all? If the value of things can only be esti- 
mated by their relation to this positive evil for the individual, it is 
without reward and incomprehensible. This problem does not exist 
for the believer firm in his faith or the man strongly bound by ties 
of domestic or political society. Instinctively and unreflectively they 
ascribe all that they are and do, the one to his Church or his God, 
the living symbol of the Church, the other to his family, the third to 
his country or party. Even in their sufferings they see only a means 
of glorifying the group to which they belong and thus do homage 
to it. So, the Christian ultimately desires and seeks suffering to testify 
more fully to his contempt for the flesh and more fully resemble his 
divine model. But the more the believer doubts, that is, the less he 
feels himself a real participant in the religious faith to which he 
belongs, and from which he is freeing himself; the more the family 
and community become foreign to the individual, so much the more 
does he become a mystery to himself, unable to escape the exasperat- 
ing and agonizing question: to what purpose? 



EGOISTIC SUICipE f'^- c^-<Ca^TS'trC .' 21 3 
y 

ff{, in other words, as has often been said, man is double, that is 
because social man superimposes himself upon physical man. Social 
man necessarily presupposes a society which he expresses and serves. 
If this dissolves, if we no longer feel it in existence and action 
about and above us, whatever is social in us is deprived of all objec- 
tive foundation. All that remains is an artificial combination of ^A.tv>^ 
illusory images, a phantasmagoria vanishing at the least reflection! ax^^T' 
that is, nothing which can be a goal for ouT^tion. Yet this social t-^^ t^ 
man is the essence of civilized man; he is the masterpiece of exist- ^.yv^'A^ 
ence. Thus we are bereft of reasons for existence; for the only lif^ L^^ 
to which we could cling no longer corresponds to anything actual/ 
the only existence still based upon reality no longer meets our needsl 
Because we have been initiated into a higher existence, the one whiclr 
satisfies an animal or a child can satisfy us no more and the other 
itself fades and leaves us helpless. So there is nothing more for our 
efforts to lay hold of, and we feel them lose themselves in emptiness. 
In this sense it is true to say that our activity needs an object tran- 
scending it. We do not need it to maintain ourselves in the illusion 
of an impossible immortality; it is implicit in our moral constitution 
and cannot be even partially lost without this losing its raison d'etre 
in the same degree. No proof is needed that in such a state of con- 
fusion the least cause of discouragement may easily give birth to 
desperate resolutions. If life is not worth the trouble of being lived, 
everything becomes a pretext lô~nd"'ourséIvies of^iF. 

But this is not all. This detachment occurs not only in single in- 
dividuals. One of the constitutive elements of every national tem- 
perament consists of a certain way of estimating the value of exist- 
ence. There is a collective as well as an individual humor inclining 
peoples to sadness or cheerfulness, making them see things in bright 
or sombre lights. In fact, only society can pass a collective opinion 
on the value of human life; for this the individual is incompetent. 
The latter knows nothing but himself and his own little horizon; 
thus his experience is too limited to serve as a basis for a general 
appraisal. He may indee3 consider his own_life Jo.^ie_a imlp<;s; he can 
say nothing applicable to others. On tfie' contrary, without sophistry, 
society may generalize its own feeling as to itself, its state of health 
or lack of health. For individuals share too deeply in the life of 
society for it to be diseased without their sufi^ering infection. What 



-} 



214 SUICIDE 

it suffers they necessarily suffer. Because it is the whole, its ills are 
communicated to its parts. Hence it cannot disintegrate without 
awareness that the regular conditions of general existence are equally 
disturbed. Because society is the end on which our better selves de- 
pend, it cannot feel us escaping it without a simultaneous realisation 
that our activity is purposeless. Since we are its handiwork, society 
cannot be conscious of its own decadence without the feeling that 
henceforth this work is of no value. Thence are formed currents of 
depression and disillusionment emanating from no particular indi- 
vidual but éxp ressing~societ y s~state of disintegra tion. Tpiey__CÊâect 
the relaxation of social bo nds, a sort of collective asthenia, ,0L.sûdal 
malaise, just as individual sadness, when chronic, in its way reflects 
*the poor organic state of the individual. Then metaphysical and re- 
ligious systems spring up which, by reducing these obscure sentiments 
to formulae, attempt to prove to men the senselessness of life and 
that it is self-deception to believe that it has purpose. Then new 
moralities originate which, by elevating facts to ethics, commend sui- 
cide or at least tend in that direction by suggesting a minimal exist- 
ence. On their appearance they seem to have been created out of 
whole cloth by their makers who are sometimes blamed for the 
pessimism of their doctrines. In reality they are an effect rather than 
a cause; they merely symbolize in abstract language and systematic 
form the physiological distress of the body social.^^ As these currents 
are collective, they have, by virtue of their origin, an authority which 
they impose upon the individual and they drive him more vigorously 
on the way to which he is already inclined by the state of moral 
distress directly aroused in him by the disintegration of society. 
Thus, at the very moment that, with excessive zeal, he frees himself 
from the social environment, he still submits to its influence. How- 
ever individualized a man may be, there is always something collec- 
tive remaining — the very depression and melancholy resulting from 
this same exaggerated individualism. He effects communion through 
sajiness when he no longer has anything else with which to achieve it. 
I Hence this type of suicide well deserves the name we have given 
I it. Egoism is not merely a contributing factor in it; it is its generating 
( cause. In this case the bond attaching man to life relaxes because 

*^ This is why it is unjust to accuse these theorists of sadness of generalizing per- 
sonal impressions. They are the echo of a general condition. 



EGOISTIC SUICIDE 21 5 

lat attaching him to society is i tself s lack. The incidents of private 
life wHîcli Sttlli the-diieeHtîspîration of suicide and are considered 
its determining causes are in reality only incidental causes. The indi- 
vidual yields to the slightest shock of circumstance because the state 
of society has made him a ready prey to suicide. 

%veral facts confirm this explanation. Suicide is known to be rare 
among children and to diminish among the aged at the last confines 
of life; physical man, in both, tends to become the whole of man. 
Society is still lacking in the former, for it has not had the time to 
form him in its image; it begins to retreat from the latter or, what 
amounts to the same thing, he retreats from it. Thus both are more 
self-sufficient. Feeling a lesser need for self-completion through 
something not themselves, they are also less exposed t o feel the la ck 
of what i s necessary for living. The immunity of an animal has the 
same causey. We shall likewise see in the next chapter that, though 
lower societies practice a form of suicide of their own, the one we 
have just discussed is almost unknown to them. Since their social 
life is very simple, the social inclinations of individuals are simple 
also and thus they need little for satisfaction. They re adily fii id ex- 
ternal objec tives to which they become attached. If he can carry with 
him his goHs and his family, primitive man, everywhere that he goes, 
has all that his social nature demands. 

This is also why woman can endure life in isolation more easily 
than man. When a widow is seen to endure her condition much 
better than a widower and desires marriage less passionately, one is 
led to consider this ease in dispensing with the family a mark of 
superiority; it is said that woman's affective faculties, being very 
intense, are easily employed outside the domestic circle, while her 
devotion is indispensable to man to help him endure life. Actually, 
if this is her privilege it is because her sensibility is rudimentary 
rather than highly developed. As she lives outside of community 
existence more than man, she is less penetrated by it; society is less 
necessary to her because she is less impregnated with sociability. 
She has few needs in this direction and satisfies them easily. With a 
few devotional practices and some animals to care for, the old un- 
married woman's life is full. If she remains faithfully attached to 
religious traditions and thus finds ready protection against suicide, 
it is because these very simple social forms satisfy all her needs. Man, 



2l6 SUICIDE 

on the contrary, is hard beset in this respect. As his thought and 
activity develop, they increasingly overflow these antiquated forms. 
But then he needs others. Because he is a more complex social being, 
he can maintain his equilibrium only by finding more points of 
support outside himself, and it is because his moral balance depends 
on a larger number of conditions that it is more easily disturbed. 



CHAPTER 4 ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 



^^ 



N THE order of existence, no good is measureless. A biological 
quality can only fulfill the purposes it is meant to serve on condition 
that it does not transgress certain limits. So with social phenomena. 
If, as we have just seen, excessive individuation leads to suicide, 
insufficient individuation has the same effects. When man has become 
detached from society, he encounters less resistance to suicide in him- 
self, and he does so likewise when social integration is too strong. 



It has sometimes ^ been said that suicide was unknown among 
lower societies. Thus expressed, the assertion is inexact. To be sure, 
egoistic suicide, constituted as has just been shown, seems not to be 
frequent there. But another form exists among them in an endemic 
state. 

Bartholin, in his book. De Causis contemptae mortis a Dams, 
reports that Danish warriors considered it a disgrace to die in bed 

1 Bibliography. — Steinmetz, Suicide Among Primitive Peoples, in American An- 
thropologist, January 1894. — Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvoelker, passim. — 
Suicides dans les Armées, in Journal de la société de statistique, 1874, p. 25o. — 
Millar, Statistic of military suicide, in Journal of the Statistical Society, London, 
June 1874. — Mesnier, Du suicide dans l'Armée, Paris 1881. — Bournet, Criminalité 
en France et en Italie, p. 83 ff. — Roth, Die Selbstmorde in der K. u. K. Armee, in 
den Jahren 1873-80, in Statistische Monatschrift, 1892. — Rosenfeld, Die Selbstmorde 
in der Preussischen Armee, in Militarwochenblatt, 1894, 3. supplement. — By the 
same, Der Selbstmord in der K. u. K. oesterreichischen Heere, in Deutsche Worte, 
1893. — Anthony, Suicide dans l'armée allemande, in Arch, de med. et de phar. mili- 
taire, Paris, 1895. 

2 Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 762. 

217 



2i8 suicroE 

of old age or sickness, and killed themselves to escape this ignominy. 
The Goths likewise believed that those who die a natural death are 
destined to languish forever in caverns full of venomous creatures.' 
On the frontier of the Visigoths' territory was a high pinnacle called 
The Rock of the Forefathers, from the top of which old men would 
throw themselves when weary of life. The same custom was found 
among the Thracians, the Heruli, etc. Silvius Italicus says of the 
Spanish Celts: "They are a nation lavish of their blood and eager 
to face death. As soon as the Celt has passed the age of mature 
strength, he endures the flight of time impatiently and scorns to 
await old age; the term of his existence depends upon himself." ^ 
Accordingly they assigned a delightful abode to those who com- 
mitted suicide and a horrible subterranean one to those who died of 
sickness or decrepitude. The same custom has long been maintained 
in India. Perhaps this favorable attitude toward suicide did not 
appear in the Vedas, but it was certainly very ancient. Plutarch says 
concerning the suicide of the brahmin Calanus: "He sacrificed him- 
self with his own hands as was customary with sages of this coun- 
try." ^ And Quintus Curtius: "Among them exists a sort of wild 
and bestial men to whom they give the name of sages. The anticipa- 
tion of the time of death is a glory in their eyes, and they have them- 
selves burned alive as soon as age or sickness begins to trouble them. 
According to them, death, passively awaited, is a dishonor to life; 
thus no honors are rendered those bodies which old age has de- 
stroyed. Fire would be contaminated did it not receive the human 
sacrifice still breathing." ® Similar facts are recorded at Fiji,'^ in the 
New Hebrides, Manga, etc.^ At Ceos, men who had outlived a cer- 
tain age used to unite in a solemn festival where with heads crowned 
with flowers they joyfully drank the hemlock.^ Like practices were 
found among the Troglodytes ^"^ and the Seri, who were nevertheless 
renowned for their morality.^^ 

^Quoted from Brierre de Boismont, p. 23. 
* Punica, 1,225 and ff. 

5 Lije of Alexander, CXIII. 

6 VIII, 9. 

^ Cf. Wyatt Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, p. 163. 
^ Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. I, p. 216 and ff. 
9 Strabo, par. 486. — Elian, V. H., 337. 
1*^ Diodorus Sicilus, III, 33, pars. 5 and 6. 
11 Pomponius Mela, III, 7. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 219 

Besides the old men, women are often required among the same 
peoples to kill themselves on their husbands' death. This barbarous 
practice is so ingrained in Hindu customs that the efforts of the Eng- 
lish are futile against it. In 18 17, 706 widows killed themselves in 
the one province of Bengal and in 1821, 2,366 were found in all 
India. Moreover, when a prince or chief dies, his followers are forced 
not to survive him. Such was the case in Gaul. The funerals of chiefs, 
Henri Martin declares, were bloody hecatombs where their garments, 
weapons, horses and favorite slaves were solemnly burned, together 
with the personal followers who had not died in the chief's last 
battle. ^^ Such a follower was never to survive his chief. Among the 
Ashantis, on the king's death his officers must die.^^ Observers have 
found the same custom in Hawaii.^* 

Suicide, accordingly, is surely very common among primitive peo- 
ples. But it displays peculiar characteristics. All the facts above re- 
ported fall into one of the following three categories: 

1. Suicides of men on the threshold of old age or stricken with 
sickness. 

2. Suicides of women on their husbands' death. 

3. Suicides of followers or servants on the death of their chiefs. 
Now, when a person kills himself, in all these cases, it is not 

because he assumes the right to do so but, on the contrary, because 
it is his duty. If he fails in this obligation, he is dishonored and also 
punished, usually, by religious sanctions. Of course, when we hear 
of aged men killing themselves we are tempted at first to believe 
that the cause is weariness or the sufferings common to age. But if 
these suicides really had no other source, if the individual made away 
with himself merely to be rid of an unendurable existence, he would 
not be required to do so; one is never obliged to take advantage of 
a privilege. Now, we have seen that if such a person insists on living 
he loses public respect; in one case the usual funeral honors are 
denied, in another a life of horror is supposed to await him beyond 
the grave. The weight of society is thus brought to bear on him to 
lead him to destroy himself^. To be sure, society intervenes in egoistic 
suicide, as well; but its intervention differs in the two cases. In one 

^^ Histoire de France, I, 81, cf. Caesar, de Bella Gallico, VI, 19. 

i^See Spencer, Sociology, vol. II, p. 146. 

^* See Jarves, History of the Sandwich Islands, 1843, p. 108. 



220 SUICIDE 

case, it speaks the sentence of death; in the other it forbids the choice 
of death. In the case of egoistic suicide it suggests or counsels at 
most; in the other case it compels and is the author of conditions 
and circumstances making this obligation coercive. 

This sacrifice then is imposed by society for social ends. If the 
follower must not survive his chief or the servant his prince, this 
is because so strict an interdependence between followers and chiefs, 
officers and king, is involved in the constitution of the society that 
any thought of separation is out of the question. The destiny of one 
must be that of the others. Subjects as well as clothing and armor 
must follow their master wherever he goes, even beyond the tomb; 
if another possibility were to be admitted social subordination would 
be inadequate.^^ Such is the relation of the woman to her husband. 
As for the aged, if they are not allowed to await death, it is prob- 
ably, at least in many instances, for religious reasons. The protecting 
spirit of a family is supposed to reside in its chief. It is further 
thought that a god inhabiting the body of another shares in his life, 
enduring the same phases of health and sickness and aging with 
him. Age cannot therefore reduce the strength of one without the 
other being similarly weakened and consequently without the group 
existence being threatened, since a strengthless divinity would be 
its only remaining protector. For this reason, in the common interest, 
a father is required not to await the furthest limit of life before 
transferring to his successors the precious trust that is in his 
keeping.^® 

This description sufficiently defines the cause of these suicides. 
For society to be able thus to compel some of its members to kill 
themselves, the individual personality can have little value. For as 
soon as the latter begins to form, the right to existence is the first 
conceded it; or is at least suspended only in such unusual circum- 
stances as war. But there can be only one cause for this feeble indi- 
viduation itself. For the individual to occupy so little place in collec- 

15 At the foundation of these practices there is probably also the desire to prevent 
the spirit of the dead man from returning to earth to revisit the objects and persons 
closely associated with him. But this very desire implies that servants and followers 
are strictly subordinated to their master, inseparable from him, and, furthermore, 
that to avoid the disaster of the spirit's remaining on earth they must sacrifice them- 
selves in the common interest. 

1^ See Frazer, Golden Bough, loc. cit., and passim. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 221 

tive life he must be almost completely absorbed in the group and the 
latter, accordingly, very highly integrated. For the parts to have so 
little life of their own, the whole must indeed be a compact, con- 
tinuous mass. And we have shown elsewhere that such massive 
cohesion is indeed that of societies where the above practices obtain.^'' 
As they consist of few elements, everyone leads the same life; every- 
thing is common to all, ideas, feelings, occupations. Also, because 
of the small size of the group it is close to everyone and loses no one 
from sight; consequently collective supervision is constant, extending 
to everything, and thus more readily prevents divergences. The indi- 
vidual thus has no way to set up an environment of his own in the 
shelter of which he may develop his own nature and form a physiog- 
nomy that is his exclusively. To all intents and purposes indistinct 
from his companions, he is only an inseparable part of the whole 
without personal value. His person has so little value that attacks 
upon it by individuals receive only relatively weak restraint. It is thus 
natural for him to be yet less protected against collective necessities 
and that society should not hesitate, for the very slightest reason, to 
bid him end a life it values so little. 

We thus confront a type of suicide differing by incisive qualities 
from the preceding one. Whereas the latter is due to excessive indi- 
viduation, the former is caused by too rudimentary individuation. 
One occurs because society allows the individual to escape it, being 
insufficiently aggregated in some parts or even in the whole; the 
other, because society holds him in too strict tutelage. Having given 
the name of egoism to the state of the ego living its own life and 
obeying itself alone, that of altruism adequately expresses the oppo- 
site state, where the ego is not its own property, where it is blended 
with something not itself, where the goal of conduct is exterior to 
itself, that is, in one of the groups in which it participates. So we 
call the suicide caused by intense altruism altruistic suicide. But since 
it is also characteristically performed as a duty, the terminology 
adopted should express this fact. So we will call such a type obliga- 
tory altruistic suicide. 

The combination of these two adjectives is required to define it; 
for not every altruistic suicide is necessarily obligatory. Some are 
not so expressly imposed by society, having a more optional character. 

^^ See Division du travail social, passim. 



222 SUICIDE 

In Other words, altruistic suicide is a species with several varieties. 
We have just established one; let us examine the others. 

In these same societies just mentioned, or others of their sort, sui- 
cides may often be encountered with the most futile immediate and 
apparent motives. Titus Livy, Caesar, Valerius Maximus all tell us 
not without astonishment mixed with admiration, of the calmness 
with which the Gallic and German barbarians kill themselves. ^^ 
Celts were known who bound themselves to suffer death in consid- 
eration of wine or money,^^ Others boasted of retreating neither 
before fire nor the ocean.^" Modern travellers have noticed such prac- 
tices in many lower societies. In Polynesia, a slight offense often 
decides a man to commit suicide.^^ It is the same among the North 
American Indians; a conjugal quarrel or jealous impulse suffices 
to cause a man or woman to commit suicide.^^ Among the Dacotas 
and Creeks the least disappointment often leads to desperate steps. -^ 
The readiness of the Japanese to disembowel themselves for the 
slightest reason is well known. A strange sort of duel is even re- 
ported there, in which the effort is not to attack one another but to 
excel in dexterity in opening one's own stomach. ^'^ Similar facts are 
recorded in China, Cochin China, Thibet and the Kingdom of Siam. 

In all such cases, a man kills himself without being explicitly 
forced to do so. Yet these suicides are of the same nature as obliga- 
tory suicide. Though public_opinion does not formally require them, 
it is certainly favorable to them. Since here not clinging to life is a 
virtue,^^ên of Ihe highest rank, thejnan who renounces life on least 
provocation of circumstances or through simple vainglory is. pra.ise- 
worthy. A social prestige thus attaches to suicide, which receives 
"éÎTCÔuragemênF' f rom this fact, and the refusal of this reward has 
effects similar to actual punishment, although to a lesser degree. 
What is done in one case to escape the stigma of insult is done in 
the other to win esteem. When people are accustomed to set no value 

^8 Caesar, Gallic War, VI, 14. — Valerius Maximus, VI, 11 and 12. — Pliny, 
Natural History, IV, 12. 

19 Posidonius, XXIII, in Athanasius Deipnosophistes, IV, 154. 

20 Elian, XII, 23. 

21 Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvoelker, vol. VI, p. 115. 
^^Ibid., vol. Ill, Part I, p. 102. 

23 Mary Eastman, Dacotah, pp. 89, 169. — Lombroso, L'Uomo delinquente, 1884, 
p. 51. 

24 Lisle, op. cit., p. 333. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 223 

on life from childhood on, and to despise those who value it ex- 
cessively, they inevitably renounce it on the least pretext. So value- 
less a sacrifice is easily assumed. Like obligatory suicide, therefore, 
these practices are associated with the most fundamental moral char- 
acteristics of lower societies. As they can only persist if the individual 
has no interests of his own, he must be trained to renunciation and 
an unquestioned abnegation; whence come such partially spontaneous 
suicides. Exactly like those more explicitly prescribed by society, 
they arise from this state of impersonality, or as we have called it, 
altruism, which may be regarded as a moral characteristic of primitive 
man. (Therefore, we shall give them, also, the name altruistic, and if 
optional is added to make their special quality clearer, this word 
simply means that they are less expressly required by society than 
when strictly obligatory. Indeed, the two varieties are so closely re- 
lated that it is impossible to distinguish where one begins and the 
other ends. ) 

Finally, other cases exist in which altruism leads more directly 
and more violently to suicide. In the preceding examples, it caused 
a man to kill himself only with the concurrence of circumstances. 
Either death had to be imposed by society as a duty, or some ques- 
tion of honor was involved, or at least some disagreeable occurrence 
had to lower the value of life in the victim's eyes. But it even 
happens that the individual kills himself purely for the joy of sacri- 
fice, because, even with no particular reason, renunciation in itself 
is considered praiseworthy. 

India is the classic soil for this sort of suicide. The Hindu was 
already inclined to self-destruction under Brahminic influence. 
Manu's laws, to be sure, command suicide only with some reserva- 
tions. A man must already have attained a certain age, he must at 
least have left one son. But if these conditions are satisfied, he has 
nothing more to do with life. "The Brahmin who has freed himself 
from his body by one of the methods employed by the great saints, 
freed from grief and fear, is honorably received in the abode of 
Brahma." ^^ Though Buddhism has often been accused of having 
carried this principle to its most extreme consequences and elevated 
suicide into a religious practice, it actually condemned it. It is true 
that it taught that the highest bliss was self-destruction in Nirvana; 

^'^ Lois de Manu, VI, 32 (trans. Loiseleur). 



224 SUICIDE 

but this suspension of existence may and should be achieved even 
during this life without need of violent measures for its realization. 
Of course, the thought that one should seek to escape existence is so 
thoroughly in the spirit of the Hindu doctrine and so conformable 
with the aspirations of the Hindu temperament that it may be en- 
countered in various forms in the chief sects sprung from Buddhism 
or formed simultaneously with it. It is thus with Jainism. Though 
one of the canonical books of the Jainist religion reproves suicide, 
accusing it of really augmenting life, inscriptions found in many 
sanctuaries show that especially among the southern Jainists religious 
suicide was very often practiced. ^^ The believer allowed himself to 
die of hunger.^'^ In Hinduism the custom of seeking death in the 
waters of the Ganges or of other sacred rivers was widespread. In- 
scriptions represent to us kings and ministers preparing to end their 
days thus ^^ and we are assured that these superstitions had not 
wholly disappeared at the beginning of the century.^^ Among the 
Bhils there was a rock from the top of which men cast themselves 
with religious motives, to devote themselves to Shiva; ^° even as late 
as 1822 an officer attended one of these sacrifices. The story of the 
fanatics who let themselves be crushed to death in throngs under 
the wheels of the idol Juggernaut has become classic.^^ Charlevoix in 
his time had observed rites of this sort in Japan: "Nothing is com- 
moner," he says, "than to see ships along the seashore filled with 
these fanatics who throw themselves into the water weighted with 
stones, or sink their ships and let themselves be gradually submerged 
while singing their idol's praises. Many of the spectators follow them 
with their eyes, lauding their valor to the skies and asking their 
blessing before they disappear. The sectarians of Amida have them- 
selves immured in caverns where there is barely space to be seated 
and where they can breathe only through an air shaft. There they 
quietly allow themselves to die of hunger. Others climb to the top 

2^ Barth, The Religions of India, London, 1891, p. 146. 

27 Biihler, Uber die Indische Secte der Jalna, Vienna, 1887, pp. 10, 19, and 37. 

28 Barth, op. cit., p. 279. 

29 Heber, Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces of India, 1824-25, 
Chap. XII. 

2" Forsyth, The Highlands of Central India, London, 1871, pp. 172-175. 

3^ Cf. Burnell, Glossary, 1886, under the word, Jagarnnath. The practice has 
almost disappeared; but single cases have been observed even in our days. See 
Stirling, Asiatic Studies, vol. XV, p. 324. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 225 

of very high cliffs, upon which there are sulphur mines from which 
flames jet from time to time. They continuously call upon their gods, 
pray to them to accept the sacrifice of their lives and ask that some 
of these flames rise. As soon as one appears they regard it as a sign of 
the gods' consent and cast themselves head-foremost to the bottom 
of the abyss. . . . The memory of these so-called martyrs is held in 
great reverence." ^^ 

There are no suicides with a more definitely altruistic character. 
We actually see the individual in all these cases seek to strip himself 
of his personal being in order to be engulfed in something which 
he regards as his true essence. The name he gives it is unimpor- 
tant; he feels that he exists in it and in it alone, and strives so 
violently to blend himself with it in order to have being. He must 
therefore consider that he has no life of his own. Impersonality is 
here carried to its highest pitch; altruism is acute. But, it will be 
objected, do not these suicides occur simply because men consider 
life unhappy? Obviously, if an individual kills himself so spontane- 
ously, he does not set much store by his life, which is consequently 
conceived as more or less melancholy. But in this çespect aU suicides 
are alike. Yet it would be a great mistake to 'make no distinction 
between them; for this conception has not always the same cause, 
and thus is not identical in the different cases, appearances to the 
contrary notwithstanding. While the egoist is unhappy because he, 
sees nothing real in the world but the individual, the intemperate 
altruist's sadness, on the contrary, springs from the individual's seem- 
ing wholly unreal to him. One is detached from life because, seeing 
no goal to which he may attach himself, he feels himself useless and • 
purposeless; the other because he has a goal but one outside this 
life, which henceforth seems merely an obstacle to him. Thus, the 
difference of the causes reappears in their effects, and the melancholy 
of one is quite different from that of the other. That of the former 
consists of a feeling of incurable weariness and sad depression; it 
expresses a complete relaxation of activity, which, unable to find 
useful employment, collapses. That of the latter, on the contrary, 
springs from hope; for it depends on the belief in beautiful perspec- 
tives beyond this life. It even implies enthusiasm and the spur of a 

32 Histoire du Japon, vol. II. 



226 SUICIDE 

faith eagerly seeking satisfaction, affirming itself by acts of extreme 
energy. 

Furthermore, the more or less gloomy view of life taken by a 
people does not in itself explain the intensity of its inclination to 
suicide. The Christian conceives of his abode on earth in no more 
delightful colors than the Jainist sectarian. He sees in it only a time 
of sad trial; he also thinks that his true country is not of this world. 
Yet the aversion to suicide professed and inspired by Christianity is 
well known. The reason is that Christian societies accord the indi- 
vidual a more important role than earlier ones. They assign to him 
personal duties which he is forbidden to evade; only as he has 
acquitted himself of the role incumbent upon him here on earth 
is he admitted or not admitted to the joys of the hereafter, and these 
very joys are as personal as the works which make them his heritage. 
Thus the moderate individualism in the spirit of Christianity prevents 
it from favoring suicide, despite its theories concerning man and his 
destiny. 

The metaphysical and religious systems which form logical set- 
tings for these moral practices give final proof that this is their origin 
and meaning. It has long been observed that they coexist generally 
with pantheistic beliefs. To be sure, Jainism, as well as Buddhism, 
is atheistic; but pantheism is not necessarily theistic. Its essential 
quality is the idea that what reality there is in the individual is for- 
eign to his nature, that the soul which animates him is not his own, 
and that consequently he has no personal existence. 'Now this dogma 
is fundamental to the doctrines of the Hindus; it already exists in 
Brahminism. Inversely, where the principle of being is not fused 
with such doctrines but is itself conceived in an individual form, that 
is, among monotheistic peoples like the Jews, Christians, Mahomet- 
ans, or polytheists like the Greeks and the Latins, this form of 
suicide is unusual. It is never found there in the state of a ritual 
practice. There is therefore probably a relation between it and pan- 
theism. What is this relation? 

It cannot be conceded that pantheism produced suicide. Such ab- 
stract ideas do not guide men, and the course of history could not 
be explained through the play of purely metaphysical concepts. 
Among peoples as well as individuals, mental representations func- 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 227 

tion above all as an expression of a reality not of their own making; 
they rather spring from it and, if they subsequently modify it, do so 
only to a limited extent. Religious conceptions are the products of 
the social environment, rather than its producers, and if they react,, 
once formed, upon their own original causes, the reaction cannot be 
very profound. If the essence of pantheism, then, is a more or less' 
radical denial of all individuality, such a religion could be consti- 
tuted only in a society where the individual really counts for noth- 
ing, that is, is almost wholly lost in the group. For men can conceive 
of the world only in the image of the small social world in which 
they live. Religious pantheism is thus only a result and, as it were, 
a reflection of the pantheistic organization of society. Consequently, 
it is also in this society that we must seek the cause for this special 
suidde which everywhere appears in connection with pantheism. 

s-We have thus constituted a second type of suicide, itself consisting 
of three varieties: obligatory altruistic suicide, optional altruistic 
suicide, and acute altruistic suicide, the perfect pattern of which is 
mystical suicide. In these different forms, it contrasts most strikingly 
with egoistic suicide. One is related to the crude morality which dis- 
regards everything relating solely to the individual; the other is closely 
associated with the refined ethics which sets human personality on so 
high a pedestal that it can no longer be subordinated to anything. 
Between the two there is, therefore, all the difference between primi- 
tive peoples and the most civilized nations. 

However, if lower societies are the theatre par excellence of 
altruistic suicide, it is also found in more recent civilizations. Under 
this head may notably be classified the death of some of the Chris- 
tian martyrs. All those neophytes who without killing themselves, 
voluntarily allowed their own slaughter, are really suicides. Though 
they did not kill themselves, they sought death with all their power 
and behaved so as to make it inevitable. To be suicide, the act from 
which death must necessarily result need only have been performed 
by the victim with full knowledge of the facts. Besides, the passion- 
ate enthusiasm with which the believers in the new religion faced 
final torture shows that at this moment they had completely discarded 
their personalities for the idea of which they had become the serv- 
ants. Probably the epidemics of suicide which devastated the monas- 



228 SUICIDE 

teries on several occasions during the Middle Ages, apparently caused 
by excesses of religious fervor, were of this nature.^^ 

In our contemporary societies, as individual personality becomes 
increasingly free from the collective personality, such suicides could 
not be widespread. Some may doubtless be said to have yielded to 
altruistic motives, such as soldiers who preferred death to the humili- 
ation of defeat, like Commandant Beaurepaire and Admiral Ville- 
neuve, or unhappy persons who kill themselves to prevent disgrace 
befalling their family. For when such persons renounce life, it is for 
something they love better than themselves. But they are isolated and 
exceptional cases.^^ Yet even today there exists among us a special 
environment where altruistic suicide is chronic: namely, the army. 

II 

It is a general fact in all European countries that the suicidal apti- 
tude of soldiers is much higher than that of the civilian population 
of the same age. The difference varies between 25 and 900 per cent 
(see Table XXIII). 

TABLE XXIII — Comparison of Military and Civilian Suicides in 
the Chief European Countries 





Si 


jicides 


per 
1 Million 


Coefficient of Aggra- 
votion of Soldiers 




1 Million 




Civilians 


Compared with 




Soldiers 




of Same Age 


Civilians 


Austria (1876-90) 


1,253 




122 


10 


United States (1870-84) 


680 




80 


8.5 


Italy (1876-90) 


407 




77 


5.2 


Englond (1876-90) 


209 




79 


2.6 


Wurttemberg (1846-58) 


320 




170 


1.92 


Saxony (1847-58) 


640 




369 


1.77 


Prussia (1876-90) 


607 




394 


1.50 


France 1876-90) 


333 




265 


1.25 



Denmark is the only country where the contingent of the two 
portions of the population is substantially the same, 388 per million 

^^ The moral state occasioning these suicides has been called acedia. See Bour- 
quelot, Recherches sur les opinions et la législation en matière de mort volontaire 
pendant le moyen âge. 

3* Probably the frequent suicides of the men of the Revolution were at least 
partly due to an altruistic state of mind. At this time of civil strife and collective 
enthusiasm, individual personality had lost some of its value. The interests of coun- 
try or party outweighed everything. Doubtless the great number of capital execu- 
tions spring from the same cause. One then killed others as readily as one's self. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 229 

civilians and 382 per million soldiers during the years 1845-56. But 
the suicides of officers are not included in this figure.^^ 

This fact is at first sight all the more surprising because it might 
be supposed that many causes would guard the army against suicide. 
First, from the physical point of view, the persons composing it 
represent the flower of the country. Carefully selected, they have no 
serious organic flaws.^^ Also, the esprit de corps and the common 
life should have the prophylactic effect here which they have else- 
where. What is the cause of so large an aggravation? 

Since soldiers who are not officers do not marry, the fault has been 
ascribed to bachelorhood. But first, this should have less adverse 
eflfects in the army than in civilian life; for, as we have just re- 
marked, the soldier is anything but isolated. He belongs to a strongly 
constructed society of a sort calculated partially to replace the family. 
However true or false this hypothesis may be, there is a way to 
examine this factor in isolation. One needs only compare the suicides 
of soldiers with those of unmarried persons of the same age; Table 
XXI, the importance of which again becomes clear, allows this com- 
parison. During the years 1888-91 in France, 380 suicides per mil- 
lion soldiers were recorded; at the same time, unmarried men of 
from 20 to 25 years showed only 237. There were thus 160 military 
suicides per 100 unmarried civilians; which makes a coefficient of 
aggravation of 1.6, wholly independent of bachelorhood. 

If the suicides of non-commissioned officers are separately com- 
puted, the coefficient is still higher. During the period 1867-74, a 
million non-commissioned officers showed an annnual average of 
993 suicides. According to a census made in 1866, their average age 
was a little over 31 years. Of course, we do not know how high 
suicides of unmarried men of 30 years rose at that time; the tables 
we have drawn up refer to a much more recent time (1889-91) and 
are the only ones in existence; but starting from their figures, what- 
ever error we make can only lower the coefficient of aggravation 

2^ The figures on military suicide are taken from official documents or from 
Wagner (op. cit., p. 229 and ff.) ; those on civilian suicide from official documents, 
Wagner's statements, or Morselli. For the United States we have assumed that the 
average army age was from 20 to 30 years as in Europe. 

3^ A new proof of the non-efficacy of the organic factor in general and of matri- 
monial selection in particular. 



230 suicroE 

of the non-commissioned officers below what it really was. Actually, 
the number of suicides having almost doubled between the two 
periods, the rate of unmarried men of the age in question certainly 
rose. Consequently, comparing suicides of non-commissioned officers 
of 1867-74 "^i^h those of unmarried men of 1889-91, we may well 
reduce but not broaden the adverse effect of the military profession. 
If therefore we find a coefficient of aggravation in spite of this error, 
we may be sure not only that it is real but that it is quite a bit more 
important than the figures would make it appear. Now, in 1889-91, 
a million unmarried men of 31 years of age gave a number of 
suicides between 394 and 627, or about 510. This number is to 
993 as 100 is to 194; which implies a coefficient of aggravation of 
1.94 which may be increased almost to 4 without fear of exaggerat- 
ing the facts.^'^ 

Finally, the officers' corps averaged from 1862 to 1878, 430 sui- 
cides per million persons. Their average age which cannot have 
varied between very wide extremes was in 1866, 37 years and 9 
months. Since many of them are married, they should be compared 
not with unmarried men of this age but with the total of the male 
population, unmarried and married men combined. Now, at 37 years 
of age in 1863-68, a million men of every marital status gave only 
a little more than 200 suicides. This number is to 430 as 100 is to 
215, making a coefficient of aggravation of 2.15, in no way depend- 
ent on marriage or family life. 

This coefficient which varies with the different degrees of the 
hierarchy from 1.6 to nearly 4, can clearly be explained only by 
causes connected with the military status. To be sure, we have directly 
shown its existence only for France; for other countries we lack the 
data necessary to examine the influence of bachelorhood in isolation. 
But as the French army happens to be the very one least afflicted 
by suicide in Europe, with the one exception of Denmark, we may 

3' During the years 1S67-74 the suicide-rate is about 140; in 1889-91 it is 210 
to 220, an increase of nearly 60 per cent. If the rate of unmarried men grew in the 
same proportion, and there is no reason why it should not have done so, during the 
first of these periods it would have been only 319, which would raise the coefficient 
of aggravation of non-commissioned officers to 3.1 1. If we do not speak of non- 
commissioned officers after 1874, it is because from then on there were decreasingly 
few professional non-commissioned officers. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 23 1 

be sure of the general character of the above result and even that it 
must be much more pronounced in other European states. To what 
cause shall we attribute it? 

Alcoholism has been suggested, which is said to afiflict the army 
more than the civilian population. But if, in the first place, as has 
been shown, alcoholism has no definite influence on the suicide-rate 
in general, it is unlikely to have more on that of military suicides in 
particular. Then, the few years of service, three in France and two 
and a half in Prussia, could not create a large enough number of 
inveterate alcoholics for the enormous contingent contributed to sui- 
cide by the army to be thus explained. Finally, even according to 
those observers who attribute most influence to alcoholism, only a 
tenth of the cases can be ascribed to it. Thus, even though alcoholic 
suicides were two or three times as numerous among soldiers as 
among civilians of like age, which is not proven, a considerable 
excess of military suicides would still remain for which another cause 
would have to be sought. 

The cause most often suggested is disgust with the service. This 
explanation agrees with the popular conception which attributes sui- 
cide to the hardships of life; for disciplinary rigor, lack of liberty, 
and want of every comfort makes barracks life appear especially 
intolerable. Actually it seems that there are many other harsher occu- 
pations which yet do not increase the inclination to suicide. The 
soldier is at least sure of having enough food and shelter. But what- 
ever these considerations may be worth, the following facts show the 
inadequacy of this over-simple explanation: 

I. It is logical to admit that disgust with the service must be much 
stronger during the first years and decrease as the soldier becomes 
accustomed to barracks life. After some time, an acclimatization 
must be made, either through habit or the desertion of the most re- 
fractory or their suicide; and this acclimatization must become greater 
the longer the stay with the colors. If, then, it were the change of 
habits and the impossibility of adjustment to the new life which de- 
veloped in the soldier special aptitude for suicide, the coefficient 
of aggravation should lessen as the life under arms was prolonged. 
This is not so, as the following table shows: 



232 



SUICIDE 



Frenc 


h Army 

Non-commissioned 

Officers and Soldiers 

Annual Suicides per 

100,000 Men (1862-69) 


S 

Age 


English Army 
jicides per 100,000 

Home 
Stations 


In 
India 


Less than 1 year service 
From 1-3 years 
From 3-5 years 
From 5-7 years 
From 7-10 years 




28 
27 
40 
48 
76 


20-25 years 
25-30 years 
30-35 years 
35-40 years 


20 
39 
51 
71 


13 

39 

84 

103 



In France, in less than lo years of military service, the suicide-rate 
almost triples while for unmarried civilians during the same time 
it only rises from 237 to 394. In the English armies of India, it 
becomes eight times as high in 20 years; the civilian rate never 
advances so rapidly. This proves that the army's characteristic aggra- 
vation is not centered in the first years. 

The situation seems to be the same in Italy. To be sure, we have 
not the proportional figures for the soldiers of each contingent. But 
the net figures are practically the same for each of the three service 
years, 15.1 for the first, 14.8 for the second, 14.3 for the third. It 
is true that the numbers diminish year by year as a result of deaths, 
discharges, leaves of absence, etc. The absolute figures could thus only 
remain at the same level if the proportional figures have considerably 
increased. It is not unlikely, however, that in some countries there 
are a certain number of suicides at the beginning of service really 
due to the change of life. In fact, in Prussia it is said that suicides 
are unusually numerous during the first six months. Likewise in 
Austria, of 1,000 suicides, 156 occur in the first three months,^^ 
which is certainly a very considerable figure. But these facts do not 
conflict with the preceding ones. For very possibly, besides the tem- 
porary aggravation occurring during this troubled period, there is 
another due to totally diflPerent causes which increases according to 
the same pattern we have observed in France and England. Further- 
more, in France itself, the rate of the second and third years is 
slightly less than that of the first, which, however, does not prevent 
the later increase.^* 



38 See Roth's article in the Stat. Monatschrift, 1892, p. 200. 

3^ For Prussia and Austria, we have not the numbers of men per year of service, 
which prevents our computing the proportional numbers. In France, it was said 
that if military suicides had diminished following the war, it was because the serv- 
ice had become shorter (5 years instead of 7). But this decrease did not last and 
from 1882 the figures rose perceptibly. From 1882 to 1889 they returned to their 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 



233 



2. Military life is much less hard and discipline less severe for 
officers and non-commissioned officers than for private soldiers. The 
coefficient of aggravation of the first two categories should therefore 
be less than that of the third. The opposite is true: we have already 
shown it for France; the same fact is encountered in other countries. 
In Italy, officers during the years 1871-75 showed an annual average 
of 565 cases per million while the troops had only 230 (Morselli). 
For the non-commissioned officers the rate is still more enormous, 
more than 1,000 per million. In Prussia, while privates show only 
560 suicides per million, non-commissioned officers show 1,140. 
In Austria there is one suicide of an officer for every nine of privates, 
while there are clearly many more than nine privates to an officer. 
Likewise, although there is not a non-commissioned officer for every 
two soldiers, there is one suicide of the former for every 2.5 of the 
latter. 

3. Disgust with the military life should be less among those who 
choose it freely as a vocation. Volunteers and re-enlisted men should 
therefore show less aptitude for suicide. On the contrary, it is ex- 
ceptionally high. 



Age 
Suicide-rate (Probable 
per Million Average) 



Suicide-rate 

Unmarried Civilians 

of the Same Age 

(1889-91) 



Coefficient 

of 
Aggravation 



Years 1875-78 
Volunteers 



Re-enlisted 



670 
1,300 



25 years 
30 years 



Between 237 and 394, 
or 315 

Between 394 and 627, 
or 510 



2.12 
2.54 



For the reasons given, these coefficients, calculated with reference 
to unmarried men of 1889-91, are certainly below the correct num- 
bers. The intensity of inclination shown by re-enlisted men is espe- 
cially noteworthy, since they remain in the army after having experi- 
enced military life. 

Thus the members of the army most stricken by suicide are also 
those who are most inclined to this career, who are best suited to 
its needs and are best sheltered from its disadvantages and incon- 
veniences. The coefficient of aggravation special to this profession 
is then caused not by the repugnance it inspires, but, on the contrary, 

number before the war, varying between 322 and 424 per million, although the 
length of service had again been reduced, 3 years in place of 5. 



234 suicroE 

by the sum total of states, acquired habits or natural dispositions 
making up the military spirit. Now, the first quality of a soldier is 
a sort of impersonality not to be found anywhere in civilian life to 
the same degree. He must be trained to set little value upon himself, 
since he must be prepared to sacrifice himself upon being ordered 
to do so. Even aside from such exceptional circumstances, in peace 
time and in the regular exercise of his profession, discipline requires 
him to obey without question and sometimes even without under- 
standing. For this an intellectual abnegation hardly consistent with 
individualism is required. He must have but a weak tie binding him 
to his individuality, to obey external impulsion so docilely. In short, 
a soldier's principle of action is external to himself; which is the 
quality of the state of altruism. Of all elements constituting our mod- 
ern societies, the army, indeed, most recalls the structure of lower 
societies. It, too, consists of a massive, compact group providing a 
rigid setting for the individual and preventing any independent 
movement. Therefore, since this moral constitution is the natural field 
for altruistic suicide, military suicide may certainly be supposed to 
have the same character and derive from the same source. 

This would explain the increase of the coefficient of aggravation 
with the duration of service; this aptitude for renunciation, this taste 
for impersonality develops as a result of prolonged discipline. Just 
as the military spirit must be stronger among re-enlisted men and 
non-commissioned officers than among mere privates, the former may 
be expected to be more specially inclined to suicide than the latter. 
This hypothesis even permits an understanding of the strange su- 
periority of non-commissioned officers over officers in this respect. 
If they commit suicide more frequently, it is because no function 
requires so much of the habit of passive submission. However disci- 
plined the officer, he must be capable of initiative to a certain extent; 
he has a wider field of action and, accordingly, a more developed 
individuality. The conditions favorable to altruistic suicide are thus 
less completely realized in him than in the non-commissioned officer; 
having a keener feeling of the value of his life, he is less ready to 
sacrifice it. 

Not only does this explanation account for the facts stated above, 
but it is furthermore confirmed by the following facts. 

I. From Table XXIII it appears that the military coefficient of 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 235 

aggravation is higher the less tendenq^ the civihan population has to 
suicide and vice versa. Denmark is the classical country for suicide; 
soldiers kill themselves there no more than the other inhabitants. 
Next to Denmark, the states most abounding in suicides are Saxony, 
Prussia and France; in them the army is not especially stricken, the 
coefficient of aggravation varying between 1.25 and 1.77. On the 
contrary it is very considerable for Austria, Italy, the United States 
and England, countries in which civilian suicide is infrequent. Rosen- 
feld, in the article already cited, reached the same results, having 
classified the principal European countries from the point of view 
of military suicide though without thinking of drawing any theoreti- 
cal conclusion from this classification. Here is the order in which he 
arranges the diflferent states and the coefficients calculated by him: 

Coefficient of Aggrovotion 

of Soldiers in Proportion to Rote of Civilian Population 
Civilians of 20-30 Years per Million 

Fronce 1.3 150 (1871-75) 

Prussia 1.8 133 (1871-75) 

England 2.2 73 (1876) 

Italy Between 3 and 4 37 (1874-77) 

Austria 8 72 (1864-72) 

Except that Austria should come before Italy, the inversion is 
absolutely regular.^^ 

It is still more strikingly clear within the Austro-Hungarian Em- 
pire. The army corps with the highest coefficient of aggravation are 
those stationed in garrisons in regions where civilians have the high- 
est immunity, and vice versa: 

Military Coefficient of 

Aggravation in Proper- Civilian Suicides 
tion to Civilians Over per Million 

Military Areas 20 Years Over 20 Years 

Vienna (Lower and Upper Austria, 
Salzburg) 1.42 660 

Brunn (Morovia and Silesia) 2.41") a 580l a 

Prague (Bohemia) 2.58 )- ^"^'^^^ 620 )■ ^''"°^^ 



2.46 %i)i f 480 



Innsbruck (Tyrol, Vorarlberg) 2.41 J ^■'*° 240 

Zara (Dolmatia) 3.48^ . 250 1 . 

Groz (Stelermork, Varinthio, Carniola) 3.58 )- Average 290 l- Averoge 

Cracow (Golicia and Bukowina) 4.41 J ^° 310 J ^°^ 

There is only one exception, the territory of Innsbruck, where the 
civilian rate is low and the coefficient of aggravation only average. 

*" It may be questioned whether the great size of the military coefficient of aggra- 
vation in Austria does not result from a more exact recording of military suicides 
than those of the civilian population. 



236 suicroE 

In Italy, likewise, Bologna is the military district where suicides 
of soldiers are least frequent (180 suicides per 1,000,000); and also 
where civilian suicides are highest (89.5). The Apulias and the 
Abruzzis, on the contrary, have many military suicides (370 and 400 
per million) and only 15 or 16 civilian suicides. Similar facts may 
be observed in France. The military government of Paris with 260 
suicides per million is well below the army corps of Brittany with 
440. The coefficient of aggravation in Paris must really be insignifi- 
cant, since in the Seine a million unmarried men of from 20 to 25 
years show 214 suicides. 

These facts prove that the causes of military suicide are not only 
different from, but in inverse proportion to, the most determining 
causes of civilian suicide. The latter causes in the great European 
societies spring from the excessive individuation characteristic of 
civilization. Military suicides must therefore depend on the reverse 
disposition, feeble individuation or what we have called the state of 
altruism. Actually, those peoples among whom the army is most in- 
clined to suicide are also the least advanced, those whose customs 
.most resemble the customs observed in lower societies. Traditional- 
ism, the chief opponent of the spirit of individualism, is far more 
developed in Italy, Austria and even in England than in Saxony, 
Prussia and France. It is more intense in Zara, in Cracow, than in 
Graz or Vienna, in the Apulias than in Rome or Bologna, in Brittany 
than in the Seine. As it guards against egoistic suicide, one readily 
understands that where it still has power, the civilian population has 
few suicides. But it has this prophylactic influence only if it remains 
moderate. If it exceeds a certain degree of intensity, it becomes itself 
an original cause of suicide. As we know, the army necessarily tends 
to exaggerate this, and is the readier to do so the more its own action 
is aided and re-enforced by the surrounding environment. The effects 
of army education are more violent the more it conforms with the 
ideas and sentiments of the civilian population itself; for then, this 
education is not restrained at all. Where, on the other hand, the mili- 
tary spirit is steadily and strongly opposed by public morality, it 
cannot be as strong as where everything conspires to incline the 
young soldier in the same direction. It is thus readily understandable 
that, in countries where there is sufficient altruism to protect the 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 237 

population as a whole to a degree, it is easily carried by the army 
to a point where it becomes the cause of a considerable aggravation,'*^ 
2, In all armies, the coefficient of aggravation is highest among 
the elite troops. 

Average Age Suicides 

Real or Probable per Million Coefficient of Aggravation 

Speciol corps In proportion to tlie male 

of Paris From 30 to 35 570 (1862-78) 2.45 civilian population of 35 

yeors, every marital sta- 
Gendarmerie 570 (1873) 2.45 tus combined.» 

Veterans (abolished In proportion to unmar- 

in 1872) From 45 to 55 2,860 2.37 ried men of the same age 



of the years 1889-91. 



* Because gendarmes and police are often married. 



The last figure, having been calculated in proportion to unmarried 
men of 1889-91, is far too low and yet is far higher than that of 
ordinary troops. Similarly, in the army of Algeria, considered the 
school of military virtue, during the period 1872-78 suicide had a 
mortality double that of the same period for troops stationed in 
France (570 suicides per million instead of 280). On the other 
hand, the least severely affected troops are the bridge-train, the engi- 
neers, the ambulance corps, troops of administrative units, in short, 
those with the least pronounced military character. In Italy, similarly, 
while the army as a whole during the years 1878-81 provided only 
430 cases per milllion, the bersaglieri had 580, the carabinieri 800, 
the military school and instruction battalions 1,010. 

Now, what distinguishes elite troops is the intense strength of 
the spirit of abnegation and military renunciation among them. Sui- 
cide in the army accordingly varies with this moral state. 

3. A final proof of this law is that military suicide is everywhere 
decreasing. In France, there were in 1862, 630 cases per million; 
in 1890 there are only 280. It has been claimed that this decrease 
was due to the laws reducing the length of service. But this tendency 
to decrease is much anterior to the new recruiting law. It is continu- 
ous from 1862 on, except for a fairly considerable rise from 1882 
to 1888.^^ Besides, it appears everywhere. Military suicides have 

*^ It is notable that the state of altruism is inherent in a region. The army corps 
of Brittany is not exclusively composed of Bretons, but it undergoes the influence 
of the moral atmosphere of its environment. 

*2 This rise is too important to be accidental. If we note its occurrence at the very 
commencement of the period of colonial expansion, we may justly wonder whether 
the wars the period occasioned did not cause a reawakening of the military spirit. 



238 SUICIDE 

fallen in Prussia from 716 per million in 1877 to 457 in 1893; in 
all Germany from 707 in 1877 to 550 in 1890; in Belgium from 
391 in 1885 to 185 in 1891; in Italy from 431 in 1876 to 389 in 
1892. In Austria and England the fall is unimportant, but there is 
no rise (1,209 ^^ 1892 in the first country and 210 in the second in 
1890, instead of 1,277 ^^^ 217 in 1876). 

This is the way things should happen if our explanation is well 
founded. It is certain, indeed, that a decline in the old military spirit 
has occurred in all these countries at the same time. Wrongly or 
rightly, the habits of passive obedience, of absolute submission, of 
impersonalism (if this barbarism is permitted us), have proved to be 
more and more in contradiction with the requirements of the public 
conscience. Consequently, they have lost ground. To satisfy new aspi- 
rations, discipline has become less rigid, less repressive of the indi- 
vidual.^^ It is also noteworthy that at the very same time in these 
same societies civilian suicides have constantly increased. This is a 
new proof that their generating cause is of an opposite nature to that 
usually responsible for the specific aptitude of soldiers. 

Everything therefore proves that military suicide is only a form of 
altruistic suicide. We certainly do not mean that all individual cases 
occurring in the regiments are of this character and origin. When 
he puts on his uniform, the soldier does not become a completely 
new man; the effects of his education and of his previous life do not 
disappear as if by magic; and he is also not so separated from the 
rest of society as not to share in the common life. The suicide he 
commits may therefore sometimes be civilian in its character and 
causes. But with the exception of these scattered cases, showing no 
connections with one another, a compact, homogeneous group re- 
mains, including most suicides which occur in the army and which 
depend on this state of altruism without which military spirit is 
inconceivable. This is the suicide of lower societies, in survival among 
us because military morality itself is in certain aspects a survival of 
primitive morality,^* Influenced by this predisposition, the soldier 

^3 We do not mean that individuals suffered from this repression and killed them- 
selves because they suffered. They killed themselves in greater numbers because they 
were less individualized. 

*^ Which does not mean that it is destined to disappear forthvi^ith. These sur- 
vivals have their own bases for existence, and it is natural for some of the past to 
remain in the midst of the present. Life is made of these contradictions. 



ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 239 

kills himself at the least disappointment, for the most futile reasons, 
for a refusal of leave, a reprimand, an unjust punishment, a delay 
in promotion, a question of honor, a flush of momentary jealousy 
or even simply because other suicides have occurred before his eyes 
or to his knowledge. Such is really the source of these phenomena 
of contagion often observed in armies, specimens of which we have 
mentioned earlier. They are inexplicable if suicide depends essen- 
tially on individual causes. It cannot be chance which caused the 
appearance in precisely this regiment or that locality of so many 
persons predisposed to self-homicide by their organic constitution. 
It is still more inadmissible that such a spread of imitative action 
could take place utterly without predisposition. But everything is 
readily explained when it is recognized that the profession of a 
soldier develops a moral constitution powerfully predisposing man 
to make away with himself. For this constitution naturally occurs, 
in varying degrees, among most of those who live or who have lived 
under the colors, and as this is an eminently favorable soil for sui- 
cides, little is needed to actualize the tendency to self-destruction 
which it contains; an example is enough. So it spreads like a trail 
of gunpowder among persons thus prepared to follow it. 

Ill 

It may now be better understood why we insisted on giving an 
objective definition of suicide and on sticking to it. 

Because altruistic suicide, though showing the familiar suicidal 
traits, resembles especially in its most vivid manifestations some cate- 
gories of action which we are used to honoring with our respect and 
even admiration, people have often refused to consider it as self- 
destruction. It is to be remembered that the deaths of Cato and of 
the Girondins were not suicides for Esquirol and Falret. But if 
suicides with the spirit of renunciation and abnegation as their imme- 
diate and visible cause do not deserve the name, it can be no more 
appropriate for those springing from the same moral disposition, 
though less apparently; for the second differ by only a few shades 
from the first. If the inhabitant of the Canary Islands who throws 
himself into an abyss to do honor to his god is not a suicide, how 
give this name to a Jain sectary who kills himself to obtain entry 
to oblivion; to the primitive who, under the influence of the same 



240 suicroE 

mental state, renounces life for a slight insult done him or merely 
to express his contempt for existence; to the bankrupt who prefers 
not to survive his disgrace; and finally to the many soldiers who 
every year increase the numbers of voluntary deaths? All these cases 
have for their root the same state of altruism which is equally the 
cause of what might be called heroic suicide. Shall they alone be 
placed among the ranks of suicides and only those excluded whose 
motive is particularly pure? But first, according to what standard 
will the division be made? When does a motive cease to be suffi- 
ciently praiseworthy for the act it determines to be called suicide? 
Moreover, by separating these two classes of facts radically from 
each other, we inevitably misjudge their nature. For the essential 
characteristics of the type are clearest in obligatory altruistic suicide. 
Other varieties are only derivative forms. Either a considerable num- 
ber of instructive phenomena will be eliminated or, if not all are 
eliminated, not only will a purely arbitrary choice be the only one 
possible among them, but it will be impossible to detect the common 
stock to which those that are retained belong. Such is the risk we 
incur in making the definition of suicide depend on the subjective 
feelings it inspires. 

Besides, not even the reasons for the sentiment thought to justify 
this exclusion are well founded. The fact is stressed that the motives 
of certain altruistic suicides reappear in slightly different forms as 
the basis of actions regarded by everyone as moral. But is egoistic 
suicide any different? Has not the sentiment of individual autonomy 
its own morality as well as the opposite sentiment? If the latter serves 
as foundation to a kind of courage, strengthening and even harden- 
ing the heart, the other softens and moves it to pity. Where altru- 
istic suicide is prevalent, man is always ready to give his life; how- 
ever, at the same time, he sets no more value on that of another. On 
the contrary, when he rates individual personality above all other 
ends, he respects it in others. His cult for it makes him suffer from 
all that minimizes it even among his fellows. A broader sympathy 
for human suffering succeeds the fanatical devotions of primitive 
times. Every sort of suicide is then merely the exaggerated or de- 
flected form of a virtue. In that case, however, the way they affect 
the moral conscience does not sufficiently differentiate them to justify 
their being separated into different types. 



CHAPTER 5 ANOMIC SUICIDE 



*UT society is not only something attracting the sentiments and 
activities of individuals with unequal force. It is also a power con- 
trolling them. There is a relation between the way this regulative 
action is performed and the social suicide-rate. 

It is a well-known fact that economic crises have an aggravating 
effect on the suicidal tendency. 

In Vienna, in 1873 a financial crisis occurred which reached its 
height in 1874; the number of suicides immediately rose. From 141 
in 1872, they rose to 153 in 1873 and 216 in 1874. The increase 
in 1874 is 53 per cent ^ above 1872 and 41 per cent above 1873. 
What proves this catastrophe to have been the sole cause of the 
increase is the special prominence of the increase when the crisis was 
acute, or during the first four months of 1874. From January i to 
April 30 there had been 48 suicides in 1871, 44 in 1872, 43 in 
1873; there were 73 in 1874. The increase is 70 per cent.^ The 
same crisis occurring at the same time in Frankfurt-on-Main pro- 
duced the same effects there. In the years before 1874, 22 suicides 
were committed annually on the average; in 1874 there were 32, 
or 45 per cent more. 

The famous crash is unforgotten which took place on the Paris 
Bourse during the winter of 1882. Its consequences were felt not 

1 Durkheim incorrectly gives this figure as 5 1 per cent. — Ed. 

2 In 1874 over 1873. — Ed. 

241 



242 suicroE 

only in Paris but throughout France. From 1874 to 1886 the average 
annual increase was only 2 per cent; in 1882 it was 7 per cent. 
Moreover, it was unequally distributed among the different times of 
year, occurring principally during the first three months or at the 
very time of the crash. Within these three months alone 59 per cent 
of the total rise occurred. So distinctly is the rise the result of un- 
usual circumstances that it not only is not encountered in 188 1 but 
has disappeared in 1883, although on the whole the latter year had 
a few more suicides than the preceding one: 

1881 1882 1883 

Annual total 6,741 7,213 (plus 7%) 7,267 

First three months 1,589 1,770 (plus 11%) 1,604 

This relation is found not only in some exceptional cases, but is 
the rule. The number of bankruptcies is a barometer of adequate 
sensitivity, reflecting the variations of economic life. When they in- 
crease abruptly from year to year, some serious disturbance has cer- 
tainly occurred. From 1845 to 1869 there were sudden rises, symp- 
tomatic of crises, on three occasions. While the annual increase in 
the number of bankruptcies during this period is 3.2 per cent, it is 
26 per cent in 1847, 37 per cent in 1854 and 20 per cent in 1861. 
At these three moments, there is also to be observed an unusually 
rapid rise in the number of suicides. While the average annual in- 
crease during these 24 years was only 2 per cent, it was 17 per cent in 
1847, 8 per cent in 1854 and 9 per cent in 1861. 

But to what do these crises owe their influence? Is it because they 
increase poverty by causing public wealth to fluctuate? Is life more 
readily renounced as it becomes more difficult? The explanation is 
seductively simple; and it agrees with the popular idea of suicide. But 
it is contradicted by facts. 

Actually, if voluntary deaths increased because life was becoming 
more difficult, they should diminish perceptibly as comfort increases. 
Now, although when the price of the most necessary foods rises 
excessively, suicides generally do the same, they are not found to 
fall below the average in the opposite case. In Prussia, in 1850 wheat 
was quoted at the lowest point it reached during the entire period 
of 1848-81; it was at 6.91 marks per 50 kilograms; yet at this very 
time suicides rose from 1,527 where they were in 1849 to 1,736, 
or an increase of 13 per cent, and continued to increase during the 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 243 

years 1851, 1852 and 1853 although the cheap market held. In 
1858-59 a new fall took place; yet suicides rose from 2,038 in 
1857 to 2,126 in 1858, and to 2,146 in 1859, From 1863 to 1866 
prices which had reached 11.04 niarks in 1861 fell progressively 
to 7.95 marks in 1864 and remained very reasonable for the whole 
period; suicides during the same time increased 17 per cent (2,112 
in 1862, 2,485 in 1866).^ Similar facts are observed in Bavaria. 
According to a curve constructed by Mayr * for the period 1835-61, 
the price of rye was lowest during the years 1857-58 and 1858-59; 
now suicides, which in 1857 numbered only 286, rose to 329 in 
1858, to 387 in 1859. The same phenomenon had already occurred 
during the years 1848-50; at that time wheat had been very cheap 
in Bavaria as well as throughout Europe. Yet, in spite of a slight 
temporary drop due to political events, which we have mentioned, 
suicides remained at the same level. There were 217 in 1847, there 
were still 215 in 1848, and if they dropped for a moment to 189 
in 1849, they rose again in 1850 and reached 250. 

So far is the increase Jn^oyerty from causing the increase in 
suicide that even fortunate crises, the effect of which is abruptly to 
enhance a country's prosperity, affect suicide like economic disasters. 

The conquest of Rome by Victor-Emmanuel in 1870, by definitely 
forming the basis of Italian unity, was the starting point for the 
country of a process of growth which is making it one of the great 
powers of Europe. Trade and industry received a sharp stimulus 
from it and surprisingly rapid changes took place. Whereas in 1876, 
4,459 steam boilers with a total of 54,000 horse-power were enough 
for industrial needs, the number of machines in 1887 was 9,983 
and their horse-power of 167,000 was threefold more. Of course 
the amount of production rose proportionately during the same 
time.^ Trade followed the same rising course; not only did the mer- 
chant marine, communications and transportation develop, but the 
number of persons and things transported doubled.^ As this generally 
heightened activity caused an increase in salaries (an increase of 
35 per cent is estimated to have taken place from 1873 to 1889), 

^ See Starck, V erbrechen und Vergehen in Preussen, Berlin, 1884, p. 55. 
^ Die Gesetzmassigkeit im Gesellschaftsleben, p. 345. 

^ See Fornasari di Verce, La criminalita e le vicende economiche d'ltalia, Turin 
1894, pp. 77-83- 
^ Ibid., pp. 108-117. 



244 SUICIDE 

the material comfort of workers rose, especially since the price of 
bread was falling at the same time.'^ Finally, according to calcula- 
tions by Bodio, private wealth rose from 45 and a half billions on 
the average during the period 1875-80 to 51 billions during the 
years 1880-85 ^^^ 54 billions and a half in 1885-90.^ 

Now, an unusual increase in the number of suicides is observed 
parallel with this collective renaissance. From 1866 to 1870 they 
were roughly stable; from 1871 to 1877 *^hey increased 36 per cent. 
There were in 

1864-70 29 suicides per million 1874 37 suicides per million 

1871 31 suicides per million 1875 34 suicides per million 

1872 33 suicides per million 1876 36.5 suicides per million 

1873 36 suicides per million 1877 40.6 suicides per million 

And since then the movement has continued. The total figure, 
1,139 ^^ 1877, was 1,463 in 1889, a new increase of 28 per cent. 

In Prussia the same phenomenon occurred on two occasions. In 
1866 the kingdom received a first enlargement. It annexed several 
important provinces, while becoming the head of the Confederation 
of the North. Immediately this growth in glory and power was 
accompanied by a sudden rise in the number of suicides. There had 
been 123 suicides per million during the period 1856-60 per average 
year and only 122 during the years 1861-65. ^^ *^he five years, 
1866-70, in spite of the drop in 1870, the average rose to 133. The 
year 1867, which immediately followed victory, was that in which 
suicide achieved the highest point it had reached since 18 16 (i sui- 
cide per 5,432 inhabitants, while in 1864 there was only one case 
per 8,739). 

On the morrow of the war of 1870 a new accession of good for- 
tune took place. Germany was unified and placed entirely under 
Prussian hegemony. An enormous war indemnity added to the public 
wealth; commerce and industry made great strides. The develop- 
ment of suicide was never so rapid. From 1875 to 1886 it increased 
90 per cent, from 3,278 cases to 6,212. 

World expositions, when successful, are considered favorable 
events in the existence of a society. They stimulate business, bring 
more money into the country and are thought to increase public 

^ Ibid., pp. 86-104. 

* The increase is less during the period 1885-90 because of a financial crisis. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 245 

prosperity, especially in the city where they take place. Yet, quite 
possibly, they ultimately take their toll in a considerably higher num- 
ber of suicides. Especially does this seem to have been true of the 
Exposition of 1878. The rise that year was the highest occurring 
between 1874 and 1886. It was 8 per cent, that is, higher than the 
one caused by the crash of 1882. And what almost proves the Expo- 
sition to have been the cause of this increase is that 86 per cent of it 
took place precisely during^the six months of the Exposition. 

In 1889 things Tvere not identical all over France. But quite 
possibly the Boulanger crisis neutralized the contrary effects of the 
Exposition by its depressive influence on the growth of suicides. Cer- 
tainly at Paris, although the political feeling aroused must have had 
the same effect as in the rest of the country, things happened as in 
1878. For the 7 months of the Exposition, suicides increased almost 
10 per cent, 9.66 to be exact, while through the remainder of the 
year they were below what they had been in 1888 and what they 
afterwards were in 1890. 

1888 1889 1890 

The seven months of the Exposition 517 567 540 

The five other months 319 311 356 

It may well be that but for the Boulanger influence the rise would 
have been greater. 

What proves still more conclusively that economic distress does 
not have the aggravating influence often attributed to it, is that it 
tends rather to produce the opposite effect. There is very little suicide 
in Ireland, where the peasantry leads so wretched a life. Poverty- 
stricken Calabria has almost no suicides; Spain has a tenth as many 
as France. Poverty may even be considered a protection. In the vari- 
ous French departments the^more people there are who have in- 
dependent means, the more numerous are suicides. 

Average Number of Per- 
sons of Independenf 
Means per 1,000 Inbabi- 
Deparfmenfs Where, per 700,000 Inhabitants, iants in Each Group of 

Suicides Were Commifted (1878-1887) Deparfmenfs (1886) 

Suicides Number of Deportments 

From 48 to 43 5 127 

From 38 to 31 6 73 

From 30 to 24 6 69 

From 23 to 18 15 59 

From 17 to 13 18 49 

From 12 to 8 26 49 

From 7 to 3 10 42 



1 



246 suicroE 

Comparison of the maps confirms that of the averages (see 
Appendix V) . 

!. If therefore industrial or financial crises increase suicides, this is 
not because they cause poverty, since crises of prosperity have the 
same result; it is because they are crises, that is, disturbances^fjihe 
collective order.^ Every disturbance of equilibrium, even though it 
achieves greater comfort and a heightening of general vitality, is an 
impulse to voluntary death. Whenever serious readjustments take 
place in the social order, whether or not due to a sudden growth or 
to an unexpected catastrophe, men are more inclined to self-destruc- 
tion. How is this possible.'* How can something considered generally 
to improve existence serve to detach men from it? ' 

For the answer, some preliminary considerations are required. 

II 

No living being can be happy or even exist unless his n€eds-arÊ__ 
sufficiently proportioned to his means. In other words, if his needs 
require more than can be granted, or even merely something of a 
different sort, they will be under continual friction and can only 
function painfully. Movements incapable of production without pain 
tend not to be reproduced. Unsatisfied tendencies atrophy, and as 
the impulse to live is merely the result of all the rest, it is bound to 
weaken as the others relax. 

In the animal, at least in a normal condition, this equilibrium 
is established with automatic spontaneity because the animal depends 
on purely material conditions. All the organism needs is that the sup- 
plies of substance and energy constantly employed in the vital process 
should be periodically renewed by equivalent quantities; that replace- 
ment be equivalent to use. When the void created by existence in its 
own resources is filled, the animal, satisfied, asks nothing further. 
Its power of reflection is not sufficiently developed to imagine other 
ends than those implicit in its physical nature. On the other hand, 

9 To prove that an increase in prosperity diminishes suicides, the attempt has been 
made to show that they become less when emigration, the escape-valve of poverty, is 
widely practiced (See Legoyt, pp. 257-259). But cases are numerous where parallel- 
ism instead of inverse proportions exist between the two. In Italy from 1876 to 1890 
the number of emigrants rose from 76 per 100,000 inhabitants to 335, a figure itself 
exceeded between 1887 and 1889. At the same time suicides did not cease to grow 
in numbers. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 247 

as the work demanded of each organ itself depends on the general 
state of vital energy and the needs of organic equilibrium, use is 
regulated in turn by replacement and the balance is automatic. The; 
limits of one are those of the other; both are fundamental to the\ 
constitution of the existence in question, which cannot exceed them.' 

This is not the case with man, because most of his needs are not 
dependent on his body or not to the same degree. Strictly speaking, 
we may consider that the quantity of material supplies necessary to the 
physical maintenance of a human life is subject to computation, 
though this be less exact than in the preceding case and a wider 
margin left for the free combinations of the will; for beyond the 
indispensable minimum which satisfies nature when instinctive, a 
more awakened reflection suggests better conditions, seemingly de- 
sirable ends craving fulfillment. Such appetites, however, admittedly 
sooner or later reach a limit which they cannot pass. But how deter- 
mine the quantity of well-being, comfort or luxury legitimately to 
be craved by a human being? Nothing appears in man's organic nor 
in his psychological constitution which sets a limit to such tendencies. 
The functioning of individual life does not require them to cease 
at one point rather than at another; the proof being that they have 
constantly increased since the beginnings of history, receiving more 
and more complete satisfaction, yet with no weakening of average 
health. Above all, how establish their proper variation with different 
conditions of life, occupations, relative importance of services, etc.? 
In no society are they equally satisfied in the different stages of 
the social hierarchy. Yet human nature is substantially the same 
among all men, in its essential qualities. It is not human nature 
which can assign the variable limits necessary to our needs. They are 
thus unlimited so far as they depend on the individual alone. Irre- 
spective of any external regulatory force, our capacity for feeling 
is in itself an insatiable and bottomless abyss. 

But if nothing external can restrain this capacity, it can only be a 
source of torment to itself. Unlimited desires are insatiable by defini- 
tion and insatiability is rightly considered a sign of morbidity. Be- 
ing unlimited, they constantly and infinitely surpass the means at 
their command; they cannot be quenched. Inextinguishable thirst is 
constantly renewed torture. It has been claimed, indeed, that human 
activity naturally aspires beyond assignable limits and sets itself un- 



248 suicroE 

attainable goals. But how can such an undetermined state be any 
more reconciled with the conditions of mental life than with the 
demands of physical life? All man's pleasure in acting, moving and 
exerting himself implies the sense that his efforts are not in vain 
and that by walking he has advanced. However, one does not ad- 
vance when one walks toward no goal, or — ^which is the same thing 
— when his goal is infinity. Since the distance between us and it is 
always the same, whatever road we take, we might as well have made 
the motions without progress from the spot. Even our glances behind 
and our feeling of pride at the distance covered can cause only de- 
ceptive satisfaction, since the remaining distance is not proportion- 
ately reduced. To pursue a goal which is by definition unattainable 
is to condemn oneself to a. state of perpetual unhappiness. Of course, 
man may hope contrary to all reason, and hope has its pleasures 

I even when unreasonable. It may sustain him for a time; but it cannot 

V'f^^ survive the repeated disappointments of experience indefinitely. 

What more can the future offer him than the past, since he can 

^ _ ^r never reach a tenable condition nor even approach the glimpsed 
X ideal? Thus, the more one has, the more one wants, since satisfat- 
V tions received only stimulate instead of filling needs. Shall action as 
such be considered agreeable? First, only on condition of blindness 
to its uselessness. Secondly, for this pleasure to be felt and to temper 
and half veil the accompanying painful unrest, such unending mo- 
tion must at least always be easy and unhampered. If it is interfered 
with only restlessness is left, with the lack of ease which it, itself, 
entails. But it would be a miracle if no insurmoimtable obstacle were 
never encountered. Our thread of life on these conditions is pretty 
thin, breakable at any instant, 
j To achieve any other result, the^assions first must be limited. 
\ Only then can they be harmonized with the faculties and satisfied. 
^ But since the individual has no way of limiting them, this must be 

s*'^*^ done by some force -exterior^to him. Adregolative force must play the 

same role for moral needs which the organism plays for physical 
needs. This means that the force can only be moral. The awakening 
of conscience interrupted the state of equilibrium of the animal's 
dormant existence; only conscience, therefore, can furnish the means 
to re-establish it. Physical restraint would be ineffective; hearts cannot 
be touched by physio-chemical forces. So far as the appetites are not 



^ 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 249 

automatically restrained by physiological mechanisms, they can be 
halted only by a limit that they recognize as just. Men would never 
consent to restrict their desires if they felt justified in passing the 
assigned limit. But, for reasons given above, they cannot assign them- 
selves this law of justice. So they must receive it from an authority 
which they respect, to which^Eey^yield spontaneously. Either directly 
and^s a whole, or through the agency of one of its organs, society 
alone can play this moderating role; for it is the only moral power 
superior to the individual, the authority of which he accepts. It alone 
has the power necessary to stipulate law and to set the point beyond 
which the passions must not go. Finally, it alone can estimate the 
reward to be prospectively ofifered to every class of human function- 
ary, in the name of the common interest. 

As a matter of fact, at every moment of history there is a dim 
perception, in the moral consciousness of societies, of the respective 
value of different social services, the relative reward due to each, and 
the consequent degree o f com fort appropriate on the average to 
workers in each occupation. The different functions are graded in 
public opinion and a certain coefficient of well-being assigned to 
each, according to its place in the hierarchy. According to accepted 
ideas, for example, a certain way of living is considered the upper 
limit to which a workman may aspire in his efforts to improve his 
existence, and there is another limit below which he is not willingly 
permitted to fall unless he has seriously bemeaned himself. Both 
differ for city and country workers, for the domestic servant and 
the day-laborer, for the business clerk and the official, etc. Likewise 
the man of wealth is reproved if he lives the life of a poor man, 
but also if he seeks the refinements of luxury overmuch. Economists 
may protest in vain; public feeling will always be scandalized if an 
individual spends too much wealth for wholly superfluous use, and 
it even seems that this severity relaxes only in times of moral dis- 
turbance.^" A genuine regimen exists, therefore, although not 
always legally formulated, which fixes with relative precision the 
maximum degree of ease of living to which each social class may 
legitimately aspire. However, there is nothing immutable about such 

^^ Actually, this is a purely moral reprobation and can hardly be judicially imple- 
mented. We do not consider any reestablishment of sumptuary laws desirable or 
even possible. 



250 SUICIDE 

a scale. It changes with the increase or decrease of collective revenue 
and the changes occurring in the moral ideas of society. Thus what 
appears luxury to one period no longer does so to another; and the 
well-being which for long periods was granted to a class only by 
exception and supererogation, finally appears strictly necessary and 
equitable. 

Under this pressure, each in his sphere vaguely realizes the ex- 
treme limit set to his ambitions and aspires to nothing beyond. At 
least if he respects regulations and is docile to collective. authority, 
that is, has a wholesome moral constitution, he feels that it is not 
well to ask more. Thus, an end and goal are^et to the passons. 
Truly, there is nothing rigidTiur absolute about such determination. 
The economic ideal assigned each class of citizens is itself confined 
to certain limits, within which the desires have free range. But it is 
not infinite. This relative limitation and the moderation it involves, 
make men contented with their lot while stimulating them moder- 
ately to improve it; and this average contentment causes the feeling 
of calm, active happiness, the pleasure in existing and living which 
characterizes health for societies as well as for individuals. Each per- 
son is then at least, generally speaking, in harmpnyjçvithjiis condi- 
/ tion, and desires only what he may legitimately hope for as tlîe 
7 normal reward of his activity. Besides, this does not condemn man 
to a sort of immobility. He may seek to give beauty to his life; but 
his attempts in this direction may fail without causing him to despair. 
For, loving what he has and not fixing his desire solely on what he 
lacks, his wishes and hopes may fail of what he has happened to 
aspire to, without his being wholly destitute. He has the essentials. 
The equilibrium of his happiness is secure because it is defined, and 
a few mishaps cannot disconcert him. 

But it would be of little use for everyone to recognize the justice 
of the hierarchy of functions established by public opinion, if he 
did not also consider the distribution of these functions just. The 
workman is not in harmony with his social position if he is not con- 
vinced that he has his desserts. If he feels justified in occupying 
another, what he has would not satisfy him. So it is not enough for 
the average level of needs for each social condition to be regulated 
by public opinion, but another, more precise rule, must fix the way 
in which these conditions are open to individuals. There is no society 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 25 1 

in which such regulation does not exist. It varies with times and 
places. Once it regarded birth as the almost exclusive principle of 
social classification; today it recognizes no other inherent inequality 
than hereditary fortune and merit. But in all these various forms its 
object is unchanged. It is also only possible, everywhere, as a re- 
striction upon individuals imposed by superior authority, that is, by 
collective authority. For it can be established only by requiring of 
one or another group of men, usually of all, sacrifices and conces- 
sions in the name of the public interest. 

Some, to be sure, have thought that this moral pressure would be- 
come unnecessary if men's economic circumstances were only no 
longer determined by heredity. If inheritance were abolished, the 
argument runs, if everyone began life with equal resources and if the 
competitive struggle were fought out on a basis of perfect equality, 
no one could think its results unjust. Each would instinctively feel 
that things are as they should be. 

Truly, the nearer this ideal equality were approached, the less 
souciai restraint will be necessary. But it is only a matter of degree. 
One sort of heredity will always exist, that of natural talent. Intelli- 
gence, taste, scientific, artistic, literary or industrial ability, courage 
and manual dexterity are gifts received by each of us at birth, as 
the heir to wealth receives his capital or as the nobleman formerly 
received his title and function. A moral discipline will therefore 
still be required to make those less favored by nature accept the lesser 
advantages which they owe to the chance of birth. Shall it be de- 
manded that all have an equal share and that no advantage be given 
those more useful and deserving? But then there would have to be 
a discipline far stronger to make these accept a treatment merely 
equal to that of the mediocre and incapable. 

But like the one first mentioned, this discipline can be useful only 
if considered just by the peoples subject to it. When it is maintained 
only by custom and force, peace and harmony are illusory; the spirit 
of unrest and discontent are latent; appetites superficially restrained 
are ready to revolt. This happened in Rome and Greece when the 
faiths underlying the old organization of the patricians and plebeians 
were shaken, and in our modern societies when aristocratic preju- 
dices began to lose their old ascendancy. But this state of upheaval is 
exceptional; it occurs only when society is passing through some 



252 SUICIDE 

abnormal crisis. In normal conditions the collective order is regarded 
as just by the great majority of persons. Therefore, when we say that 
an authority is necessary to impose this order on individuals, we cer- 
tainly do not mean that violence is the only means of establishing it. 
Since this regulation is meant to restrain individual passions, it must 
come from a power which dominates individuals; but this power 
must also be obeyed through respect, not fear, 
I It is not true, then, that human activity can be released from all 
restraint. Nothing in the world can enjoy such a privilege. All exist- 
ence being a part of the universe is relative to the remainder; its 
nature and method of manifestation accordingly depend not only on 
itself but on other beings, who consequently restrain and regulate it. 
Here there are only differences of degree and form between the 
mineral realm and the thinking person.' Man's characteristic privilege 
is that the bond he accepts is not physical but moral; that is, social. 
He is governed not by a material environment brutally imposed on 
him, but by a conscience superior to his own, the superiority of which 
he feels. Because the greater, better part of his existence transcends 
the body, he escapes the body's yoke, but is subject to that of society. 
CBut when society is disturbed by some painful crisis or by benefi- 
cent but abrupt transitions, it is momentarily incapable of exercising 
this influence; thence come the sudden rises in the curve of suicides 
which we have pointed out above. 

In the case of economic disasters, indeed, something like a declas- 
sification occurs which suddenly casts certain individuals into a lower 
state than their previous one. Then they must reduce their require- 
ments, restrain their needs, learn greater self-control. All the advan- 
tages of social influence are lost so far as they are concerned; their 
moral education has to be recommenced. But society cannot adjust 
them instantaneously to this new life and teach them to practice the 
increased self-repression to which they are unaccustomed. So they are 
not adjusted to the condition forced on them, and its very prospect 
is intolerable; hence the suffering which detaches them from a re- 
duced existence even before they have made trial of it. 

It is the same if the source of the crisis is an abrupt growth of 
power and wealth. Then, truly, as the conditions of life are changed, 
the standard according to which needs were regulated can no longer 
remain the same; for it varies with social resources, since it largely 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 253 

determines the share of each class of producers. The scale is upset; 
but a new scale cannot be immediately improvised. Time is required 
for the public conscience to reclassify men and things. So long as 
the social forces thus freed have not regained equilibrium, their 
respective values are unknown and so all regulation is lacking for a 
time. The limits are unknown between the possible and the impos- 
sible, what is just and what is unjust, legitimate claims and hopes 
and those which are immoderate. Consequently, there is no restraint 
upon aspirations. If the disturbance is profound, it affects even the 
principles controlling the distribution of men among various occu- 
pations. Since the relations between various parts of society are nec- 
essarily modified, the ideas expressing these relations must change. 
Some particular class especially favored by the crisis is no longer 
resigned to its former lot, and, on the other hand, the example of its 
greater good fortune arouses all sorts of jealousy below and about it. ^ 
Appetites, not being controlled by a public opinion become dis- / 
oriented, no longer recognize the limits proper to them. Besides, ' 
they are at the same time seized by a sort of natural erethism simply 
by the greater intensity of public life. With increased prosperity de 
sires increase. At the very moment when traditional rules have lost 
their authority, the richer prize offered these appetites stimulates 
them and makes them more exigent and impatient of control. The | 
state of de-regulation or anomy is thus further heightened by pas- 
sions being less disciplined, precisely when they need more disci- 
plining. 

But then their very demands make fulfillment impossible. Over- 
weening ambition always exceeds the results obtained, great as they 
may be, since there is no warning to pause here. Nothing gives 
satisfaction and all this agitation is uninterruptedly maintained with- 
out appeasement. Above all, since this race for an unattainable goal 
can give no other pleasure but that of the race itself, if it is one, 
once it is interrupted the participants are left empty-handed. At the 
same time the struggle grows more violent and painful, both from 
being less controlled and because competition is greater. All classes 
contend among themselves because no established classification any 
longer exists. Effort grows, just when it becomes less productive. 
How could the desire to live not be weakened under such conditions? 

This explanation is confirmed by the remarkable immunity of poor 



t \)f^\p'\^ 4 (kov< 



254 <y\ SUICIDE 

countries. \ Poverty protects against suicide because it is a restraint 
in itself.} No matter how one acts, desires have to depend upon re- 
sources to some extent; actual possessions are partly the criterion of 
those aspired to. So the less one has the less he is tempted to extend 
the range of his needs indefinitely. Lack of power, compelling mod- 
eration, accustoms men to it, while nothing excites envy if no one has 
superfluity. Wealth, on the other hand, by the power it bestows, 
deceives us into believing that we depend on ourselves only. Re- 
ducing the resistance we encounter from objects, it suggests the possi- 
bility of unlimited success against them. The less limited one feels, 
the more intolerable all limitation appe_ars. Not without reason, 
therefore, have so many religions dwelt on the advantages and moral 
value of poverty. It is actually the best school for teaching self- 
restraint. Forcing us to constant self-discipline, it prepares^ us to 
accept collective discipline with equanimity, while wealth, exalting 
the individual, may always arouse the spirit of rebellion which is the 
very source of immorality. This, of course, is no reason why hu- 
manity should not improve its material condition. But though the 
moral danger involved in every growth of prosperity is not irre- 
mediable, it should not be forgotten. 

Ill 

If anomy never appeared except, as in the above instances, in inter- 
mittent spurts and acute crisis, it might cause the social suicide-rate 
to vary from time to time, but it would not be a regular, constant 
factor. In one sphere of social life, however — the sphere of trade 
and industry — it is actually in a chronic state. 

For a whole century, economic progress has mainly consisted in 
freeing industrial relations from all regulation. Until very recently, 
it was the function of a whole system of moral forces to exert this 
discipline. First, the influence of religion was felt alike by workers 
and masters, the poor and the rich. It consoled the former and taught 
them contentment with their lot by informing them of the provi- 
dential nature of the social order, that the share of each class was 
assigned by God himself, and by holding out the hope for just com- 
pensation in a world to come in return for the inequalities of this 
world. It governed the latter, recalling that worldly interests are not 
man's entire lot, that they must be subordinate to other and higher 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 255 

interests, and that they should therefore not be pursued without rule 
or measure. Temporal power, in turn, restrained the scope of eco- 
nomic functions by its supremacy over them and by the relatively 
subordinate role it assigned them. Finally, within the business world 
proper, the occupational groups by regulating salaries, the price of 
products and production itself, indirectly fixed the average level of 
income on which needs are partially based by the very force of cir- 
cumstances. However, we do not mean to propose this organization 
as a model. Clearly it would be inadequate to existing societies with- 
out great changes. What we stress is its existence, the fact of its 
useful influence, and that nothing today has come to take its place. 
Actually, religion has lost mpstjif^its-^iûwer. And government, 
instead of regulating economic life, has become its tool and servant. 
The most opposite schools, orthodox economists and extreme social- 
ists, unite to reduce government to the role of a more or less passive 
intermediary among the various social functions. The former wish to 
make it simply the guardian of individual contracts; the latter leave 
it the task of doing the collective bookkeeping, that is, of recording 
the demands of consumers, transmitting them to producers, inven- 
torying the total revenue and distributing it according to a fixed 
formula. But both refuse it any power to subordinate other social 
organs to itself and to make them converge toward one dominant 
aim. On both sides nations are declared to have the single or chief 
purpose of achieving industrial prosperity; such is the implication of 
the dogma of economic materialism, the basis of both apparently 
opposed systems. And as these theories merely express the state of 
opinion, industry, instead of being still regarded as a means to an 
end transcending itself, has become the supreme end of individuals 
and societies alike. Thereupon the appetites thus excited have become 
freed of any limiting authority. By sanctifying them, so to speak, 
this apotheosis of well-being has placed them above all human law. 
Their restraint seems like a sort of sacrilege. For this reason, even 
the purely utilitarian regulation of them exercised by the industrial 
world itself through the medium of occupational groups has been 
unable to persist. Ultimately, this liberation of desires has been made 
worse by the very developrnent of industry and the almost infinite 
extension of the market. ISo long as the producer could gain his 
profits only in his immediate neighborhood, the restricted amount of 



Aiob^i^^^'l'^ '■ 



256 suicroE 

possible gain could not much overexcite ambition. Now that he may 
assume to have almost the entire world as his customer, how could 
passions accept their former confinement in the face of such limitless 
prospects? 

Such is the source of the excitement predominating in this part of 
society, and which has thence extended to the other parts. There, 
the state of crisis and anomy is constant and, so to speak, normal. 
From top to bottom of the ladder, greed is aroused without knowing 
where to find ultimate foothold. Nothing can calm it, since its goal 
is far beyond all it can attain. Reality seems valueless by compari- 
son with the dreams of fevered imaginations; reality is therefore 
abandoned, but so too is possibility abandoned when it in turn be- 
comes reality. A thirst arises for novelties, unfamiliar pleasures, 
nameless sensations, all of which lose their savor once known. Hence- 
forth one has no strength to endure the least reverse. The whole 
fever subsides and the sterility of all the tumult is apparent, and 
it is seen that all these new sensations in their infinite quantity 
cannot form a solid foundation of happiness to support one during 
days of trial. The wise man, knowing how to enjoy achieved results 
without having constantly to replace them with others, finds in them 
an attachment to life in the hour of difficulty. But the man who has 
always pinned all his hopes on the future and lived with his eyes 
fixed upon it, has nothing in the past as a comfort against the 
present's afflictions, for the past was nothing to him but a series 
of hastily experienced stages. What blinded him to himself was his 
expectation always to find further on the happiness he had so far 
missed. Now he is stopped in his tracks; from now on nothing re- 
mains behind or ahead of him to fix his gaze upon. Weariness alone, 
moreover, is enough to bring disillusionment, for he cannot in the 
end escape the futility of an endless pursuit. 

We may even wonder if this moral state is not principally what 
makes economic catastrophes of our day so fertile in suicides. In 
societies where a man is subjected to a healthy discipline, he submits 
more readily to the blows of chance. The necessary effort for sus- 
taining a little more discomfort costs him relatively little, since he 
is used to discomfort and constraint. But when every constraint is 
hateful in itself, how can closer constraint not seem intolerable? 
There is no tendency to resignation in the feverish impatience, of 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 257 

men's lives. When there is no other aim but to outstrip constantly 
the point arrived at, how painful to be thrown back! Now this very i 
lack of organization characterizing our economic condition throws 
the door wide to every sort of adventure. Since imagination is hungry 
for novelty, and ungoverned, it gropes at random. Setbacks neces- 
sarily increase with risks and thus crises multiply, just when they 
are becoming more destructive. 

Yet these dispositions are so inbred that society has grown to-v 
accept them and is accustomed to think them normal. It is everlast- | 
ingly repeated that it is man's nature to be eternally dissatisfied, con- 
stantly to advance, without relief or rest, toward an indefinite goal. 
The longing for infinity is daily represented as a mark of moral distinc- 
tion, whereas it can only appear within unregulated consciences which 
elevate to a rule the lack of rule from which they suffer. The doctrine 
of the most ruthless and swift progress has become an article of 
faith. But other theories appear parallel with those praising the 
advantages of instability, which, generalizing the situation that gives 
them birth, declare life evil, claim that it is richer in grief than in 
pleasure and that it attracts men only by false claims. Since this 
disorder is greatest in the economic world, it has most victims there. 

Industrial and commercial functions are really among the occu- 
pations which furnish the greatest number of suicides (see Table 
XXIV, p. 258). Almost on a level with the liberal professions, they 
sometimes surpass them; they are especially more afflicted than agri- 
culture, where the old regulative forces still make their appearance 
felt most and where the fever of business has least penetrated. Here is 
best recalled what was once the general constitution of the economic 
order. And the divergence would be yet greater if, among the sui- 
cides of industry, employers were distinguished from workmen, for 
the former are probably most stricken by the state of anomy. The 
enormous rate of those with independent means (720 per million) 
sufficiently shows that the possessors of most comfort suffer most. 
Everything that enforces subordination attenuates the effects of this 
state. At least the horizon of the lower classes is limited by those 
above them, and for this same reason their desires are more modest. 
Those who have only empty space above them are almost inevitably 
lost in it, if no force restrains them. 



258 suicroE 

TABLE XXiV — Suicides per Million Persons of Different Oc- 
cupations 

Agricul- Liberal * 

Trade Transportation Industry ture Professions 

France (1878-87) t 440 340 240 300 

Switzerland (1876) 664 1,514 577 304 558 

Italy (1866-76) 277 152.6 80.4 26.7 61 8 f 

Prussia (1883-90) 754 456 315 832 

Bavorio (1884-91) 465 369 153 454 

Belgium (1886-90) 421 160 160 100 

Wurttemberg (1873-78) 273 190 206 

Soxony (1878) 341.59 § 71.17 

* When statistics distinguish several different sorts of liberal occupations, we show os a 
specimen the one in which the suicide-rate is highest. 

t From 1826 to 1880 economic functions seem less affected (see Compte-rendu of 1880); 
but were occupational statistics very accurate? 

t This figure is reached only by men of letters. 

§ Figure represents Trade, Transportation and Industry combined for Saxony. Ed. 

I* Anomy, therefore, is a regular and specific factor in suicide in our 

(y\ modern societies; one of the springs from which the annual contin- 

^3^ gent feeds. /^6 we have here a new type to distinguish from the 

others. It differs from them in its dependence, not on the way in 

\J. which individuals are_ attached to society, but on how it regulates 



liu^. Egoistic suicide results from man's no longer finding a basis 
for existence in life; altruistic suicide, because this basis for existence 
appears to man situated beyond life itself. The third sort of suicide, 
^ the existence of which has just been shown, results from man's 
activity's lacking regulation and his consequent sufferings. By virtue 
of its origin we shall assign this last variety the name of anomic 
suicide\ 

Certainly, this and egoistic suicide have kindred ties. Both spring 
from society's insufficient presence in individuals. But the sphere of 
its absence is not the same in both cases. In egoistic suicide it is 
deficient in truly collective activity, thus depriving the latter of object 
and meaning. In anomic suicide, society's influence is lacking in the 
basically individual passions, thus leaving them without a check-rein. 
In spite of their relationship, therefore, the two types are independ- 
ent of each other. We may offer society everything social in us, and 
still be unable to control our desires; one may live in an anomic state 
without being egoistic, and vice versa. These two sorts of suicide 
therefore do not draw their chief recruits from the same social en- 
vironments; one has its principal field among intellectual careers, 
the world of thought — ^the other, the industrial or commercial world. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 259 

IV 

But economic anomy is not the only anomy which may give rise to 
suicide. 

The suicides occurring at the crisis of wi dowhoo d^ of which we 
have already spoken ^^ are really due to domestic anomy resulting 
from the death of husband or wife. A family catastrophe occurs 
which affects the survivor. He is not adapted to the new situation 
in which he finds himself and accordingly offers less resistance to 
suicide. 

TABLE XXV — Comparison of European States from the Point 
of View of Both Divorce and Suicide 

Annual Divorces Suicides 

per per Million 

1,000 Marriages Inhabitants 

I. COUNTRIES WHERE DIVORCE AND SEPARATION ARE RARE 

Norway 0.54 (1875-80) 73 

Russio 1.6 (1871-77) 30 

England and Wales 1.3 (1871-79) 68 

Scotlond 2.1 (1871-81) 

Italy 3.05 (1871-73) 31 

Finland 3.9 (1875-79) 30.8 

Averages 2.07 46.5 

If. COUNTRIES WHERE DIVORCE AND SEPARATION ARE OF 
AVERAGE FREQUENCY 

Bavaria 5.0 (1881) 90.5 

Belgium 5.1 (1871-80) 68.5 

Holland 6.0 (1871-80) 35.5 

Sweden 6.4 (1871-80) 81 

Baden 6.5 (1874-79) 156.6 

France 7.5 (1871-79) 150 

Wurttemberg 8.4 (1876-78) 162.4 

Prussia ... 133 

Averoges 6Â 109.6 

III. COUNTRIES WHERE DIVORCE AND SEPARATION ARE FREQUENT 

Kingdom of Saxony 26.9 (1876-80) 299 

Denmark 38 (1871-80) 258 

Switzerland 47 (1876-80) 216 

Averages 37.3 257 

But another variety of anomic suicide should draw greater atten- 
tion, both because it is more chronic and because it will serve to 
illustrate the nature and functions of marriage. 

1^ See above, Book II, Ch. 3. 



26o 



SUICIDE 



In the Annales de démographie internationale (September 1882), 
Bertillon published a remarkable study of divorce, in which he 
proved the following proposition: throughout Europe the number 
of suicides varies with that of divorces and separations. 

If the different countries are compared from this twofold point of 
view, this parallelism is apparent (see Table XXV, p. 259). Not 
only is the relation between the averages evident, but the single 
irregular detail of any importance is that of Holland, where suicides 
are not as frequent as divorces. 

TABLE XXVI — Comparison of Swiss Cantons from the Point of 
View of Divorce and Suicide 





Divorces and 
Separations 
per 1,000 
Marriages 


Suicides 

per 
Million 




Divorces and 
Separations 
per 1,000 
Marriages 


Suicides 

per 
Million 








1. CATHOLIC CANTONS 












Frei 


Tcfi and Ifalian 






Tessino 
Valois 


7.6 
4.0 




57 
47 


Freiburg 


15.9 


119 


Averages 


51 




50 


Averages 
German 


15.9 


m 


Uri 

Upper Unterwalden 4.9 
Lower Unterwalden 5.2 
Schwyz 5.6 




60 

20 

1 

70 


Solothurn 37.7 
Inner Appenzell 18.9 
Zug 14.8 
Luzern 13.0 


205 

158 

87 

100 


Averages 


3.9 




37.7 


Averages 


21.1 


137.5 








11. PROTESTANT CANTONS 














French 






Neufchâtel 


42.4 




560 


Vaud 
German 


43.5 


352 


Bern 

Basel (city) 

Basel (country) 


47.2 
34.5 
33.0 




229 
323 
288 


Schaffhausen 106.0 
Outer Appenzell 100.7 
Claris 83.1 
Zurich 80.0 


602 
213 
127 
288 



Averages 



Averages 



38.2 



280 



Aveorges 



92.4 



III. CANTONS MIXED AS TO RELIGION 



36.9 



155 



Averages 



64.0 



307 



Argau 


40.0 


195 


Geneva 


70.5 


360 


Grisons 


30.9 


116 


Saint Gall 


57.6 


179 



269 



The law may be yet more vigorously verified if we compare not 
different countries but different provinces of a single country. Nota- 
bly, in Switzerland the agreement between the two series of phe- 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 261 

nomena is striking (see Table XXVI, p. 260). The Protestant can- 
tons liave the most divorces and also the most suicides. The mixed 
cantons follow, from both points of view, and only then come the 
Catholic cantons. Within each group the same agreements appear. 
Among the Catholic cantons Solothurn and Inner Appenzell are 
marked by the high number of their divorces; they are likewise 
marked by the number of their suicides. Freiburg, although Catholic 
and French, has a considerable number of both divorces and suicides. 
Among the Protestant German cantons none has so many divorces 
as Schaffhausen; Schaffhausen also leads the list for suicides. Finally, 
the mixed cantons, with the one exception of Argau, are classed in 
exactly the same way in both respects. 

The same comparison, if made between French departments, gives 
the same result. Having classified them in eight categories according 
to the importance of their suicidal mortality, we discovered that the 
groups thus formed were arranged in the same order as with refer- 
ence to divorces and separations: 









Average of Divorces 






Suicides per 


a 


nd Separations 






Million 


per 


1,000 Marriages 


1st group 


( 5 departments) 


Below 50 




2.6 


2nd group 


(18 departments) 


From 51 to 75 




2.9 


3rd group 


(15 departments) 


76 to 100 




5.0 


4th group 


(19 departments) 


101 to 150 




5.4 


5th group 


(10 departments) 


151 to 200 




7.5 


6th group 


( 9 departments) 


201 to 250 




8.2 


7th group 


( 4 departments) 


251 to 300 




10.0 


8th group 


( 5 departments) 


Above 300 




12.4 



Having shown this relation, let us try to explain it. 

We shall mention only as a note the explanation Bertillon sum- 
marily suggested « According to that author, the number of suicides 
and that of divorces vary in parallel manner because both depend 
on the same factor: the greater or less frequency of people with 
unstable equilibrium. There are actually, he says, more divorces in a 
country the more incompatible married couples it contains. The latter 
are recruited especially from among people of irregular lives, persons 
of poor character and intelligence, whom this temperament pre- 
disposes to suicide. The parallelism would then be due, not to the 
influence of divorce itself upon suicide, but to the fact that these two 
phenomena derive from a similar cause which they express differ- 
ently. But this association of divorce with certain psychopathic flaws 



202 



suicroE 



is made arbitrarily and without proof. (J'here is no reason to think 
that there are 15 times as many unbalanced people in Switzerland 
as in Italy and from 6 to 7 times as many as in France, and yet in 
the first of these countries divorces are 15 times as frequent as in 
the second and about 7 times as frequent as in the third. Moreover, 
so far as suicide is concerned, we know how far purely individual 
conditions are from accounting for it.. Furthermore, all that follows 
will show the inadequacy of this theory.) 

One must seek the cause of this remarkable relation, not in the 
organic predispositions of people but in the intrinsic nature of di- 
vorce. As our first proposition here we may assert: in all countries 
for which we have the necessary data, suicides of divorced people are 
immensely more numerous than those of other portions of the popu- 
lation. 





Unmarried 
Above 
15 Years 
Men Women 


Suicides in 

Married 
Men Women 


a Million 

Widowed 
Men Women 


Divorced 
Men Women 


Prussia (1887-1889) • 
Prussio (1883-1890) • 
Boden (1885-1893) 
Soxony (1847-1858) 
Saxony (1876) 
Wurttemberg (1846-1860) 
Wurttemberg (1873-1892) 


360 120 
388 129 
458 93 

' 555.18 V 

251 .' ■ ■ 


430 90 
498 100 
460 85 
481 120 
821 146 
226 52 
218 t 


1,471 215 
1,552 194 
1,172 171 
1,242 240 

' 536 '97 

405 t 


1,875 290 
1,952 328 
1,328 

3,102 312 

3,252 389 

1,298 281 

796 t 



* There appears to be some error in the figures for Prussia here. — Ed 
t Men ond women combined. — Ed. 

Thus, divorced persons of both sexes kill themselves between three 
and four times as often as married persons, although younger (40 
years in France as against 46 years), and considerably more often 
than widowed persons in spite of the aggravation resulting for the 
latter from their advanced age. What is the explanation? 

There is no doubt that the change of moral and material regimen 
which is a consequence of divorce is of some account in this result. 
But it does not sufficiently explain the matter. Widowhood is indeed 
as complete a disturbance of existence as divorce; it usually even 
has much more unhappy results, since it was not desired by husband 
and wife, while divorce is usually a deliverance for both. Yet di- 
vorced persons who, considering their age, should commit suicide 
only one half as often as widowed persons, do so more often every- 
where, even twice as often in certain countries. This aggravation, to 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 263 

be represented by a coefficient between 2,5 and 4, does not depend 
on their changed condition in any way. 

Let us refer to one of the propositions estabhslied above to dis- 
cover the causes of this fact. In the third chapter of Book II, we 
saw that in a given society the tendency of widowed persons to 
suicide was a function of the corresponding tendency of married per- 
sons. While the latter are highly protected, the former enjoy an 
immunity less, to be sure, but still considerable, and the sex best 
protected by marriage is also that best protected in the state of 
widowhood. Briefly, when conjugal society is dissolved by the death 
of one of the couple, the effects which it had with reference to suicide 
continue to be felt in part by the survivor.^- Then, however, is it not 
to be supposed that the same thing takes place when the marriage is 
interrupted, not by death, but by a judicial act, and that the aggrava- 
tion which afflicts divorced persons is a result not of the divorce but 
of the marriage ended by divorce? It must be connected with some 
quality of the matrimonial society, the influence of which the couple 
continue to experience even when separated. If they have so strong 
an inclination to suicide, it is because they were already strongly 
inclined to it while living together and by the very effect of their 
common life. 

Admitting so much, the correspondence between divorces and sui- 
cides becomes explicable. Actually, among the people where divorce 
is common, this peculiar effect of marriage in which divorce shares 
must necessarily be very wide-spread; for it is not confined to house- 
holds predestined to legal separation. If it reaches its maximum in- 
tensity among them, it must also be found among the others, or the 
majority of the others, though to a lesser degree. For just as where 
there are many suicides, there are many attempted suicides, and just 
as mortality cannot grow without morbidity increasing simultane- 
ously, so wherever there are many actual divorces there must be 
many households more or less close to divorce. The number of actual 
divorces cannot rise, accordingly, without the family condition pre- 
disposing to suicide also developing and becoming general in the 
same degree, and thus the two phenomena naturally vary in the same 
general direction. 

Not only does this hypothesis agree with everything demonstrated 
12 See above, Book II, Ch. 3. 



264 SUICIDE 

TABLE XXVII — Influence of Divorce on fhe Immunity of Mar- 
ried Persons 







Suicides 


per Million 














Persons 












Country 




Unmarried 

Men Above 

15 Years 




Married 
Men 




Coefficient of Preservation 

of Married with Reference 

to Unmarried Men 


Where divorce does not 
Itoly (1884-88) 
France (1863-68) * 


exist 


145 
273 




88 
245.7 








1.64 
1.11 


Where divorce is common 
Baden (1885-93) 
Prussia (1883-90) 
Prussia (1887-89) 


458 
388 
364 




460 
498 
431 








0.99 
0.77 
0.83 




Per one hundred su 
marital status. 


icides of every 








Where divorce is very 
frequent t 
Saxony (1879-80) 


Pe 

ev 


Unmarried men 
27.5 
r one Hundred 
erv marital stat 


1 

male 
us. 


Married men 
52.5 
inhabitants of 






0.63 



Unmarried men Married men 

42.10 52.47 

* We take this distant period because divorce did not exist ot all at the time. The law of 
1884 re-establishing it seems, however, up to the present, to have had no perceptible effects 
on the suicides of married men; their coefficient of preservation had not appreciably changed 
in 1888-92; an institution does not produce its effects in so short a time. 

t For Saxony we have only the relative numbers given above and taken from Oettingen; 
they are enough for the purpose. In Legoyt (p. 171) other data will be found likewise proving 
that in Saxony married persons have a higher rate than unmarried. Legoyt himself notes this 
with surprise. 

above but it is susceptible of direct proof. Indeed, if it is well- 
founded, married persons in countries where divorces are numerous 
must have less immunity against suicide than where marriage is 
indissoluble. This is the net result of the facts, at least so far as hus- 
bands are concerned as appears from Table XXVII above. Italy, a 
Catholic country in which divorce is unknown, is also the country 
with the highest coefficient of preservation for husbands; it is less in 
France, where separations have always been more frequent, and can 
be seen to diminish as we pass to countries where divorce is more 
widely practiced.^^ 

1^ If we compare only these few countries from this point of view, it is because 
statistics for the others combine the suicides of husbands with those of wives; and 
we shall see below how imperative it is to keep them separate. 

But one should not conclude from this table that in Prussia, Baden and Saxony 
husbands really kill themselves more than unmarried men. We must not forget that 
these coefficients were compiled independently of age and of its influence on suicide. 
Now, as men of the average age of the unmarried, or from 25 to 30 years, commit 
suicide about half as often as men of 40 to 45 years, the average age for husbands, 
the latter enjoy some immunity even in countries with frequent divorce; but it is less 
than elsewhere. For this to be considered negligible, the rate of married men with- 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 265 

We were unable to obtain the number of divorces for the grand- 
duchy of Oldenburg, Considering, however, that it is a Protestant 
country, divorces may be supposed to be frequent, without being 
excessively so since the Catholic minority is considerable. From this 
point of view it should be in about the same class as Baden and 
Prussia. Now, it is also in the same class from the point of view of 
immunity of husbands; 100,000 unmarried men above 15 years of 
age show 52 suicides annually, 100,000 married men 66. The latter' s 
coefficient of preservation is therefore 0.79, or very different from 
that found in Catholic countries where divorce is rare or unknown. 

France permits us to make an observation confirming those just 
given, all the more so as it is still more exact. Divorces are much more 
frequent in the Seine than in the rest of the country. In 1885 the 
number of divorces issued there was 23.99 ^'^^ 10,000 established 
households, whereas the average for all France was only 5.65. We 
need only refer to Table XXII to see that the coefficient of preserva- 
tion for husbands is definitely less in the Seine than in the provinces. 
Indeed it reaches 3 there only once, for the period of 20 to 25 years; 
and the exactness of even this figure is uncertain, since it is calculated 
from too small a number of cases, since there is annually hardly more 
than one suicide of a husband at this age. From 30 years on, the 
coefficient does not exceed 2, is usually below that, and is even below 
unity between 60 and 70 years of age. On the average it is 1.73. 
In the departments, on the contrary, it is above 3, 5 times out of 8; 
on the average it is 2.88, or 1.66 times higher than in the Seine. 

This is one more proof that the large number of suicides in coun- 
tries where divorce is widespread has no reference to any organic 
predisposition, especially to the number of unstable people. For if 

out reference to age would have to be twice that of unmarried men; which is not 
the case. However, this omission has no bearing on our conclusion. For the average 
age of husbands varies little from one country to another, only two or three years, 
and moreover the law of the effect of age on suicide is ever3rwhere the same. Con- 
sequently by disregarding the effect of this factor, we have indeed reduced the abso- 
lute value of the coefficients of preservation, but as we have reduced them in the 
same proportion everywhere, we have not altered what is of sole importance to us — 
their relative value. For we are not seeking to estimate the absolute value of the 
immunity of married men of every country, but to classify the different countries 
from the point of view of this immunity. As for our reasons for making this simpli- 
fication, it was first to avoid complicating the problem unnecessarily, but also be- 
cause we have not in all cases the necessary data for the exact calculation of the 
effect of age. 



266 suicroE 

such were the real cause, it would aflfect unmarried as well as mar- 
ried men. Now the latter are actually those most affected. The origin 
of the evil is therefore undoubtedly to be sought, as we have sup- 
posed, in some peculiarity either of marriage or of family life. It 
remains for us to choose between the last two hypotheses. Is the 
lesser immunity of husbands due to the condition of domestic society, 
or to that of matrimonial society.'' Is the family morale inferior or the 
conjugal bond not all that it should be? 

A first fact which makes the former explanation improbable is 
that among peoples where divorce is most frequent the birth-rate 
is very high and, consequently, the density of the domestic group is 
also very high. Now we know that where the family is dense, family 
spirit is usually strong. There is reason to believe, then, that the 
cause of the phenomenon is to be sought in the nature of marriage. 

Actually, if it were imputable to the constitution of the family, 
wives should also be less protected from suicide in countries where 
divorce is current than in those where it is rare; for they are as 
much affected by the poor state of domestic relations as husbands. 
Exactly the reverse is the truth. The coefficient of preservation of 
married women rises proportionately to the fall of that of husbands, 
or in proportion as divorces are more frequent and vice versa. The 
more often and easily the conjugal bond is broken, the more the wife 
is favored in comparison with the husband (see Table XXVIII, 
p. 267). 

The inversion between the two series of coefficients is remarkable. 
In countries where there is no divorce, the wife is less protected than 
the husband; but her inferiority is greater in Italy than in France, 
where the matrimonial tie has always been more easily broken. On 
the contrary, wherever divorce is practiced (Baden), the husband is 
less protected than the wife, and the latter's advantage increases regu- 
larly with the increase in the frequency of divorce. 

Just as in the preceding instance, the grand-duchy of Oldenburg 
classifies from this point of view like the other sections of Germany 
where divorce is of average frequency. A million unmarried women 
show 203 suicides, a million married women 156; the latter have, 
therefore, a coefficient of preservation of 1.3, much above that of 
husbands, which was only 0.79. The first number is 1.64 times 
greater than the second, approximately as in Prussia. 



ANOMIC SUICroE 



267 



TABLE XXVIII— Bnfluence of Divorce on the Immunity of 
Married Women * 





Suicides 


per 


Coefficient 


0/ 


How Many 


How Many 




Million 


Preservation 


Tintes 


Times 














Husbands' 


Wives' 




Unmarried 










Coefficient 


Coefficient 




Women Over 










Above 


Above 




16 Years 


Wives 


Wives 


Husbands 


Wives' 


Husbands' 


Italy 


21 


22 


0.95 




1.64 


1.72 




France 


59 


62.5 


0.96 




1.11 


1.15 




Baden 


93 


85 


1.09 




0.99 




i .1 6 


Prussia 


129 


100 


1.29 




0.77 




1.67 


Prussia 
















(1887-89) 120 


90 


1.33 




0.83 




1.60 




Per 100 suicides of every mar- 














ital status. 
















Unmarried 
















Women 


Wives 












Saxony 


35.3 

Per 100 inhobitai 

maritol status. 

Unmarried 

Women 


42.6 
Fits of every 

Wives 














37.97 


49.74 


1.19 




0.63 


.... 


1.73 



•The periods are the same as in Table XXVII. 

Comparison of the Seine with other French departments confirms 
this law in a striking manner. In the provinces, where there is less 
divorce, the average coefficient of married women is only 1.49; it is 
therefore only half the average coefficient of husbands, which is 2.88. 
In the Seine the relation is reversed. The immunity of men is only 
1,56 and even 1.44 if we omit the uncertain figures referring to the 
period of from 20 to 25 years; the immunity of women is 1.79. The 
woman's situation in relation to the husband's there is thus more 
than twice as good as in the departments. 

The same result is obtained by comparing the various provinces of 
Prussia: 



From 810 to 
405 Divorced 



Provinces Confoining, per 100,000 Married Persons 



Coefficient 

of 
Preserva- 
tion of 
Wives 



From 371 

to 324 
Divorced 



Coefficient 
of Preser- 
vation of 
Wives 



From 229 

to 116 

Divorced 



Coefficient 
of Preser- 
vation of 
Wives 



Berlin 

Brandenburg 
East Prussia 
Saxony 



1.72 
1.75 
1.50 
2.08 



Pomerania 
Silesia 

West Prussia 
Schleswig 



1 

1.18 
1 
1.20 



Posen 

Hesse 

Hanover 

Rhineland 

Westphalia 



1 

1.44 

0.90 

1.25 

0.80 



All the coefficients of the first group are distinctly above those of 
the second, and the lowest are found in the third. The only anomaly 



268 suicroE 

is Hesse, where, for unknown reasons, married women have a con- 
siderable immunity although divorced persons are few in number. ^^ 
In spite of these concurrent proofs, let us seek a final verification 
of this law. Instead of comparing the immunity of husbands with 
that of wives, let us discover how differently marriage in different 
countries modifies the respective situations of the sexes with regard 
to suicide. This comparison forms the subject of Table XXIX. Here 

TABLE XXIX — Proportional Shore of Each Sex in Suicides of 
Each Category of Marital Status in Different 
Countries of Europe 







Per 


100 




Per 


100 


Average 


Excess per 






Suicic 


les of 


Si 


ukides of 


Country 






Unmarried 




Married 


on fhe 


part of 
















Wives Over 


Unmarried 
















Unmarried 


Women 






Men 


Women 


Husbands 


Wives 


Women 


Over Wives 


Itoly (1871) 




87 


13 


79 




211 






Italy (1872) 




82 


18 


78 




221 


6.2 




Italy (1873) 




86 


14 


79 




21 
21 






Italy (1884-88) 


85 


15 


79 








France (1863- 


-66) 


84 


16 


78 




22 






France (1867- 


-71) 


84 


16 


79 




21 


3.6 




France (1888- 


-91) 


81 


19 


81 




19 






Baden (1869- 


73) 


84 


16 


85 




15\ 
15/ 




1 


Baden (1885- 


93) 


84 


16 


85 






Prussla (1873 


-75) 


78 


22 


83 




17/ 




5 


Prussia (1887 


-89) 


77 


23 


83 






Saxony (1866 


-70) 


77 


23 


84 




16\ 




7 


Soxony (1879- 


-90) 


80 


20 


86 




14/ 





it appears that, in countries where divorce does not exist or has only 
recently been instituted, woman's share is greater in the suicides of 
married than of unmarried persons. This means that marriage here 
favors the husband rather than the wife, and the latter' s unfavorable 
position is more pronounced in Italy than in France. The average 
excess of the proportional share of married over unmarried women 
is indeed twice as much in the former as in the latter of the two 
countries. Turning to peoples among whom the institution of divorce 
is widespread, the reverse is the case. Here woman gains by marriage 
and man loses; and her profit is greater in Prussia than in Baden, and 
greater in Saxony than in Prussia. Her profit is greatest in the country 
where divorces also are greatest. 

Accordingly, the following law may be regarded as beyond dis- 

^* It has been necessary to classify these provinces by the number of divorced 
persons recorded, the number of annual divorces not having been available. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 269 

pute: From the standpoint of suicide, marriage is more favorable to 
the wife the more widely practiced divorce is; and vice versa. 

From this proposition, two consequences flow. 

First, only husbands contribute to the rise in the suicide rate 
observable in societies where divorces are frequent, wives on the 
contrary committing suicide more rarely than elsewhere. If, then, 
divorce can only develop with the improvement of woman's moral 
situation, it cannot be connected with an unfavorable state of domestic 
society calculated to aggravate the tendency to suicide; for such an 
aggravation should occur in the case of the wife, as well as of the 
husband. A lowering of family morale cannot have such opposite 
effects on the two sexes: it cannot both favor the mother and seri- 
ously afflict the father. Consequently, the cause of the phenomenon 
which we are studying is found in the state of marriage and not in 
the constitution of the family. And indeed, marriage may very pos- 
sibly act in an opposite way on husband and wife. For though they 
have the same object as parents, as partners their interests are dif- 
ferent and often hostile. In certain societies therefore, some pecu- 
liarity of the matrimonial institution may very well benefit one and 
harm the other. All of the above tends to show that this is precisely 
the case with divorce." ^ 

Secondly, for the same reason we have to reject the hypothesis 
that this unfortunate state of marriage, with which divorces and 
suicides are closely connected, is simply caused by more frequent 
domestic disputes; for no such cause could increase the woman's 
immunity, any more than could the loosening of the family tie. If, 
where divorce is common, the number of suicides really depends on 
the number of conjugal disputes, the wife should suffer from them 
as much as the husband. There is nothing in this situation to afford 
her exceptional immunity. The hypothesis is the less tenable since 
divorce is usually asked for by the wife from the husband ( in France, 
60 per cent of divorces and 83 per cent of separations).^^ Accord- 
ingly, domestic troubles are most often attributable to the man. Then, 
however, it would not be clear why, in countries of frequent divorce, 
the husband kills himself with greater frequency because he causes 

1^ Levasseur, Population française, V. II, p. 92. Cf. Bertillon, Annales de Dem. 
Inter., 1880, p. 460. — In Saxony, demands for divorce from men are almost as fre- 
quent as those from women. 



270 SUICIDE 

his wife more suffering, and the wife kills herself less often because 
her husband makes her suffer more. Nor is it proven that the number 
of conjugal dissensions increases in the same measure with divorce.^® 

If we discard this hypothesis, only one other remains possible. 
The institution of divorce must itself cause suicide through its effect 
on marriage. 

After all, what is marriage? A regulation of sexual relations, 
including not merely the physical instincts which this intercourse 
involves but the feelings of every sort gradually engrafted by civiliza- 
tion on the foundation of physical desire. For among us love is a 
far more mental than organic fact. A man looks to a woman, not 
merely to the satisfaction of the sexual impulse. Though this natural 
proclivity has been the germ of all sexual evolution, it has become 
increasingly complicated with aesthetic and moral feelings, numerous 
and varied, and today it is only the smallest element of the total com- 
plex process to which it has given birth. Under the influence of these 
intellectual elements it has itself been partially freed from its physi- 
cal nature and assumed something like an intellectual one. Moral 
reasons as well as physical needs impel love. Hence, it no longer has 
the regular, automatic periodicity which it displays in animals. A 
psychological impulse may awaken it at any time: it is not seasonal. 
But just because these various inclinations, thus changed, do not 
directly depend upon organic necessities, social regulation becomes 
necessary. They must be restrained by society since the organism has 
no means of restraining them. This is the function of marriage. It 
completely regulates the life of passion, and monogamie marriage 
more strictly than any other. For by forcing a man to attach himself 
forever to the same woman it assigns a strictly definite object to the 
need for love, and closes the horizon. 

This determination is what forms the state of moral equilibrium 
from which the husband benefits. Being unable to seek other satis- 
factions than those permitted, without transgressing his duty, he 
restricts his desires to them. The salutary discipline to which he is 
subjected makes it his duty to find his happiness in his lot, and by 
doing so supplies him with the means. Besides, if his passion is 
forbidden to stray, its fixed object is forbidden to fail him; the obli- 
gation is reciprocal. Though his enjoyment is restricted, it is assured 
^' Bertillon, Annales, etc., 1882, p. 275 S. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 27 1 

and this certainty forms his mental foundation. The lot of the un- 
married man is different. As he has the right to form attacliment 
wherever inclination leads him, he aspires to everything and is satis- 
fied with nothing. This morbid desire for the infinite which every- 
where accompanies anomy may as readily assail this as any other 
part of our consciousness; it very often assumes a sexual form which 
was described by Musset.^'^ When one is no longer checked, one 
becomes unable to check one's self. Beyond experienced pleasures 
one senses and desires others; if one happens almost to have ex- 
hausted the range of what is possible, one dreams of the impossible; 
one thirsts for the non-existent.^^ How can the feelings not be exacer- 
bated by such unending pursuit? For them to reach that state, one 
need not even have infinitely multiplied the experiences of love and 
lived the life of a Don Juan. The humdrum existence of the ordi- 
dinary bachelor suffices. New hopes constantly awake, only to be 
deceived, leaving a trail of weariness and disillusionment behind 
them. How can desire, then, become fixed, being uncertain that it 
can retain what it attracts; for the anomy is twofold. Just as the 
person makes no definitive gift of himself, he has definitive title 
to nothing. The uncertainty of the future plus his own indeterminate- 
ness therefore condemns him to constant change. The result of it 
all is a state of disturbance, agitation and discontent which incyi- 
tably increases the possibilities of suicide. 

Now divorce implies a weakening of matrimonial regulation. 
Where it exists, and especially where law and custom permit its 
excessive practice, marriage is nothing but a weakened simulacrum 
of itself; it is an inferior form of marriage. It cannot produce its 
useful effects~to~Ehe same degiee. Ils lestraiht upon desire is weak- 
ened; since it is more easily disturbed and superceded, it controls 
passion less and passion tends to rebel. It consents less readily to ^ 
its assigned limit. The moral calmness and tranquillity which werci 
the husband's strength are less; they are replaced to some extent by 
an uneasiness which keeps a man from being satisfied with what he 1 
has. Besides, he is the less inclined to become attached to his present I 
state as his enjoyment of it is not completely sure: the future is less . 
certain. One cannot be strongly restrained by a chain which may be 

1^ See Rolla and in Namouna the portrait of Don Juan. 

'8 See the monologue of Faust in Goethe's work. i 



CùMt'/^ <-/ f û*^""^ "^^^ 



^^S)^ 



.•272 SUICIDE 

broken on one side or the other at any moment. One cannot help 
looking beyond one's own position when the ground underfoot does 
not feel secure. Hence, in the countries where marriage is strongly 
tempered by divorce, the immunity of the married man is inevitably 
less. As he resembles the unmarried under this regime, he inevitably 
loses some of his own advantages. Consequently, the total number 
of suicides rises. ^^ 

But this consequence of divorce is peculiar to the man and does 
not affect the wife. Woman's sexual needs have less of a mental 
character because, generally speaking, her mental life is less devel- 
oped. These needs are more closely related to the needs of the organ- 
ism, following rather than leading them, and consequently find in 
them an efl5£ierrr'réstFainî>s^Being a more instinctive creature than 
man, w6^anJiasj)r]Lly to follow her instincts to find calmness and 
peace. She thus does not require so strict a social regulation as mar- 
riage, and particularly as monogamie marriage. Even when useful, 
such a discipline has its inconveniences. By fixing the conjugal state 
permanently, it prevents all retreat, regardless of consequences. By 
limiting the horizon, it closes all egress and forbids even legitimate 
hope. Man himself doubtless suffers from this immutability; but for 
him the evil is largely compensated by the advantages he gains in 
other respects. Custom, moreover, grants him certain privileges which 
allow him in some measure to lessen the strictness of the regime.'^ 
There is no compensation or relief for the woman. Monogamy is 
strictly obligatory for her, with no qualification of any sort, and, on 
the other hand, marriage is not in the same degree useful to her for 
limiting her desires, which are naturally limited, and for teaching 
her to be contented with her lot; but it prevents her from changing 
it if it becomes intolerable. \The regulation therefore is a restraint 
to her without any great advantages. Consequently, everything that 
makes it more flexible and lighter can only better the wife's situa- 
tion. So divorce protects her and she has frequent recourse to itr' 

^^ It will be objected that where marriage is not tempered by divorce the rigid 
obligation of monogamy may result in disgust. This result will of course follow if 
the moral character of the obligation is no longer felt. What actually matters in fact 
ÎS not only that the regulation should exist, but that it should be accepted by the 
conscience. Otherwise, since this regulation no longer has moral authority and con- 
tinues only through the force of inertia, it can no longer play any useful role. It 
chafes without accomplishing much. 



i/Om 






ANOMIC SUICIDE 273 

The State of conjugal anomy, produced by the institution of 
divorce, thus explains the parallel development of divorces and 
suicides. Accordingly, the suicides of husbands which increase the 
number of voluntary deaths in countries where there are many di- 
vorces, form a division of anomic suicide?) They are not the result 
of the existence of more bad husbands or bad wives in these societies, 
that is, of more unhappy households. They result from a moral struc- 
ture sui generis, itself caused by a weak ening of matrimonial regula- 
tion. This structure, established by marriage, by surviving it produces 
the exceptional tendency to suicide shown by divorced men. But we 
do not mean that this enervation of the regulation is created out of 
whole cloth by the legal establishment of divorce. Divorce is never 
granted except out of respect for a pre-existing state of customs. If 
the public conscience had not gradually decided that the indissolu- 
bility of the conjugal bond is unreasonable, no legislator would ever 
have thought of making it easier to break up. Matrimonial anomy 
may therefore exist in public opinion even without being inscribed 
in law. On the other hand, only when it has assumed a legal form, 
can it produce all its consequences. So long as the marriage law is 
unmodified, it at least serves considerably to restrict the passions; 
above all, it opposes the increase of the taste for anomy merely by 
reproof. That is why anomy has pronounced and readily recognizable 
effects only where it has become a legal institution. 

While this explanation accounts both for the observed parallelism 
between divorces and suicides ^° and the inverse variations shown 
by the immunity of husband and that of the wife, it is confirmed by 
several other facts: 

I. Only where divorce applies, can there be real matrimonial in- 
stability; for it alone completely severs marriage, whereas separation 
merely partially suspends certain of its effects without giving the 
couple their liberty. If, then, this special anom y really increases the 
suicidal tendency, divorced people sKoïïTHTïave a far higher aptitude 
than those merely separated. This is in fact the gist of the only docu- 
"ment on this matter known to us. According to a calculation by 

"" Since the wife's immunity is greater where the husband's is less, it may seem 
strange that there is no compensation. But as the wife's share in the total number 
of suicides is very slight, the decrease in female suicides is imperceptible in the 
whole and does not balance the increase of male suicides. Thus divorce is ultimately 
associated with a rise in the total number of suicides. 



274 SUICIDE 

Legoyt,-^ in Saxony, during the period 1847-56, there were, as an 
annual average, 1,400 suicides for a milHon divorced persons and 
only 176 for a million separated persons. This latter rate is even 
below that of husbands (318). 

2. If the strong suicidal tendency of the unmarried is partially 
connected with the sexual anomy in which they chronically exist, the 
aggravation they suffer must be most perceptible just when sexual 
feelings are most aroused. And in fact, the suicide rate of the un- 
married grows between 20 and 45 years much more rapidly than 
after that; it quadruples during this period, while from 45 to the 
maximum age (after 80 years) it only doubles. But no such accelera- 
tion appears among women; the rate of unmarried women does not 
even double from 20 to 45 years, but merely rises from 106 to 171 
(see Table XXI). The sexual period therefore does not affect the 
increase of female suicides. This is just what we should expect if, as 
we have granted, woman is not very sensitive to this form of anomy. 

3, Finally, several facts established in Chapter III of this very 
book are explained by the theory just set forth and consequently help 
to verify it. 

We saw in that chapter that marriage in France, by itself and 
irrespective of family, gives man a coefficient of preservation of 1.5. 
We know now to what this coefficient corresponds. It represents the 
advantages obtained by a man from the regulative influence exerted 
upon him by marriage, from the moderation it imposes on his in- 
clinations and from his consequent moral well-being. But at the same 
time we noted that in the same country the condition of a married 
woman was, on the contrary, made worse with respect to suicide 
unless the advent of children corrects the ill effects of marriage for 
her. We have just stated the reason. Not that man is naturally a 
wicked and egoistic being whose role in a household is to make his 
companion suffer. But in France where, until recently, marriage was 
not weakened by divorce, the inflexible rule it- imposed on women 
was a very heavy, profitless yoke for them. Sjieaking generallly, we 
now have the cause of that antagonism of the sexes which prevents 
m arriage favorin g them equally: -^ their interests are contrary; one 
"ïïéeds restraint and the other libertyTv]^ 



21 op. cit., p. 171. 

22 See above, Book II, Ch. 3. 



ANOMIC SUICIDE 275 

Furthermore, it does seem that at a certain time of hfe man is 
afifected by marriage in the same way as woman, though for different 
reasons. If, as we have shown, very young husbands kill themselves 
much more often than unmarried men of the same age, it is doubt- 
less because their passions are too vehement at that period and too 
self-confident to be subjected to so severe a rule. Accordingly, this 
rule seems to them an unendurable obstacle against which their 
desire dashes and is broken. This is probably why marriage produces 
all its beneficent effects only when age, supervening, tempers man 
somewhat and makes him feel the need of discipline.^^ 

Finally, in this same Chapter III we saw that where marriage 
favors the wife rather than the husband, the difference between the 
sexes is always less than when the reverse is true.^^ This proves that, 
even in those societies where the status of matrimony is wholly in 
the woman's favor, it does her less service than it does man where 
it is he that profits more by it. Woman can suffer more from marriage 
if it is unfavorable to her than she can benefit by it if it conforms 
to her interest. This is because she has less need of it. This is the 
assumption of the theory just setTortïïTThe results obtained previ- 
ously and those arising from the present chapter therefore combine 
and check each other mutually. 

Thus we reach a conclusion quite different from the current idea 
of marriage and its role. It is supposed to have been originated for 
the wife, to protect her weakness against masculine caprice. Monog- 
amy, especially, is often represented as a sacrifice made by man of 
his polygamous instincts, to raise and improve woman's condition 

23 It is even probable that marriage in itself produces a prophylactic effect only 
later, after the age of thirty. Actually, until that age, childless married men commit 
as many suicides in absolute numbers as married men with children, 6.6 from 20 
to 25 years, for both, and from 25 to 30 years, 33 for the former and 34 for the 
latter. Of course, however, marriages with children are much more common than 
infertile marriages at this period. The tendency of the husbands of the latter mar- 
riages to suicide must therefore be several times as strong as that of husbands with 
children; or very close in intensity to that of unmarried men. Unfortunately we can 
only form hypotheses on the subject; for, as the census does not give the popula- 
tion of husbands without children for each age, as distinct from husbands with 
children, we cannot calculate separately the rate of each for each period of life. We 
can give only the absolute numbers, as we have them from the Ministry of Justice 
for 1889-91. We have reproduced them in a special table to be found at the close 
of this work. This gap in census-taking is most regrettable. 

24 See above, Book II, Cb ^. 



276 SUICIDE 

in marriage. Actually, whatever historical causes may have made him 
accept this restriction, he benefits more by it. The liberty he thus 
renounces could only be a source of torment to him. Woman did not 
have the same reasons to abandon it and, in this sense, we may say 
_that by submitting to the same rule, it was she who made a sacrifice.^^ 

25 The above considerations show that there is a type of suicide the opposite of 
anomic suicide, just as egoistic and altruistic suicides are opposites. It is the suicide 
deriving from excessive regulation , that of persons with futures pitilessly blocked 
and passions violently choked by oppressive discipline. It is the suicide of very 
young husbands, ot ttie~marriéd woman who is childless. So, for completeness' sake, 
we should set up a fourth suicidal type. But it has so little contemporary impor- 
tance and examples are so hard to find aside from the cases just mentioned that it 
seems useless to dwell upon it. However it might be said to have historical interest. 
Do not the suicides of slaves, said to be frequent under certain conditions (See 
Corre, Le crime en pays créoles, p. 48), belong to this type, or all suicides attribut- 
able to excessive physical or moral despotism ? To bring o ut the ineluctible and 
inflexible nature of a rule against whi ch there is ^no appeal, and in contrast with 
the expression "anomy" which has just been used, we migtit call it uatalistic suicide^ 



CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 



NE result now stands out prominently from our investigation: 
namely, that there are not one but various forms of suicide. Of 
course, suicide is always the act of a man who prefers death to life. 
But the causes determining him are not of the same sort in all cases: 
they are even sometimes mutually opposed. Now, such difference in 
causes must reappear in their effects. We may therefore be sure that 
there are several sorts of suicide which are distinct in quality from 
one another. But the certainty that these differences exist is not 
enough; we need to observe them directly and know of what they 
consist. We need to see the characteristics of special suicides grouped 
in distinct classes corresponding to the types just distinguished. Thus 
we would follow the various currents which generate suicide from 
their social origins to their individual manifestations. 

This morphological classification, which was hardly possible at 
the commencement of this study, may be undertaken now that an 
aetiological classification forms its basis. Indeed, we only need to 
start with the three kinds of factors which we have just assigned to 
suicide and discover whether the distinctive properties it assumes in 
manifesting itself among individual persons may be derived from 
them, and if so, how. Of course, not all the peculiarities which sui- 
cide may present can be deduced in this fashion; for some may exist 
which depend solely on the person's own nature. Each victim of 
suicide gives his act a personal stamp which expresses his tempera- 
ment, the special conditions in which he is involved, and which, 
consequently, cannot be explained by the social and general causes 

277 



278 SUICIDE 

of the phenomenon. But these causes in turn must stamp the suicides 
they determine with a shade all their own, a special mark expressive 
of them. This collective mark we must find. 

To be sure, this can be done only approximately. We are not in 
a position to describe methodically all the suicides daily committed 
by men or committed in the course of history. We can only empha- 
size the most general and striking characteristics without even having 
an objective criterion for making the selection. Moreover, we can 
only proceed deductively in relating them to the respective causes 
from which they seem to spring. All that we can do is to show their 
logical implication, though the reasoning may not always be able to 
receive experimental confirmation, (^e do not forgeJL^at a deduction 
uncontrolled by experiment is always questionable^ Yet this re- 
search is far from being useless, even with these reservations. Even 
though it may be considered only a method of illustrating the pre- 
ceding results by examples, it would still have the worth of giving 
them a more concrete character by connecting them more closely 
with the data of sense-perception and with the details of daily ex- 
perience. It will also introduce some little distinctiveness into this 
mass of facts usually lumped together as though varying only by 
shades, though there are striking differences among them. Suicide is 
like mental alienation. For the popular mind the latter consists in a 
single state, always identical, capable only of superficial differentia- 
tion according to circumstances. For the alienist, on the contrary, the 
word denotes many nosological types. Every suicide is, likewise, 
ordinarily considered a victim of melancholy whose life has become 
a burden to him. Actually, the acts by which a man renounces life 
belong to different species, of wholly different moral and social 
significance. 

I 

One form of suicide, certainly known to antiquity, has widely 
developed in our day: Lamartine's Raphael offers us its ideal type. 
Its characteristic is a condition of melancholic languor which relaxes 
all the springs of action. Business, public affairs, useful work, even 
domestic duties inspire the person only with indifference and aver- 
sion. He is unwilling to emerge from himself. On the other hand, 
what is lost in activity is made up for in thought and inner life. 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 279 

In revulsion from its surroundings consciousness becomes self-pre- 
occupied, takes itself as its proper and unique study, and undertakes 
as its main task self-observation and self-analysis. But by this ex- 
treme concentration it merely deepens the chasm separating it from 
the rest of the universe. The moment the individual becomes so 
enamoured of himself, inevitably he increasingly detaches himself 
from everything external and emphasizes the isolation in which he 
lives, to the point of worship. Self-absorption is not a good method 
of attaching one's self to others. All movement is, in a sense, altru- 
istic in that it is centrifugal and disperses existence beyond its own 
limitations. Reflection, on the other hand, has about it something 
personal and egoistic; for it is only possible as a person becomes 
detached from the outside world, and retreats from it into himself. 
And reflection is the more intense, the more complete this retreat. 
Action without mixing with people is impossible; to think, on the 
contrary, we must cease to have connection with them in order to con- 
_^ider them objectively — the more so, in order to think about oneself. 
So the man whose whole activity is diverted to inner meditation be- 
comes insensible to all his surroundings. If he loves, it is not to give 
himself, to blend in fecund union with another being, but to meditate 
on his love. His passions are mere appearances, being sterile. They 
are dissipated in futile imaginings, producing nothing external to 
themselves. ; 

On the other hand, all internal life draws its primary material 
from without. All we can think of is objects or our conceptions of 
them. We cannot reflect our own consciousness in a purely undeter- 
mined state; in this shape it is inconceivable. Now consciousness 
becomes determined only when affected by something not itself. 
Therefore, if it individualizes beyond a certain point, if it separates 
itself too radically from other beings, men or things, it finds itself 
unable to communicate with the very sources of its normal nourish- 
ment and no longer has anything to which it can apply itself. It 
creates nothingness within by creating it without, and has nothing 
left upon which to reflect but its own wretched misery. Its only re- 
maining object of thought is its inner nothingness and the resulting 
melancholy. It becomes addicted and abandoned to this with a kind 
of morbid joy which Lamartine, himself familiar with it, describes 



28o suicroE 

so well in the words of his hero: "The languor of all my surround- 
ings was in marvelous harmony with my own languor. It increased 
this languor by its charm. I plunged into the depths of melancholy. 
But is was a lively melancholy, full enough of thoughts, impres- 
sions, communings with the infinite, half-obscurity of my own soul, 
so that I had no wish to abandon it. A human disease, but one the 
experience of which attracts rather than pains, where death resembles 
a voluptuous lapse into the infinite. I resolved to abandon myself to 
it wholly, henceforth; to avoid all distracting society and to wrap 
myself in silence, solitude and frigidity in the midst of whatever 
company I should encounter; my spiritual isolation was a shroud, 
through which I desired no longer to see men, but only nature and 
God." 1 

However, one cannot long remain so absorbed in contemplation of 
emptiness without being increasingly attracted to it. In vain one 
bestows on it the name of infinity; this does not change its nature. 
When one feels such pleasure in non-existence, one's inclination 
can be completely satisfied only by completely ceasing to exist. This 
is the element of truth in the parallelism Hartmann claims to observe 
between the development of consciousness and the weakening of the 
will to live. Ideation and movement are really two hostile forces, ad- 
vancing in inverse directions, and movement is life. To think, it is 
said, is to abstain from action; in the same degree, therefore, it is to 
abstain from living. This is why the absolute reign of idea cannot be 
achieved, and especially cannot continue; for this is death. But this 
does not mean, as Hartmann believes, that reality itself is intolerable 
unless veiled by illusion. Sadness does not inhere in things; it does 
not reach us from the world and through mere contemplation of 
the world. It is a product of our own thought. We create it out of 
whole cloth; but to create it our thought must be abnormal. If 
consciousness sometimes constitutes unhappiness for a man, it is only 
by achieving a morbid development in which, revolting against its 
own very nature, it poses as an absolute and seeks its purpose in 
itself. It is so far from being a belated discovery, from being the 
ultimate conquest of knowledge, that we might equally well have 
sought the chief elements of our description in the Stoic frame of 

^ Raphaël, ed. Hachette, p. 6. 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 28 1 

mind. Stoicism also teaches man to detach himself from everything 
external in order to live by and through himself. Only, the doctrine 
ends in suicide since life then has no reason. 

The same characteristics reappear in the ultimate act which fol- 
lows logically from this moral condition. There is nothing violent 
or hasty about its unfolding. The sufferer selects his own time and 
meditates on his plan well in advance. He is not even repelled by 
slow means. A calm melancholy, sometimes not unpleasant, marks 
his last moments. He analyzes himself to the last. Such is the case 
of the business man mentioned by Falret - who goes to an isolated 
forest to die of hunger. During an agony of almost three weeks he 
had regularly kept a journal of his impressions, which has been 
preserved. Another asphyxiates himself by blowing on the charcoal 
which is to kill him, and jots down his observations bit by bit: "I do 
not consider that I am showing either courage or cowardice; I simply 
wish to use my few remaining moments to describe the sensations 
felt during asphyxiation and the length of the suffering." ^ Another 
man, before abandoning himself to what he calls "the intoxicating 
perspective of rest," builds a complicated apparatus to accomplish his 
own. death without having his blood stain the floor.^ 

'. It is clear how these various peculiarities are related to egoistic 
suicide. They are almost certainly its consequence and individual 
expression. This loathness to act, this melancholy detachment, spring 
from the qver-individuation by which we have defined this type of 
suicide. If the individuar isolates himself, it is because the ties unit- 
ing him with others are slackened or broken, because society is not 
sufficiently integrated at the points where he is in contact with it. 
These gaps between one and another individual consciousness, es- 
tranging them from each other, are authentic results of the weakening 
of the social fabric. And finally, the intellectual and meditative 
nature of suicides of this sort is readily explained if we recall that 
egoistic suicide is necessarily accompanied by a high development 
of knowledge and reflective intelligence. Indeed, it is clear that in a 
society where consciousness is normally compelled to extend its field 

2 Hypochondrie et suicide, p. 316. 

2 Brierre de Boismont, Du suicide, p. 198. 

* Ibid., p. 194. 



282 suicroE 

of action, it is also much more in danger of transgressing the normal 
limits which shelter it from self-destruction. A mind that questions 
everything, unless strong enough to bear the weight of its ignorance, 
risks questioning itself and being engulfed in doubt. If it cannot 
discover the claims to existence of the objects of its questioning — 
and it would be miraculous if it so soon succeeded in solving so 
many mysteries — it will deny them all reality, the mere formulation 
of the problem already implying an inclination to negative solutions. 
But in so doing it will become void of all positive content and, find- 
ing nothing which offers it resistance, will launch itself perforce 
into the emptiness of inner revery. 

(^But this lofty form of egoistic suicide is not the only one; there 
is another, more commonplace. Instead of reflecting sadly on his 
condition, the person makes his decision cheerfully. He knows his 
own egoism and its logical consequences; but he accepts them in 
advance and undertakes to live the life of a child or animal, except 
for his knowledge of what he is doing. He assigns himself the single 
task of satisfying his personal needs, even simplifying them to make 
this easier. Knowing that he can hope for nothing better, he asks 
nothing more, prepared, if unable to reach this single end, to termi- _ 
nate a thenceforth meaningless existence. This is Epicurean suicide. 
For Epicurus did not enjoin his disciples to hasten their death, but 
advised them on the contrary to live as long as they found any inter- 
est in doing so. Only, as he felt clearly that if a man has no other 
purpose in life, he risks momentarily having none at all, and as 
sensual pleasure is a very slight link to attach men to life, he ex- 
horted them always to be ready to leave it, at the least stimulus of 
circumstance. In this case philosophic, dreamy melancholy is replaced 
by sceptical, disillusioned matter-of-factness, which becomes espe- 
cially prominent at the final hour. The sufferer deals himself the 
blow without hate or anger, but equally with none of the morbid 
satisfaction with which the intellectual relishes his suicide. He is 
even more passionless than the latter. He is not surprised at the end 
to which he has come; he has foreseen it as a more or less impend- 
ing event. He therefore makes no long preparations; in harmony 
with all his preceding existence, he only tries to minimize pain. Such 
especially is the case of those voluptuaries who, v^hen the fatal mo- 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 283 

ment arrives when they can no longer continue their easy existence, 
kill themselves with ironic tranquillity and a matter-of-course mood.^ 



When we established the nature of altruistic suicide, sufficient 
examples were given to make it superfluous to describe its charac- 
teristic psychological forms at length. They are the opposite of those 
characterizipg egoistic suicide, as different as altruism itself from its 
opposite. ,The egoistic suicide is characterized by a general depres- 
sion, in the form either of melancholic languor or Epicurean indiflfer- 
ence. Altruistic suicide, on the contrary, involves a certain expendi- 
ture of energy, since its source is a violent emotion. In the case of 
obligatory suicide, this energy is controlled by the reason and the 
will. The individual kills himself at the command of his conscience; 
he submits to an imperative. Thus, the dominant note of his act is 
the serene conviction derived from the feeling of duty accomplished; 
the deaths of Cato and of Commander Beaurepaire are historic types 
of this. When altruism is at a high pitch, on the other hand, the 
impulse is more passionate and unthinking. A burst of faith and en- 
thusiasm carries the man to his death. This enthusiasm itself is either 
happy or somber, depending on the conception of death as a means 
of union with a beloved deity, or as an expiatory sacrifice, to appease 
some terrible, probably hostile power. There is no resemblance be- 
tween the religious fervor of the fanatic who hurls himself joyously 
beneath the chariot of his idol, that of the monk overcome by acedia, 
or the remorse of the criminal who puts an end to his days to expiate 
his crime. Yet beneath these superficially different appearances, the 
essential features of the phenomenon are the same. This is an active 
suicide, contrasting, accordingly, with the depressed suicide discussed 
above. 

The same quality reappears in the simpler suicides of primitive 
man or of the soldier, who kill themselves either for a slight offense 
to their honor or to prove their courage. The ease with which they 
are performed is not to be confused with the disillusionment and 

5 Examples will be found in Brierre de Boismont, pp. 494 and 506. 



284 SUICIDE 

matter-of-factness of the Epicurean. The disposition to sacrifice one's 
life is none the less an active tendency even thougli it is strongly 
enough embedded to be effected vitli the ease and spontaneity of 
instinct. A case which may be considered the model of this species 
is reported by Leroy. It concerns an officer, who, after having once 
unsuccessfully tried to hang himself, prepares to make another 
attempt but first takes care to record his last impressions: "Mine is 
a strange destiny! I have just hung myself, had lost consciousness, 
the rope broke, I fell on my left arm. . . . My new preparations are 
complete, I shall start again shortly but shall smoke a final pipe first; 
the last, I hope. I experienced no struggle with my feelings the first 
time, things went very well; I hope the second will go as well. I am 
as calm as though I were taking an early morning glass. It's strange, 
I will confess, but it is so. It is all true. I am about to die a second 
time with perfect tranquillity." ^ Underneath this tranquillity is 
neither irony nor scepticism nor the sort of involuntary wincing 
which the voluptuary never quite manages completely to hide when 
committing suicide. The man's calmness is perfect; there is no trace 
of effort, the action is straightforward because all the vital inclina- 
tions prepare his course. 



There is, finally, a third sort of persons who commit suicide, con- 
trasting both with the first variety in that their action is essentially 
passionate, and with the second because this inspiring passion which 
dominates their last moment is of a wholly different nature. It is 
neither enthusiasm, religious, moral or political faith, nor any of the 
military virtues; it is anger and all the emotions customarily associ- 
ated with disappointment. Brierre de Boismont, who analyzed the 
papers left behind by 1,507 suicides, found that very many expressed 
primarily irritation and exasperated weariness. Sometimes they con- 
tain blasphemies, violent recriminations against life in general, some- 
times threats and accusations against a particular person to whom the 
responsibility for the suicide's unhappiness is imputed. With this 

^ Leroy, op. cit., p. 241. 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 285 

group are obviously connected suicides which are preceded by a mur- ' 
der; a man kills himself after having killed someone else whom he 
accuses of having ruined his life. Never is the suicide's exasperation • 
more obvious than when expressed not only by words but by deeds. 
The suicidal egoist never yields to such displays of violence. He too, 
doubtless, at times regrets life, but mournfully. It oppresses him, but 
does not irritate him by sharp conflicts. It seems empty rather than 
painful to him. It does not interest him, but it also does not impose 
positive suffering upon him. His state of depression does not even \ 
permit excitement. As for altruistic suicides, they are quite different. 1 
Almost by definition, the altruist sacrifices himself and not his fel- 
lows. We therefore encounter a third psychological form distinct 1 
from the preceding two. *• 

This form clearly appears to be involved in the nature of anomic 
suicide. Unregulated emotions are adjusted neither to one another 
nor to the conditions they are supposed to meet; they must therefore 
conflict with one another most painfully. Anomy, whether progres- 
sive or regressive, by allowing requirements to exceed appropriate 
limits, throws open the door to disillusionment and consequently to 
disappointment. A man abruptly cast down below his accustomed 
status cannot avoid exasperation at feeling a situation escape him of 
v.'hich he thought himself master, and his exasperation naturally re- 
volts against the cause, whether real or imaginary, to which he attributes 
his ruin. If he recognizes himself as to blame for the catastrophe, he 
takes it out on himself; otherwise, on some one else. In the former 
case there will be only suicide; in the latter, suicide may be preceded 
by homicide or by some other violent outburst. In both cases the feel- 
ing is the same; only its application varies. The individual always 
attacks himself in an access of anger, whether or not he has previ- 
ously attacked another. This reversal of all his habits reduces him to 
a state of acute over-excitation, which necessarily tends to seek solace 
in acts of destruction. The object upon whom the passions thus 
aroused are discharged is fundamentally of secondary importance. 
The accident of circumstances determines their direction. 

It is precisely the same whenever, far from falling below his pre- 
vious status, a person is impelled in the reverse direction, constantly 
to surpass himself, but without rule or moderation. Sometimes he 
misses the goal he thought he could reach, but which was really be- 



286 SUICIDE 

yond his powers; his is the suicide of the man misunderstood, very 
common in days when no recognized social classification is left. 
Sometimes, after having temporarily succeeded in satisfying all his 
desires and craving for change, he suddenly dashes against an in- 
vincible obstacle, and impatiently renounces an existence thenceforth 
too restrictive for him. This is the case of Werther, the turbulent 
heart as he calls himself, enamoured of infinity, killing himself from 
disappointed love, and the case of all artists who, after having drunk 
deeply of success, commit suicide because of a chance hiss, a some- 
what severe criticism, or because their popularity has begun to wane.' 
There are yet others who, having no complaint to make of men or 
circumstances, automatically weary of a palpably hopeless pursuit, 
which only irritates rather than appeases their desires. They then 
turn against life in general and accuse it of having deceived them. 
But the vain excitement to which they are prey leaves in its wake a 
sort of exhaustion which prevents their disappointed passions from 
displaying themselves with a violence equal to that of the preceding 
cases. They are wearied, as it were, at the end of a long course, and 
thus become incapable of energetic reaction. The person lapses into a 
sort of melancholy resembling somewhat that of the intellectual ego- 
ist but without its languorous charm. The dominating note is a more 
or less irritated disgust with life. This state of soul was already ob- 
served by Seneca among his contemporaries, together with the suicide 
resulting from it. "The evil which assails us," he writes, "is not in 
the localities we inhabit but in ourselves. We lack strength to endure 
the least task, being incapable of suffering pain, powerless to enjoy 
pleasure, impatient with everything. How many invoke death when, 
after having tried every sort of change, they find themselves reverting 
to the same sensations, unable to discover any new experience." ^ In 
our own day one of the types which perhaps best incarnate this sort 
of spirit is Chateaubriand's René. While Raphaël is a creature of 
meditation who finds his ruin within himself, René is the insatiate 
type. "I am accused," he exclaims unhappily, "of being inconstant in 
my desires, of never long enjoying the same fancy, of being prey to 
an imagination eager to sound the depth of my pleasures as though it 
were overwhelmed by their persistence; I am accused of always miss- 

^ See cases in Brierre de Boismont, pp. 187-189. 

' De tranquillitate animi, II, sub fine. Cf. Letter XXIV. 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 287 

ing the goal I might attain. Alas! I only seek an unknown good, the 
instinct for which pursues me. Is it my fault if I everywhere find 
limits, if everything once experienced has no value for me?" ^ 

This description conclusively illustrates the relations and differ- 
ences between egoistic and anomic suicide, which our sociological 
analysis had already led us to glimpse.^^ Suicides of both types suffer 
from what has been called the disease of the infinite. But the disease 
does not assume the same form in both cases. In one, reflective intel- 
ligence is affected and immoderately overnourished; in the other, 
emotion is over-excited and freed from all restraint. In one, thought, 
by dint of falling back upon itself, has no object left; in the other, 
passion, no longer recognizing bounds, has no goal left. The former 
is lost in the infinity of dreams, the second in the infinity of desires. 

Thus, not even the psychological formula concerning the suicide 
has the simplicity commonly attributed to it. It is no definition to say 
of him that he is weary of life, disgusted with life, etc. There are 
really very different varieties of suicides, and these differences appear 
in the way suicide is performed. Acts and agents may thus be classi- 
fied in a certain number of species; these species also correspond in 
essential traits with the types of suicide we have established previ- 
ously in accordance with the nature of the social causes on which 
they rest. They are like prolongations of these causes inside of indi- 
viduals. 

We should add, to be sure, that they are not always found in ac- 
tual experience in a state of purity and isolation. They are very often 
combined with one another, giving rise to composite varieties; char- 
acteristics of several types will be united in a single suicide. The 
reason for this is that different social causes of suicide themselves 
may simultaneously affect the same individual and impose their com- 
bined effects upon him. Thus invalids fall a prey to deliria of dif- 
ferent sorts, involved with one another but all converging in a single 
direction so as to cause a single act, despite their different origins. 
They mutually re-enforce each other. Thus again, widely different 
fevers may coexist in one person and contribute each in its own way 
and manner to raising the temperature of the body. 

^ René, ed. Vialat, Paris, 1849, p. 112. 
1" See above, p. 258. 



288 SUICIDE 

Two factors of suicide, especially, have a peculiar affinity for one 
another: namely, egoism and anomy. We know that they are usually 
merely two different aspects of one social state; thus it is not surpris- 
ing that they should be found in the same individual. It is, indeed, 
almost inevitable that the egoist should have some tendency to non- 
regulation; for, since he is detached from society, it has not sufficient 
hold upon him to regulate him. If, nevertheless, his desires are not 
usually excited, it is because in his case the life of the passions lan- 
guishes, because he is wholly introverted and not attracted by the 
world outside. But he may be neither a complete egoist nor a pure 
victim of agitation. In such cases he may play both roles concurrently. 
To fill up the gap he feels inside himself, he seeks new sensations; 
he applies, to be sure, less ardour than the passionate temperament 
properly so-called, but he also wearies sooner and this weariness casts 
him back upon himself, thus re-enforcing his original melancholy. 
Inversely, an unregulated temperament does not lack a spark of ego- 
ism; for if one were highly socialized one would not rebel at every 
social restraint. Only, this spark cannot develop in cases where the 
action of anomy is preponderant; for, by casting its possessor outside 
himself, it prevents him from retiring into himself. If anomy is less 
intense, however, it may permit egoism to produce certain character- 
istic effects. The obstacle, for example, against which the victim of 
insatiate desires dashes may cause him to fall back upon himself and 
seek an outlet for his disappointed passions in an inner life. Find- 
ing there nothing to which he can attach himself, however, the mel- 
ancholy inspired by this thought can only drive him to new self- 
escape, thus increasing his uneasiness and discontent. Thus are 
produced mixed suicides where depression alternates with agitation, 
dream with action, transports of desire with reflective sadness. 

Anomy may likewise be associated with altruism. One and the 
same crisis may ruin a person's life, disturb the equilibrium between 
him and his surroundings, and, at the same time, drive his altruistic 
disposition to a state which incites him to suicide. Such is notably 
the case of what we have called suicides of the besieged. If, for ex- 
ample, the Jews killed themselves en masse upon the capture of Jeru- 
salem, it was both because the victory of the Romans, by making 
them subjects and tributaries of Rome, threatened to transform the 
sort of life to which they were accustomed and because they loved 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 289 

their city and cult too much to survive the probable destruction of 
both. Thus it often happens that a bankrupt man kills himself as 
much because he cannot live on a smaller footing, as to spare his 
name and family the disgrace of bankruptcy. If officers and non- 
commissioned officers readily commit suicide just when forced to re- 
tire, it is also doubtless because of the sudden change about to occur 
in their way of living, as well as because of their general disposition 
to attach little value to life. The two causes operate in the same di- 
rection. There then result suicides where either the passionate exul- 
tation or the courageous resolution of altruistic suicide blends with 
the exasperated infatuation produced by anomy. 

Finally, egoism and altruism themselves, contraries as they are, 
may combine their influence. At certain epochs, when disaggregated 
society can no longer serve as an objective for individual activities, 
individuals or groups of individuals will nevertheless be found who, 
while experiencing the influence of this general condition of egoism, 
aspire to other things. Feeling, however, that a constant passage from 
one egoistic pleasure to another is a poor method of escaping them- 
selves, and that fugitive joys, even though constantly renewed, could 
never quiet their unrest, they seek some durable object to which to 
attach themselves permanently and which shall give meaning to their 
lives. Since they are contented with nothing real, however, they can 
find satisfaction only in creating out of whole cloth some ideal reality 
to play this role. So in thought they create an imaginary being whose 
slaves they become and to which they devote themselves the more ex- 
clusively the more they are detached from everything else, themselves 
included. To it they assign all the attachment to existence which they 
ascribe to themselves, since all else is valueless in their eyes. So they 
live a twofold, contradictory existence: individualists so far as the 
real world is concerned, they are immoderate altruists in everything 
that concerns this ideal objective. Both dispositions lead to suicide. 

Such are the sources and the nature of Stoic suicide. Immediately 
above we pointed out its reproduction of certain essential qualities of 
egoistic suicide; but it may be considered under a totally diff^erent as- 
pect. Though the Stoic professes absolute indifference to everything 
beyond the range of the individual personality, though he exhorts 
the individual to be self-sufficient, he simultaneously assigns the in- 
dividual a close dependence on universal reason, and even reduces 



290 suicroE 

him to nothing more than the instrument through which this reason 
is reahzed. He thus combines two antagonistic conceptions: the most 
radical moral individualism and an immoderate pantheism. The sui- 
cide he commits is thus both apathetic, like that of the egoist, and 
performed as a duty like that of the altruist. ^^ The former's melan- 
choly and the active energy of the latter appear in this form of sui- 
cide; egoism here mingles with mysticism. This same combination 
also distinguishes the mysticism characteristic of periods of deca- 
dence, which, contrary to appearances, is so different from that ob- 
served among young, formative peoples. The latter springs from the 
collective enthusiasm which carries individual wills along with it on 
its own way, from the self-abnegation with which citizens forget 
themselves to share in a common work; the former is mere self- 
conscious egoism, conscious also of its own nothingness, striving to 
surpass itself but succeeding only artificially and in appearance. 

II 

One might think a priori that some relation existed between the 
nature of suicide and the kind of death chosen by the one who com- 
mits it. It seems quite natural that the means he uses to carry out his 
resolve should depend on the feelings urging him on and thus ex- 
press these feelings. We might therefore be tempted to use the data 
concerning this matter suppled us by statistics to describe the various 
sorts of suicides more closely, by their external form. But our re- 
searches into this matter have given only negative results. 

Social causes, however, certainly determine the choice of these 
means; for the relative frequency of the various ways of committing 
suicide is invariable for long periods in a given society, while varying 
very perceptibly from one society to another, as Table XXX 
shows. 

Thus, each people has its favorite sort of death and the other of its 
preferences changes very rarely. It is even more constant than the total 
number of suicides; events which sometimes transiently modify the 
latter do not always affect the former. Moreover, social causes are so 
preponderant that the influence of cosmic factors does not appear to be 
appreciable. Thus suicides by drowning, contrary to all presumptions, 

^^ Seneca praises Cato's suicide as the triumph of the human will over material 
things (See De Prov. 2, 9 and Ep. 71, 16). 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 29I 

TABLE XXX — Distribution of the Different Kinds of Death 
Among 1,000 Suicides (Both Sexes Combined) 







Strangula- 






Leaping 










tion and 






from a 




Asphyxia- 


Countries & Years 


Hanging 


Drowning 


Fire-arms 


High Spot 


Poison 


tion 


Fronce 


1872 


426 


269 


103 


28 


20 


69 


Fronce 


1873 


430 


298 


106 


30 


21 


67 


France 


1874 


440 


269 


122 


28 


23 


72 


Fronce 


1875 


446 


294 


107 


31 


19 


63 


Prussia 


1872 


610 


197 


102 


6.9 


25 


3 


Prussio 


1873 


597 


217 


95 


8.4 


25 


4.6 


Prussia 


1874 


610 


162 


126 


9.1 


28 


6.5 


Prussia 


1875 


615 


170 


105 


9.5 


35 


7.7 


England 


1872 


374 


221 


38 


30 


91 




England 


1873 


366 


218 


44 


20 


97 




England 


1874 


374 


176 


58 


20 


94 




England 


1875 


362 


208 


45 




97 




Italy 


1874 


174 


305 


236 


106 


60 


13J 


Italy 


1875 


173 


273 


251 


104 


62 


31.4 


Itoly 


1876 


125 


246 


285 


113 


69 


29 


Italy 


1877 


176 


299 


238 


111 


55 


22 



do not vary from one season to another in accordance with any spe- 
cial law. Here is their monthly distribution in France for 1872-78 
compared with that of suicides in general: 

Share of Each Monfh in 1,000 Annual Suicides 
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. 

Of oil sorts 75.8 66.5 84.8 97.3 103.1 109.9 103.5 86.3 74.3 74.1 65.2 59.2 

By drown- 
ing 73.5 67.0 81.9 94.4 106.4 117.3 107.7 91.2 71.0 74.3 61.0 54.2 

Suicides by drowning increase very little more than others dur- 
ing the fine season; the difference is insignificant. Yet it would 
seem that Summer should favor them exceptionally. It has, to be 
sure, been said that drowning was less employed in the North 
than in the South, and this fact has been attributed to climate. ^^ gut 
at Copenhagen during the period from 1845 to 1856 this form of 
suicide was no less common than in Italy, (281 cases per thousand 
as against 300). None was more common in St. Petersburg during 
the years 1873-74. So temperature affords no obstacle to this sort of 
death. 

The social causes on which suicides in general depend, however, 
differ from those which determine the way they are committed; for 
no relation can be discovered between the types of suicides which we 
have distinguished and the most common methods of performance. 

12 Morselli, pp. 445-446. 



292 suicroE 

Italy is a fundamentally Catholic country where scientific culture was 
relatively little developed until recent times. Thus it is very probable 
that altruistic suicides are more frequent there than in France and 
Germany, since they occur somewhat in inverse ratio to intellectual 
development; several reasons to be found in the remainder of this 
work will confirm this hypothesis. Consequently, as suicide by fire- 
arms is much more common there than in the central European coun- 
tries, it might be thought not unconnected with the state of altruism. 
In support of this supposition, it might also be noted that this is also 
the sort of suicide preferred by soldiers. Unfortunately, it happens 
that in France it is the most intellectual classes, authors, artists, offi- 
cials, who kill themselves oftenest in this way.^^ It might likewise 
seem that suicide from melancholy finds its natural expression in 
hanging. Actually, it is most employed in the country, yet melan- 
choly is a state of mind more characteristic of the city. 

The causes impelling a man to kill himself are therefore not those 
determining him to do so in one way rather than in another. The 
motives which set his choice are of a totally different sort. First, the 
totality of customs and usages of all kinds, placing one instrument of 
death rather than another at his disposal. Always following the line 
of least resistance so long as no opposing factor intervenes, he tends 
to employ the means of destruction lying nearest to his hand and 
made familiar to him by daily use. That, for example, is why suicides 
by throwing one's self from a high place are oftener committed in 
great cities than in the country: the buildings are higher. Likewise, 
the more the land is covered with railroads the more general becomes 
the habit of seeking death by throwing one's self under a train. The 
table showing the relative share of the different methods of suicide 
in the total number of voluntary deaths thus partly reproduces the 
state of industrial technology, of the most wide-spread forms of 
architecture, of scientific knowledge, etcivAs the use of electricity be- 
comes commoner, suicides by means of electric processes will become 
commoner also.' 

But perhaps the most powerful cause is the relative dignity at- 
tributed by each people, and by each social group within each people, 
to the different sorts of death. They are far from being regarded as 

1' See Lisle, op. cit., p. 94. 



INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUICIDE 293 

all on the same plane. Some are considered nobler, others repel as 
being vulgar and degrading; and the way opinion classifies them 
varies with the community. In the army, decapitation is considered 
an infamous death; elsewhere, it is hanging. This is why suicide by 
strangulation is much commoner in the country than in the city and 
in small cities than in large ones. It is because it connotes something 
gross and violent which conflicts with the gentleness of urban man- 
ners and the regard of the cultivated classes for the human body. 
Perhaps this revulsion is also associated with the dishonorable repute 
clinging for historical reason to this sort of death, one which is felt 
more keenly by refined urban populations than is possible for the 
simpler rural sensibility. 

The form of death chosen by the suicide is therefore something 
entirely foreign to the very nature of suicide. Intimately related as 
these two elements of a single act seem, they are actually independ- 
ent of each other. At least, there are only external relations of juxta- 
position between them. For while both depend on social causes, the 
social conditions expressed by them are widely different. The first 
has nothing to teach us about the second; it was discovered by a 
wholly different study. That is why we shall not dwell on these vari- 
ous forms longer, though they are customarily treated at some length 
relative to suicide. To do so would add nothing to the results given 
by our preceding studies and summarized in the following table: 

AETIOLOGICAL AND MORPHOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF THE 
SOCIAL TYPES OF SUICIDE 

Individual Forms Assumed 

Fundamental Character Secondory Varieties 

Egoistic » ^l,, Indolent melancholy with self-complacence, 

suicide Apotny y^^^ sceptic's disillusioned sangfroid. 

... . .. Energy of With calm feeling of duty. 

Airruisnc passion With mystic enthusiasm, 

suiciae jj^ ^jll yyjf^ peaceful courage. 

types Violent recriminations against life in general. 

AROrnic irriroTion, violent recriminations against one particular per- 

SUIClde disgust ^„_ ;i,„_:-:j„ ,.,:,;j„i 

" son (nomicide-suicidel . 

Ego-anomic Mixture of agitation and apathy, of action and 

suicide revery. 

Anomic-altruistic 
w. . suicide Exasperated effervesence. 

types Ego-altruistic Melancholy tempered with moral fortitude, 

suicide 



294 suicroE 

Such are the general characteristics of suicide, that is, those which 
result directly from social causes. Individualized in particular cases, 
they are complicated by various nuances depending on the personal 
temperament of the victim and the special circumstances in which he 
finds himself. But beneath the variety of combinations thus pro- 
duced, these fundamental forms are always discoverable. 



BOOK THREE GENERAL NATURE OF SUICIDE AS A 
SOCIAL PHENOMENON 



CHAPTER I THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 



^o. 



x>w that we know the factors in terms of which the social 
suicide-rate varies, we may define the reality to which this rate cor- 
responds and which it expresses numerically. 

I 

The individual conditions on which suicide might, a priori, be 
supposed to depend, are of two sorts. 

There is first the external situation of the agent. Sometimes men 
who kill themselves have had family sorrow or disappointments to 
their pride, sometimes they have had to suffer poverty or sickness, at 
others they have had some moral fault with which to reproach them- 
selves, etc. But we have seen that these individual peculiarities could 
not explain the social suicide-rate; for the latter varies in considerable 
proportions, whereas the different combinations of circumstances 
which constitute the immediate antecedents of individual cases of 
suicide retain approximately the same relative frequency. They are 
therefore not the determining causes of the act which they precede. 
Their occasionally important role in the premeditation of suicide is 
no proof of being a causal one. Human deliberations, in fact, so far 
as reflective consciousness affects them are often only purely formal, 
with no object but confirmation of a resolve previously formed for 
reasons unknown to consciousness. 

Besides, the circumstances are almost infinite in number which 
are supposed to cause suicide because they rather frequently accom- 
pany it. One man kills himself in the midst of affluence, another in 

297 



298 suicroE 

the lap of poverty; one was unhappy in his home, and another had 
just ended by divorce a marriage which was making him unhappy. 
In one case a soldier ends his life after having been punished for an 
offense he did not commit; in another, a criminal whose crime has 
remained unpunished kills himself. The most varied and even the 
most contradictory events of life may equally serve as pretexts for 
suicide. This suggests that none of them is the specific cause. Could 
we perhaps at least ascribe causality to those qualities known to be 
common to all? But are there any such? At best one might say that 
they usually consist of disappointments, of sorrows, without any pos- 
sibility of deciding how intense the grief must be to have such tragic 
significance. Of no disappointment in life, no matter how insignifi- 
cant, can we say in advance that it could not possibly make existence 
intolerable; and, on the other hand, there is none which must ne- 
cessarily have this effect. We see some men resist horrible misfor- 
tune, while others kill themselves after slight troubles. Moreover, we 
have shown that those who suffer most are not those who kill them- 
selves most. Rather it is too great comfort which turns a man against 
iiimself. Life is most readily renounced at the time and among the 
classes where it is least harsh. At least, if it really sometimes occurs 
that the victim's personal situation is the effective cause of his re- 
solve, such cases are very rare indeed and accordingly cannot explain 
the social suicide-rate. 

Accordingly, even those who have ascribed most influence to indi- 
vidual conditions have sought these conditions less in such external 
incidents than in the intrinsic nature of the person, that is, his bi- 
ological constitution and the physical concomitants on which it de- 
pends. Thus, suicide has been represented as the product of a certain 
temperament, an episode of neurasthenia, subject to the effects of the 
same factors as neurasthenia. Yet we have found no immediate and 
regular relationship between neurasthenia and the social suicide-rate. 
The two facts even vary at times in inverse proportion to one an- 
other, one being at its minimum just when and where the other is at 
its height. We have not found, either, any definite relation between 
the variations of suicide and the conditions of physical environment 
supposed to have most effect on the nervous system, such as race, 
climate, temperature. Obviously, though the neuropath may show 
some inclination to suicide under certain conditions, he is not neces- 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 299 

sarily destined to kill himself; and the influence of cosmic factors is 
not enough to determine in just this sense the very general tendencies 
of his nature. 

Wholly different are the results we obtained when we forgot the 
individual and sought the causes of the suicidal aptitude of each so- 
ciety in the nature of the societies themselves. The relations of su i- 
cide to c ertain states of social environment are as direct and constant 
as Its relations to facts of a biological and physical character were 
seen to be uncertain and ambiguous. Here at last we are face to face 
with real laws, allowing us to attempt a methodical classification of 
types of suicide. The sociological causes thus determined by us have 
even explained these various concurrences often attributed to the in- 
fluence of material causes, and in which a proof of this influence has 
been sought. If women kill themselves much less often than men, it 
is because they are much less involved than men in collective exist- 
ence; thus they feel its influence — good or evil — less strongly. So it 
is with old persons and children, though for other reasons. Finally, 
if suicide increases from January to June but then decreases, it is be- 
cause social activity shows similar seasonal fluctuations. It is therefore 
natural that the different effects of social activity should be subject to 
an identical rhythm, and consequently be more pronounced during 
the former of these two periods. Suicide is one of them. 

The conclusion from all these facts is that the social suicide-rate 
can be explained only sociologically. At any given moment the moral 
constitution of society establishes the contingent of voluntary deaths. 
There is, therefore, for each people a collective force of a definite 
amount of energy, impelling men to self-destruction. The victim's 
acts which at first seem to express only his personal temperament are 
really the supplement and prolongation of a social condition which 
they express externally. 

This answers the question posed at the beginning of this work. It 
is not mere metaphor to say of each human society that it has a 
greater or lesser aptitude for suicide; the expression is based on the 
nature of things. Each social group really has a collective inclination 
for the act, quite its own, and the source of all individual inclina- 
tion, rather than their result. It is made up of the currents of egoism, 
altruism or anomy running through the society under consideration 
with the tendencies to languorous melancholy, active renunciation or 



300 ". SUICIDE 

exasperated weariness derivative from these currents. These tenden- 
cies of the whole gOciâTEoHy, by affecting individuals, cause them to 
commit suicide. The private experiences usually thought to be the 
proximate causes of suicide have only the influence borrowed from 
the victim's moral predisposition, itself an echo of the moral state of 
society. To explain his detachment from life the individual accuses 
his most immediately surrounding circumstances; life is sad to him 
because he is sad. Of course his sadness comes to him from without 
in one sense, however not from one or another incident of his career 
but rather from the group to which he belongs. This is why there is 
nothing which cannot serve as an occasion for suicide. It all depends 
on the intensity with which suicidogenetic causes have affected the 
individual. 

II 

Besides, the stability of the social suicide-rate would itself suffi- 
ciently show the truth of this conclusion. Though we have, for 
methodological reasons, delayed the problem until now, it will never- 
theless admit of no other solution. 

When Quételet drew to the attention of philosophers ^ the re- 
markable regularity with which certain social phenomena repeat 
themselves during identical periods of time, he thought he could ac- 
count for it by his theory of the average man — a theory, moreover, 
which has remained the only systematic explanation of this remarka- 
ble fact. According to him, there is a definite type in each society 
more or less exactly reproduced by the majority, from which only the 
minority tends to deviate under the influence of disturbing causes. 
For example, there is a sum total of physical and moral characteristics 
represented by the majority of Frenchmen and not found in the same 

^ Especially in his two works Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés ou 
Essai de physique sociale, 2 vol., Paris, 1835, and Du système social et des lois qui 
le régissent, Paris 1848. If Quételet is the first to try to give a scientific explana- 
tion of this regularity, he is not the first to have observed it. The true founder of 
moral statistics is Pastor Siissmilch, in his work, Die Gottliche Ordnung in den 
Veranderungen des menschlichen Geschlechts, au s der Geburt, dem lode und der 
Fortpflanzung desselben erwiesen, 3 vol., 1742. 

See on the same question: Wagner, Die Gesetzmassigkeit, etc., first part; Dro- 
bisch, Die Moralische Statistik und die menschliche Willensfreiheit, Leipzig, 1867 
(especially pp. 1-58) ; Mayr, Die Gesetzmassigkeit im Gesellschajtsleben, Munich, 
1877; Oettingen, Moralstatistik, p. 90 and fï. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 301 

manner or degree among the Italians or the Germans, and vice versa. 
As these characteristics are by definition much the most widespread, 
the actions deriving from them are also much the most numerous; 
these constitute the great groups. Those, on the contrary, determined 
by divergent qualities are relatively rare, like these qualities them- 
selves. Again, though not absolutely unchangeable, this general type 
varies much more slowly than an individual type; for it is much more 
difficult for a society to change en masse than for one or a few indi- 
viduals, singly, to do so. This stability naturally recurs in the acts 
derived from the characteristic attributes of this type; the former re- 
main the same in quantity and quality so long as the latter do not 
change, and as these same ways of behaviour are also the commonest, 
stability must necessarily be the general law of those manifestations 
of human activity described by statistics. The statistician, in fact, 
takes into account all events of an identical nature which occur 
within a given society. Therefore, since most of them remain invari- 
able so long as the general type of the society is unchanged, and 
since, on the other hand, its changes are unusual, the results of sta- 
tistical enumerations must necessarily remain the same for fairly long 
series of consecutive years. Facts derived from special qualities and 
individual occurrences are not, to be sure, subject to the same regu- 
larity; therefore, stability is never absolute. But they are the excep- 
tion; this is why invariability is the rule, while change is exceptional. 

Quételet gave the name average type to this general type, because 
it is obtained almost exactly by taking the arithmetic mean of the in- 
dividual types. If, for example, after having determined the height 
of all persons in a given social group, one adds them and divides by 
the number of individuals measured, the result arrived at expresses 
with quite sufficient accuracy the most common height. For the dif- 
ferences of greater or less, the giants and dwarfs, probably are about 
equal in number. Thus they offset each other, annul each other mu- 
tually and accordingly have no effect on the quotient. 

The theory seems very simple. But first, it can only be considered 
as an explanation if it shows how the average type is realized in the 
great majority of individuals. For the average type to remain con- 
stantly equal to itself while they change, it must be to some extent 
independent of them; and yet it must also have some way of insinu- 
ating itself into them. Of course, the question ceases to be signifi- 



302 SUICIDE 

cant if the average type is admitted to be the same as the ethnic type. 
For the constituent elements of the race, having their origin outside 
the individual, are not subject to the same variations as he; and yet 
they are realized only in him. They can thus well be supposed to 
penetrate the truly individual elements and even act as their base. 
Only, for this explanation to apply to suicide, the tendency impelling 
a man to kill himself must depend strictly on race; but we know that 
the facts contradict this hypothesis. Shall we suppose that the general 
condition of the social environment, being the same for most indi- 
viduals, affects nearly all in the same way and so partially bestows a 
common appearance on them. But the social environment is funda- 
mentally one of common ideas, beliefs, customs and tendencies. For 
them to impart themselves thus to individuals, they must somehow 
exist independently of individuals; and this approaches the solution 
we suggested. For thus is implicitly acknowledged the existence of a 
collective inclination to suicide from which individual inclinations 
are derived, and our whole problem is to know of what it consists 
and how it acts. 

But there are still other considerations. However the preponder- 
ance of the average man is explained, this conception could never 
account for the regularity of the reproduction of the social suicide- 
rate. Actually, by definition, the only possible characteristics this type 
involves are those found in the major part of the population. But 
suicide is the act of a minority. In the countries where it is most com- 
mon, 300 or 400 cases per million inhabitants at most are found. It 
is radically excluded by the average man's instinct of self-preserva- 
tion; the average man does not kill himself. But in that case, if the 
inclination to self-destruction is rare and anomalous, it is wholly for- 
eign to the average type and so, even a profound knowledge of the 
latter could not even explain the source of suicides, still less help us 
understand the stability of the number of suicides in a given society. 
In short, Quételet's theory rests on an inaccurate observation. He 
thought it certain that stability occurs only in the most general mani- 
festations of human activity; but it is equally found in the sporadic 
manifestations which occur only at rare and isolated points of the 
social field. He thought he had met all the requirements by showing 
how, as a last resort, one could explain the invariability of what is 
not exceptional; but the exception itself has its own invariability, in- 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 303 

ferior to none. Everyone dies; every living organism is so made up 
that it cannot escape dissolution. There are, on the contrary, very few 
people who kill themselves; the great majority of men have no in- 
clination to suicide. Yet the suicide-rate is even more stable than that 
of general mortality. The close connection which Quételet sees be- 
tween the commonness of a quality and its permanence therefore 
does not exist. 

Besides, the results to which his own method leads confirm this 
conclusion. By his principle, in order to calculate the intensity of any 
quality belonging to the average type, one must divide the sum of 
the items displaying this quality within the society under considera- 
tion by the number of individuals capable of producing them. Thus, 
in a country like France, where for a long time there have not been 
more than 150 suicides per million inhabitants, the average intensity 
of the suicidal inclination would be expressed by the proportion 
150/1,000,000 or 0.00015; and in England, where there are only 80 
cases for an equal number, this proportion would be only 0.00008. 
There would therefore be an inclination to suicide, of this strength, 
in the average individual. But such figures practically amount to 
zero. So weak an inclination is so far from an act that it may be con- 
sidered non-existent. It has not strength enough to occasion a single 
suicide unaided. It is not, therefore, the commonness of such an in- 
clination which can explain why so many suicides are committed an- 
nually in one or the other of these two societies. 

Even this estimate is infinitely exaggerated. Quételet reached it 
only by arbitrarily ascribing a certain affinity for suicide to men on 
the average, and by estimating the strength of this affinity according 
to manifestations not observed in the average man, but only among 
a small number of exceptional persons. Thus, the abnormal was used 
to determine the normal. To be sure, Quételet thought to escape this 
objection by noting that abnormal cases, which occur sometimes in 
one and sometimes in the other direction, mutually compensate and 
offset each other. But such compensation occurs only for qualities 
which are found in varying degrees in everybody, such as height. We 
may in fact assume that unusually tall and unusually short persons 
are about numerically equal to each other. The average of these ex- 
ceptional heights may therefore practically be equal to the most usual 
height: so that only the latter appears at the end of the total calcu- 



304 SUICIDE 

lation. The contrary actually takes place in regard to a naturally ex- 
ceptional fact, such as the suicidal inclination. In this case Quételet's 
procedure can only artificially introduce into the average type an ele- 
ment which falls outside the average. To be sure, as we have just 
seen, it occurs there only in a very dilute state, precisely because the 
number of individuals among whom it is distributed is far greater 
than it should be. But if the mistake is of little practical importance, 
it none the less exists. 

In reality, the meaning of the relation calculated by Quételet is 
simply the probability that a single man belonging to a definite so- 
cial group will kill himself during the year. If there are 15 suicides 
annually in a population of 100,000 souls, we may well conclude 
that there are 15 chances in 100,000 that some person will commit 
suicide during this same unit of time. But this probability in no sense 
gives us a measure of the average inclination to suicide, or helps 
prove the existence of such an inclination. The fact that so many in- 
dividuals out of 100 kill themselves does not imply that the others 
are exposed to any degree and can teach us nothing concerning the 
nature and intensity of the causes leading to suicide.^ 

Thus the theory of the average man does not solve the problem. 
Let us take the problem up again, then, and see how it presents itself. 
Victims of suicide are in an infinite minority, which is widely dis- 
persed; each one of them performs his act separately, without know- 
ing that others are doing the same; and yet, so long as society 
remains unchanged the number of suicides remains the same. 
Therefore, all these individual manifestations, however independent 
of one another they seem, must surely actually result from a single 
cause or a single group of causes, which dominate individuals. Other- 

2 These considerations are one more proof that race cannot account for the social 
suicide-rate. The ethnic type, indeed, is itself also a generic type; it includes only 
characteristics common to a considerable mass of individuals. Suicide, on the con- 
trary, is an exceptional occurrence. Race therefore contains nothing which could 
determine suicide; otherwise it would be more general than it actually is. Shall it 
be said that though none of the elements constituting race could be regarded as a 
sufficient cause of suicide, race according to its nature may nevertheless make men 
more or less accessible to the causes giving rise to suicide? But then, even if facts 
verified this hypothesis, which is not the case, one would at least have to recognize 
that the ethnic type is a factor of very mediocre efficacy, since its supposed influ- 
ence could not manifest itself in the vast majority of cases and would appear only 
very exceptionally. In brief, race cannot explain how out of a million persons all of 
whom belong to the same race, only 100 or 200 at most kill themselves annually. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 305 

wise how could we explain that all these individual wills, ignorant 
of one another's existence, annually achieve the same end in the 
same numbers? At least for the most part they have no effect upon 
one another; they are in no way conjoined; yet everything takes place 
as if they were obeying a single order. There must then be some 
force in their common environment inclining them all in the same 
direction, whose greater or lesser strength causes the greater or less 
number of individual suicides. Now the effects revealing this force 
vary not according to organic and cosmic environments but solely 
according to the state of the social environment. This force must then 
be collective. In other words, each people has collectively an inclina- 
tion of its own to suicide, on which the size of its contribution to vol- 
untary death depends. 

From this point of view there is no longer anything mysterious 
about the stability of the suicide-rate, any more than about its indi- 
vidual manifestations. For since each society has its own tempera- 
ment, unchangeable within brief periods, and since this inclination to 
suicide has its source in the moral constitution of groups, it must dif- 
fer from group to group and in each of them remain for long pe- 
riods practically the same. It is one of the essential elements of social 
coenaesthesia. Now this coenaesthetic state,-^àmong collective exist- 
ences as well as among individuals, is their most personal and un- 
changeable quality, because nothing is more fundamental. But then 
the effects springing from it must have both the same personality and 
the same stability. It is even natural for them to possess a higher 
stability than that of general mortality. For temperature, climatic 
and geological influences, in a word the various conditions on which 
public health depends, change much more readily from year to year 
than the temperament of peoples. 

There is however another hypothesis, apparently different from 
the above, which might be tempting to some minds. To solve the dif- 
ficulty, might we not suppose that the various incidents of private 
life considered to be preeminently the causes determining suicide, 
regularly recur annually in the same proportions? Let us suppose ^ 
that every year there are roughly the same number of unhappy mar- 
riages, bankruptcies, disappointed ambitions, cases of poverty, etc. 
Numerically the same and analogously situated, individuals would 

2 This is fundamentally Drobisch's opinion in his work cited above. 



£o&(^e5\^-^^ ■ 



3o6 suicroE 

then naturally form the resolve suggested by their situation, in the 
same numbers. One need not assume that they yield to a superior in- 
fluence; but merely that they reason generally in the same way when 
confronted by the same circumstances. 

But we know that these individual events, though preceding sui- 
cides with fair regularity, are not their real causes. To repeat, no un- 
happiness in life necessarily causes a man to kill himself unless he is 
otherwise so inclined. The regularity of possible recurrence of these 
various circumstances thus cannot explain the regularity of suicide. 
Whatever influence is ascribed to them, moreover, such a solution 
would at best change the problem without solving it. For it remains 
to be understood why these desperate situations are identically re- 
peated annually, pursuant to a law peculiar to each country. How 
does it happen that a given, supposedly stable society always has the 
same number of disunited families, of economic catastrophies, etc.? 
This regular recurrence of identical events in proportions constant 
within the same population but very inconstant from one population 
to another would be inexplicable had not each society definite cur- 
rents impelling its inhabitants with a definite force to commercial 
and industrial ventures, to behaviour of every sort likely to involve 
families in trouble, etc. This is to return under a very slightly differ- 
ent form to the same hypothesis which had been thought refuted.* 

Ill 

Let us make an effort to grasp the meaning and import of the 
rms lust emoloved. 



terms just employed. 



* This line of argument holds true not only of suicide, though more striking in 
that than in any other case. It is identically applicable to crime in its different 
forms. The criminal indeed is an exceptional being like the suicide, and thus the 
nature of the average type cannot explain the trends of criminality. But this is no 
less true of marriage, although the tendency to marry is more general than that to 
kill or to kill one's self. At each period of life the number of people who marry 
is only a small minority with reference to the unmarried population of the same 
age. Thus in France, from 25 to 30 years of age or when the marriage rate is at its 
highest, only 176 men and 135 women per year marry per 1,000 unmarried of each 
sex (period 1877-81). If, therefore, the tendency to marriage, which must not be 
confused with the taste for sexual intercourse, has sufficient strength to find satis- 
faction among only a few, the marriage rate at a given moment cannot be explained 
by the strength of this tendency in the average type. In truth, here as in the case 
of suicide, statistical figures express not the mean intensity of individual disposi- 
tions but that of the collective impulse to marriage. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 307 

Usually when collective tendencies or passions are spoken of, we 
tend to regard these expressions as mere metaphors and manners of 
speech with no real signification but a sort of average among a cer- 
tain number of individual states. They are not considered as things, 
forces sut generis which dominate the consciousness of single indi- 
viduals. None the less this is their nature, as is brilliantly ^ shown by 
statistics of suicide. The individuals making up a society change from 
year to year, yet the number of suicides is the same so long as the so- 
ciety itself does not change. The population of Paris renews itself 
very rapidly; yet the share of Paris in the total of French suicides 
remains practically the same. Although only a few years suffice to 
change completely the personnel of the army, the rate of military 
suicides varies only very slowly in a given nation. In all countries the 
evolution of collective life follows a given rhythm throughout the 
year; it grows from January to about July and then diminishes. Thus, 
though the members of the several European societies spring from 
widely different average types, the seasonal and even monthly vari- 
ations of suicide take place in accordance with the same law. Like- 
wise, regardless of the diversity of individual temperaments, the 
relation between the aptitude for suicide of married persons and that 
of widowers and widows is identically the same in widely differing 
social groups, from the simple fact that the moral condition of 
widowhood everywhere bears the same relation to the moral consti- 
tution characteristic of marriage. The causes which thus fix the con- 
tingent of voluntary deaths for a given society or one part of it must 
then be independent of individuals, since they retain the same in- 
tensity no matter what particular persons they operate on. One would 
think that an unchanging manner of life would produce unchanging 
effects. This is true; but a way of life is something, and its unchang- 
ing character requires explanation. If a way of life is unchanged 
while changes occur constantly among those who practise it, it cannot 
derive its entire reality from them. 

It has been thought that this conclusion might be avoided through 
the observation that this very continuity was the work of individuals 
and that, consequently, to account for it there was no need to ascribe 
to social phenomena a sort of transcendency in relation to individual 

5 However, such statistics are not the only ones to do so. Ail the facts of moral 
statistics imply this conclusion, as the preceding note suggests. 



308 SUICIDE 

life. Actually, it has been said, "anything social, whether a word of 
a language, a religious rite, an artisan's skill, an artistic method, a 
legal statute or a moral maxim is transmitted and passes from an in- 
dividual parent, teacher, friend, neighbor, or comrade to another 
individual."'' 

Doubtless if we had only to explain the general way in which an 
idea or sentiment passes from one generation to another, how it is 
that the memory of it is not lost, this explanation might as a last re- 
sort be considered satisfactory.'^ But the transmission of facts such as 
suicide and, more broadly speaking, such as the various acts reported 
by moral statistics, has a very special nature not to be so readily ac- 
counted for. It relates, in fact, not merely in general to a certain way 
of acting, but to the number of cases in which this way of acting is 
employed. Not merely are there suicides every year, but there are as a 
general rule as many each year as in the year preceding. The state of 
mind which causes men to kill themselves is not purely and simply 
transmitted, but — something much more remarkable — transmitted to 
an equal number of persons, all in such situations as to make the 
state of mind become an act. How can this be if only individuals are 
concerned.-* The number as such cannot be directly transmitted. 
Today's population has not learned from yesterday's the size of the 
contribution it must make to suicide; nevertheless, it will make one 
of identical size with that of the past, unless circumstances change. 

Are we then to imagine that, in some way, each suicide had as his 
initiator and teacher one of the victims of the year before and that he 
is something like his moral heir.'* Only thus can one conceive the pos- 

^ Tarde, La sociologie élémentaire, in Annales de l'Institut international de soci- 
ologie, p. 213. 

'' We say "as a last resort" for the essence of the problem could not be solved in 
this way. The really important thing if this continuity is to be explained is to show 
not merely how customary practices of a certain period are not forgotten in a sub- 
sequent one, but how they preserve their authority and continue to function. The 
mere fact that new generations may know by way of transmissions solely between 
individuals, what their ancestors did, does not mean that they have to do the same. 
What does oblige them, then? The respect for custom, the authority of past gen- 
erations? In that case the cause of the continuity is no longer individuals serving 
as vehicles for ideas or practices, but the highly collective state of mind which 
causes ancestors to be regarded with an especial respect among a certain people. 
And this state of mind is imposed on individuals. Like the tendency to suicide, this 
state of mind in a given society even has a definite intensity, depending on the 
greater or lesser degree with which individuals conform to tradition. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 309 

sibility that the social suicide-rate is perpetuated by way of inter- 
individual traditions. For if the total figure cannot be transmitted as 
a whole, the units composing it must be transmitted singly. Accord- 
ing to this idea, each suicide would have received his tendency from 
some one of his predecessors and each act of suicide would be some- 
thing like the echo of a preceding one. But not a fact exists to permit 
the assumption of such a personal filiation between each of these 
moral occurrences statistically registered this year, for example, and 
a similar event of the year before. As has been shown above, it is 
quite exceptional for an act to be inspired in this way by another of 
like nature. Besides, why should these ricochets occur regularly from 
year to year? Why should the generating act require a year to pro- 
duce its counterpart? Finally, why should it inspire a single copy 
only? For surely each model must be reproduced only once on the 
average, or the total would not be constant. Such an hypothesis, as 
arbitrary as it is difiicult to conceive, we need discuss no longer. But 
if it is dropped, if the numerical equality of annual contingents does 
not result from each particular case producing its counterpart in the 
ensuing period, it can only be due to the permanent action of some 
impersonal cause which transcends all individual cases. 

The terms therefore must be strictly understood. Collective tenden- 
cies have an existence of their own; they are forces as real as cosmic 
forces, though of another sort; they, likewise, affect the individual 
from without, though through other channels. The proof that the 
reality of collective tendencies is no less than that of cosmic forces is 
that this reality is demonstrated in the same way, by the uniformity 
of effects. When we find that the number of deaths varies little from 
year to year, we explain this regularity by saying that mortality de- 
pends on the climate, the temperature, the nature of the soil, in 
brief on a certain number of material forces which remain constant 
through changing generations because independent of individuals. 
Since, therefore, moral acts such as suicide are reproduced not merely 
with an equal but with a greater uniformity, we must likewise admit 
that they depend on forces external to individuals. Only, since these 
forces must be of a moral order and since, except for individual men, 
there is no other moral order of existence in the world but society, 
they must be social. But whatever they are called, the important thing 
is to recognize their reality and conceive of them as a totality of 



3IO SUICIDE 

forces which cause us to act from without, like the physico-chemical 
forces to which we react. So truly are they things sut generis and not 
mere verbal entities that they may be measured, their relative sizes 
compared, as is done with the intensity of electric currents or lumi- 
nous foci. Thus, the basic proposition that social facts are objective, 
a proposition we have had the opportunity to prove in another 
work ^ and which we consider the fundamental principle of the so- 
ciological method, finds a new and especially conclusive proof in 
moral statistics and above all in the statistics of suicide. Of course, it 
offends common sense. But science has encountered incredulity when- 
ever it has revealed to men the existence of a force that has been 
overlooked. Since the system of accepted ideas must be modified to 
make room for the new order of things and to establish new con- 
cepts, men's minds resist through mere inertia. Yet this understand- 
ing must be reached. If there is such a science as sociology, it can 
only be the study of a world hitherto unknown, different from those 
explored by the other sciences. This world is nothing if not a system 
of realities. 

But just because it encounters traditional prejudices this concep- 
tion has aroused objections to which we must reply. 

First, it implies that collective tendencies and thoughts are of a 
different nature from individual tendencies and thoughts, that the 
former have characteristics which the latter lack(Tïow can this be, it 
is objected, since there are only individuals in society? But, reasoning 
thus, we should have to say that there is nothing more in animate 
nature than inorganic matter, since the cell is made exclusively of 
inanimate atorns^Ç'o be sure, it is likewise true that society has no 
other active forces than individuals; but individuals by combining 
form a psychical existence of a new species, which consequently has 
its own manner of thinking and feeling) Of course the elementary 
qualities of which the social fact consists are present in germ in indi- 
vidual minds. But the social fact emerges from them only when they 
have been transformed by association since it is only then that it ap- 
pears. Association itself is also an active factor productive of special 
effects. In itself it is therefore something new. When the conscious- 
ness of individuals, instead of remaining isolated, becomes grouped 
and combined, something in the world has been altered. Naturally 
* See Règles de la méthode sociologique, ch. II. 



K^5- 



\tr\k^iM^ 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 311 

this change produces others, this novelty engenders other novelties, 
phenomena appear v/hose characteristic qualities are not found in the 
elements composing them. 

This proposition could only be opposed by agreeing that a whole 
is qualitatively identical with the sum of its parts, that an effect is 
qualitatively reducible to the sum of its productive causes; which 
amounts to denying all change or to making it inexplicable. Someone 
has, however, gone so far as to sustain this extreme thesis, but only 
two truly extraordinary reasons have been found for its defense. 
First, it has been said that "in sociology we have through a rare 
privilege intimate knowledge both of that element which is our in- 
dividual consciousness and of the compound which is the sum of 
consciousness in individuals"; secondly, that through this two fold 
introspection "we clearly ascertain that if the individual is subtracted 
nothing remains of the social." ^ 

The first assertion is a bold denial of all contemporary psychology. 
Today it is generally recognized that psychical life, far from being 
directly cognizable, has on the contrary profound depths inaccessible 
to ordinary perception, to which we attain only gradually by devious 
and complicated paths like those employed by the sciences of the ex- 
ternal world. The nature of consciousness is therefore far from lack- 
ing in mystery for the future. The second proposition is purely 
arbitrary. The author may of course state that in his personal opinion 
nothing real exists in society but what is individual, but proofs sup- 
porting this statement are lacking and discussion is therefore im- 
possible. It would be only too easy to oppose to this the contrary feel- 
ing of a great many persons, who conceive of society not as the form 
spontaneously assumed by individual nature on expanding outwardly, 
but as an antagonistic force restricting individual natures and re- 
sisted by them! What a remarkable intuition it is, by the way, that 
lets us know directly and without intermediary both the element — the 
individual — and the compound, society? If we had really only to open 
our eyes and take a good look to perceive at once the laws of the so- 
cial world, sociology would be useless or, at least very simple. Un- 
fortunately, facts show only too clearly the incompetence of con- 
sciousness in this matter. Never would consciousness have dreamt, of 
its own accord, of the necessity which annually reproduces demo- 

^ Tarde, op. cit., in Annales de l'Institut de social., p. 222. 



312 suicroE 

graphic phenomena in equal numbers, had it not received a sugges- 
tion from without. Still less can it discover their causes, if left to its 
own devices. 

But by separating social from individual life in this manner, we do 
not mean that there is nothing psychical about the former. On the 
contrary, it is clear that essentially social life is made up of repre- 
sentations. Only these collective representations are of quite another 
character from those of the individual. We see no objection to call- 
ing sociology a variety of psychology, if we carefully add that social 
psychology has its own laws which are not those of individual psy- 
chology. An example will make the thought perfectly clear. Usually 
the origin of religion is ascribed to feelings of fear or reverence in- 
spired in conscious persons by mysterious and dreaded beings; from 
this point of view, religion seems merely like the development of 
individual states of mind and private feelings. But this over-simpli- 
fied explanation has no relation to facts. It is enough to note that the 
institution of religion is unknown to the animal kingdom, where so- 
cial life is always very rudimentary, that it is never found except 
where a collective organization exists, that it varies with the nature 
of societies, in order to conclude justifiably that exclusively men in 
groups think along religious lines. The individual would never have 
risen to the conception of forces which so immeasurably surpass him 
and all his surroundings, had he known nothing but himself and the 
physical universe. Not even the great natural forces to which he has 
relations could have suggested such a notion to him; for he was origi- 
nally far from having his present knowledge of the extent of their 
dominance; on the contrary, he then believed that he could control 
them under certain conditions.^" Science taught him how much he 
was their inferior. The power thus imposed on his respect and be- 
come the object of his adoration is society, of which the gods were 
only the hypostatic form. Religion is in a word the system of symbols 
by means of which society becomes conscious of itself; it is the char- 
acteristic way of thinking of collective existence. Here then is a great 
group of states of mind which would not have originated if indi- 
vidual states of consciousness had not combined, and which result 
from this union and are superadded to those which derive from in- 
dividual natures. In spite of the minutest possible analysis of the 

^^ See Frazer, Golden Bough, p. 9 ff. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 313 

latter, they will never serve to explain the foundation and develop- 
ment of the strange beliefs and practices from which sprang totem- 
ism, the origin of naturism from it and how naturism itself became 
on the one hand the abstract religion of Jahwe, on the other, the 
polytheism of the Greeks and Romans, etc. All we mean by affirming 
the distinction between the social and the individual is that the above 
observations apply not only to religion, but to law, morals, customs, 
political institutions, pedagogical practices, etc., in a word to all 
forms of collective life.^^ 

Another objection has been made, at first glance apparently more 
serious. Not only have we admitted that the social states of mind are 
qualitatively different from individual ones, but that they are in a 
sense exterior to individuals. We have not even hesitated to compare 
this quality of being external with that of physical forces. But, it is 
objected, since there is nothing in society except individuals, how 
could there be anything external to them? 

If the objection were well founded we should face an antinomy. 
For we must not lost sight of what has been proved already. Since 
the handful of people who kill themselves annually do not form a 
natural group, and are not in communication with one another, the 
stable number of suicides can only be due to the influence of a com- 
mon cause which dominates and survives the individual persons in- 
volved. The force uniting the conglomerate multitude of individual 
cases, scattered over the face of the earth, must necessarily be exter- 
nal to each of them. If it were really impossible for it to be so, the 
problem would be insoluble. But the impossibility is only apparent. 

First, it is not true tha t soc i ety is m ade up only of individuals; it 
also includes material things, which play an esesntial role in the 
common life. The social fact is sometimes so far materialized as to ^^Ze- 
become an element of the external world. For instance, a definite ^f^ 

type of architecture is a social phenomenon; but it is partially em- f 

^1 Let us add, to avoid any misunderstanding, that despite all the above we do 
not admit that there is a precise point at which the individual comes to an end and 
the social realm commences. Association is not established and does not produce its 
effects all at once; it requires time and there are consequently moments at which 
the reality is indeterminate. Thus we pass without interval from one order of facts 
to the other; but this is no reason for not distinguishing them. Otherwise nothing 
in the world would be distinct, since there are no distinct genera and evolution is 
continuous. 



314 SUICIDE 

bodied in houses and buildings of all sorts which, once constructed, 
become autonomous realities, independent of individuals. It is the 
same with the avenues of communication and transportation, with in- 
struments and machines used in industry or private life which ex- 
press the state of technology at any moment in history, of written 
language, etc. Social life, which is thus crystallized, as it were, and 
fixed on material supports, is by just so much externalized, and acts 
upon us from without. Avenues of communication which have been 
constructed before our time give a definite direction to our activities, 
depending on whether they connect us with one or another country. 
A child's taste is formed as he comes into contact with the monu- 
ments of national taste bequeathed by previous generations. At times 
such monuments even disappear and are forgotten for centuries, then, 
one day when the nations which reared them are long since extinct, 
reappear and begin a new existence in the midst of new societies. 
This is the character of those very social phenomena called Renais- 
sances. A Renaissance is a portion of social life which, after being, 
so to speak, deposited in material things and remained long latent 
there, suddenly reawakens and alters the intellectual and moral ori- 
entation of peoples who had had no share in its construction. Doubt- 
less it could not be reanimated if living centers of consciousness did 
not exist to receive its influence; but these individual conscious cen- 
ters would have thought and felt quite differently if this influence 
were not present. 

The same remark applies to the definite formulae into which the 
dogmas of faith are precipitated, or legal precepts when they become 
fixed externally in a consecrated form. However well digested, they 
would of course remain dead letters if there were no one to conceive 
their significance and put them into practice. But though they are not 
self-sufficient, they are none the less in their own way factors of so- 
cial activity. They have a manner of action of their own. Juridical 
relations are widely different depending on whether or not the law 
is written. Where there is a constituted code, jurisprudence is more 
regular but less flexible, legislation more uniform but also more 
rigid. Legislation adapts itself less readily to a variety of individual 
cases, and resists innovations more strongly. The material forms it 
assumes are thus not merely ineffective verbal combinations but active 
realities, since they produce effects which would not occur without 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 315 

their existence. They are not only external to individual conscious- 
ness, but this very externality establishes their specific qualities. Be- 
cause these forms are less at the disposal of individuals, individuals 
cannot readily adjust them to circumstances, and this very situation 
makes them more resistant to change. 

Of course it is true that not all social consciousness achieves such 
externalization and materialization. Not all the aesthetic spirit of a 
nation is embodied in the works it inspires; not all of morality is 
formulated in clear precepts. The greater part is diffused. There is a 
large collective life which is at liberty; all sorts of currents come, go, 
circulate everywhere, cross and mingle in a thousand different ways, 
and just because they are constantly mobile are never crystalized in 
an objective form. Today, a breath of sadness and discouragement 
descends on society; tomorrow, one of joyous confidence will uplift 
all hearts. For a while the whole group is swayed towards individu- 
alism; a new period begins and social and philanthropic aims become 
paramount. Yesterday cosmopolitanism was the rage, today patrio- 
tism has the floor. And all these eddies, all these fluxes and refluxes 
occur without a single modification of the main legal and moral pre- 
cepts, immobilized in their sacrosanct forms. Besides, these very pre- 
cepts merely express a whole sub-jacent life of which they partake; 
they spring from it but do not supplant it. Beneath all these maxims 
are actual, living sentiments, summed up by these formulae but only 
as in a superficial envelope. The formulae would awake no echo if 
they did not correspond to definite emotions and impressions scat- 
tered through society. If, then, we ascribe a kind of reality to them, 
we do not dream of supposing them to be the whole of moral reality. 
That would be to take the sign for the thing signified. A sign is cer- 
tainly something; it is not a kind of supererogatory epiphenomenon; 
its role in intellectual development is known today. But after all it is 
only a sign.^^ 

But because this part of collective life has not enough consistency 
to become fixed, it none the less has the same character as the formu- 

12 y^Q do not expect to be reproached further, after this explanation, with wish- 
ing to substitute the exterior for the interior in sociology. We start from the exterior 
because it alone is immediately given, but only to reach the interior. Doubtless the 
procedure is complicated; but there is no other unless one would risk having his 
research apply to his personal feeling concerning the order of facts under investi- 
gation, instead of to this factual order itself. 



3i6 suicroE 

lated precepts of which we were just speaking. // is external to each 
average individual taken singly. Suppose some great pubHc danger 
arouses a gust of patriotic feeHng. A collective impulse follows, by 
virtue of which society as a whole assumes axiomatically that private 
interests, even those usually regarded most highly, must be wholly 
effaced before the common interest. And the principle is not merely 
uttered as an ideal; if need be it is literally applied. Meanwhile, take 
a careful look at the average body of individuals. Among very many 
of them you will recapture something of this moral state of mind, 
though infinitely attenuated. The men who are ready to make freely 
so complete a self-abnegation are rare, even in time of war. There- 
fore there is not one of all the single centers of consciousness who 
make up the great body of the nation, to whom the collective current 
is not almost wholly exterior, since each contains only a spark of it. 
The same thing is observable in respect to even the stablest, most 
fundamental moral sentiments. Every society, for example, has a re- 
spect for the life of man in general, the intensity of which is deter- 
mined by and commensurate with, the relative ^^ weight of the 
penalties attached to homicide. The average man, on the other hand, 
certainly feels something of the same sort, but far less and in a quite 
different way from society. To appreciate this difference, we need 
only compare the emotion one may individually feel at sight of the 
murderer or even of the murder, and that which seizes assembled 
crowds under the same circumstances. We know how far they may 
be carried if unchecked. It is because, in this case, anger is collective. 
The same difference constantly appears between the manner in which 
society resents these crimes and the way in which they affect indi- 
viduals; that is, between the individual and the social form of the 
sentiment offended. Social indignation is so strong that it is very 
often satisfied only by supreme expiation. The private person, how- 
ever, provided that the victim is unknown or of no interest to him, 

^^To discover whether this sentiment of respect is stronger in one society or 
another, not only the intrinsic violence of the repressive measures should be con- 
sidered, but the position of the penalty in the penal scale. Premeditated murder is 
punished solely by death, today as in past centuries. But today unadorned punish- 
ment by death has a greater relative significance; for it is the supreme punishment, 
whereas heretofore it could be aggravated. And since these aggravations were not 
then applied to ordinary murder, it follows that the latter was the object of lesser 
reprobation. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 317 

that the criminal does not live near and thus constitute a personal 
threat to him, though thinking it proper for the crime to be pun- 
ished, is not strongly enough stirred to feel a real need for ven- 
geance. He will not take a step to discover the guilty one; he will 
even hesitate to give him up. Only when public opinion is aroused, 
as the saying goes, does the matter take on a different aspect. Then 
we become more active and demanding. But it is opinion speaking 
through us; we act under the pressure of the collectivity, not as indi- 
viduals. 

Indeed, the distance between the social state and its individual re- 
percussions is usually even greater. In the above case, the collective 
sentiment, in becoming individualized, retained, at least among 
most people, strength enough to resist acts by which it is offended; 
horror at the shedding of human blood is sufficiently deeply enrooted 
in most consciences today to prevent the outburst of homicidal 
thoughts. But mere misappropriation, quiet, non-violent fraud, are 
far from inspiring us with equal aversion. Not many have enough 
respect for another's rights to stifle in the germ every wish to enrich 
themselves fraudulently. Not that education does not develop a cer- 
tain distaste for all unjust actions. But what a difference between 
this vague, hesitant feeling, ever ready for compromise, and the cate- 
gorical, unreserved and open stigma with which society punishes 
theft in all shapes! And what of so many other duties still less 
rooted in the ordinary man, such as the one that bids us contribute 
our just share to public expense, not to defraud the public treasury, 
not to try to avoid military service, to execute contracts faithfully, 
etc.? If morality in all these respects were only guaranteed by the un- 
certain feelings of the average conscience, it would be extremely 
unprotected. 

So it is a profound mistake to confuse the collective type of a so- 
ciety, as is so often done, with the average type of its individual 
members. The morality of the average man is of only moderate in- 
tensity. He possesses only the most indispensable ethical principles to 
any decided degree, and even they are far from being as precise and 
authoritative as in the collective type, that is, in society as a whole. 
This, which is the very mistake committed by Quételet, makes the 
origin of morality an insoluble problem. For since the individual is 
in general not outstanding, how has a morality so far surpassing him 



3i8 suicroE 

succeeded in establishing itself, if it expresses only the average of 
individual temperaments? Barring a miracle, the greater cannot arise 
from the lesser. If the common conscience is nothing but the most 
general conscience, it cannot rise above the vulgar level. But then 
whence come the lofty, clearly imperative precepts which society 
undertakes to teach its children, and respect for which it enforces 
upon its members? With good reason, religions and many philoso- 
phies with them have regarded morality as deriving its total reality 
only from God. For the pallid, inadequate sketch of it contained in 
individual consciences cannot be regarded as the original type. This 
sketch seems rather the result of a crude, unfaithful reproduction, 
the model for which must therefore exist somewhere outside indi- 
viduals. This is why the popular imagination, with its customary 
over-simplicitly assigns it to God. Science certainly could waste no 
time over this conception, of which it does not even take cogni- 
zance.^^ Only, without it no alternative exists but to leave morality 
hanging unexplained in the air or make it a system of collective states 
of conscience. Morality either springs from nothing given in the 
world of experience, or it springs from society. It can only exist in a 
conscience; therefore, if it is not in the individual conscience it is in 
that of the group. But then it must be admitted that the latter, far 
from being confused with the average conscience, everywhere sur- 
passes it. 

Observation thus confirms our hypothesis. The regularity of sta- 
tistical data, on the one hand, implies the existence of collective 
tendencies exterior to the individual, and on the other, we can di- 
rectly establish this exterior character in a considerable number of 
important cases. Besides, this exteriority is not in the least surprising 
for anyone who knows the difference between individual and social 
states of consciousness. By definition, indeed, the latter can reach 
none of us except from without, since they do not flow from our per- 
sonal predispositions. Since they consist of elements foreign to us ^^ 
they express something other than ourselves. To be sure in so far as 

^* Just as the science of physics involves no discussion of the belief in God, the 
creator of the physical world, so the science of morals involves no concern with 
the doctrine which beholds the creator of morality in God. The question is not of 
our competence; we are not bound to espouse any solution. Secondary causes alone 
need occupy our attention. 

15 See above, p. 39 and p. 310. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 319 

we are solidary with the group and share its life, we are exposed to 
their influence; but so far as we have a distinct personality of our 
own we rebel against and try to escape them. Since everyone leads 
this sort of double existence simultaneously, each of us has a double 
impulse. We are drawn in a social direction and tend to follow the 
inclinations of our own natures. So the rest of society weighs upon us 
as a restraint to our centrifugal tendencies, and we for our part share 
in this weight upon others for the purpose of neutralizing theirs. We 
ourselves undergo the pressure we help to exert upon others. Two 
antagonistic forces confront each other. One, the collective force, 
tries to take possession of the individual; the other, the individual 
force, repulses it. To be sure, the former is much stronger than the 
latter, since it is made of a combination of all the individual forces; 
but as it also encounters as many resistances as there are separate per- 
sons, it is partially exhausted in these multifarious contests and 
reaches us disfigured and enfeebled. When it is very strong, when 
the circumstances activating it are of frequent recurrence, it may still 
leave a deep impression on individuals; it arouses in them mental 
states of some vivacity which, once formed, function with the spon- 
taneity of instinct; this happens in the case of the most essential 
moral ideas. But most social currents are either too weak or too inter- 
mittently in contact with us to strike deep roots in us; their action is 
superficial. Consequently, they remain almost completely external. 
Hence, the proper way to measure any element of a collective type is 
not to measure its magnitude within individual consciences and to 
take the average of them all. Rather, it is their sum that must be 
taken. Even this method of evaluation would be much below reality, 
for this would give us only the social sentiment reduced by all its 
losses through individuation. 

So there is some superficiality about attacking our conception as 
scholasticism and reproaching it for assigning to social phenomena a 
foundation in some vital principle or other of a new sort. We refuse 
to accept that these phenomena have as a substratum the conscience 
of the individual, we assign them another; that formed by all the in- 
dividual consciences in union and combination. There is nothing 
substantival or ontological about this substratum, since it is merely a 
whole composed of parts. But it is just as real, nevertheless, as the 
elements that make it up; for they are constituted in this very way. 



320 SUICIDE 

They are compounds, too. It is known today that the ego is the re- 
sultant of a multitude of conscious states outside the ego; that each 
of these elementary states, in turn, is the product of unconscious 
vital units, just as each vital unit is itself due to an association of in- 
animate particles. Therefore if the psychologist and the biologist cor- 
rectly regard the phenomena of their study as well founded, merely 
through the fact of their connection with a combination of elements 
of the next lower order, why should it not be the same in sociology? 
Only those have the right to consider such a basis inadequate who 
have not renounced the hypothesis of a vital force and of a substan- 
tive soul. Nothing is more reasonable, then, than this proposition at 
which such offense has been taken; ^^ that a belief or social practice 
may exist independently of its individual expressions. We clearly 
did not imply by this that society can exist without individuals, an 
obvious absurdity we might have been spared having attributed to 
us. But we did mean: i. that the group formed by associated indi- 
viduals has a reality of a different sort from each individual consid- 
ered singly; 2. that collective states exist in the group from whose 
nature they spring, before they affect the individual as such and es- 
tablish in him in a new form a purely inner existence. 

Such a way of considering the individual's relations to society also 
recalls the idea assigned the individual's relations with the species or 
the race by contemporary zoologists. The very simple theory has been 
increasingly abandoned that the species is only an individual perpetu- 
ated chronologically and generalized spacially. Indeed it conflicts 
with the fact that the variations produced in a single instance be- 
come specific only in very rare and possibly doubtful cases. ^"^ The 
distinctive characteristics of the race change in the individual only as 
they change in the race in general. The latter has therefore some 
reality whence come the various shapes it assumes among individual 
beings, far from its consisting simply of a generalization of these 
beings. We naturally cannot regard these doctrines as finally demon- 
strated. But it is enough for us to show that our sociological concep- 
tions, without being borrowed from another order of research, are 
indeed not without analogies to the most positive sciences. 

1^ See Tarde, op. cit., p. 212. 

^^ See Delage, Structure du protoplasme, passim; Weissmann, L'hérédité and all 
the theories akin to Weissmann's. 




THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 321 

Let us apply these ideas to the question of suicide; the solution we 
gave at the beginning of this chapter will become more precise if we 
do so. 

No moral ide a exists which does not combine in proportions var y- 
i n^~wîth " ttie societ y jnyolved^_egoism , altruism and a certain anon^ 
For social life assumes both that the individual has a certain pel 
sonality, that he is ready to surre nder itlf the co mm unity re quires 
andiinallyTThltlEElilTo^certain degree_sgns itive to ideas of prog- 
X^s. This is why there is no peopIF among whom these three currents 
of opinion do not co-exist, bending men's inclinations in three dif- 
ferent and even opposing directions. Where they offset one another, 
the moral a^ent_is_jiL_a_state of equilibrium_which^jhelters him 
"agamsTany thought oLsuicide. But let one of them exceed a certam* 
strength to the detriment of the others, and as it becomes individual-f 
ized, it also becomes suicidogenetic, for the reasons assigned. | 

Of course, the stronger it is, the more agents it contaminates 
deeply enough to influence them to suicide, and inversely. But this 
very strength can depend only on the three following sorts of causes: 
I. the nat ure of the individua ls composing the society; 2. the man- 
ner otlheir association, that is, the jiature of the socia l organizat ion; 
3. the transitory occurrences which disturb the functionmg of the col- 
lective life without changing its anatomical constitution, such as 
national crises, economic crises, etc. As for the individual qualities, 
they can play a role only if they exist in all persons. For strictly per- 
sonal ones or those of only small minorities are lost in the mass of 
the others; besides, from their_difïerences from one another they 
neutralize one^noth€if5nd -are-jnutually e-râdix:^ted._during^ the elabo- 
ration resuUiag4a theucûllective^phenom^enon. Only general human 
characteristics, accordingly, can have any effect. Now these are prac- 
tically immutable; at least, their change would require more centuries 
than the life of one nation can occupy. So the social conditions on 
which the number of suicides depends are the only ones in terms of 
which it can vary; for they are the only variable conditions. This is 
why the number of suicides remains stable as long as society does not 
change. This stability does not exist because the state of mind which 
generates suicide is found through some chance in a definite number 



322 suicroE 

of individuals who transmit it, for no recognizable reason, to an 
equal number who will imitate the act. It exists because the imper- 
sonal causes which gave it birth and which sustain it are the same. It 
is because nothing has occurred to modify either the grouping of the 
social units or the nature of their concurrence. The actions and re- 
actions interchanged among them therefore remain the same; and so 
the ideas and feelings springing from them cannot vary. 

To be sure, it is very rare, if not impossible, for one of these cur- 
rents to succeed in exerting such preponderant influence over all 
points of the society. It always reaches this degree of energy in the 
midst of restricted surroundings containing conditions specially fa- 
vorable to its development. One or another social condition, occupa- 
tion, or religious faith stimulates it more especially. This explains 
suicide's twofold character. When considered in its outer manifesta- 
tions, it seems as though these were just a series of disconnected 
events; for it occurs at separated places without visible interrelations. 
Yet the sum of all these individual cases has its own unity and its 
bwn individuality, since the social suicide-rate is a distinctive trak of 
each collective personality. That is, though these particular environ- 
ments where suicide occurs most frequently are separate from one 
another, dispersed in thousands of ways over the entire territory, they 
are nevertheless closely related; for they are parts of a single whole, 
organs of a single organism, as it were. The condition in which each 
is found therefore depends on the general condition of society. There 
is a close solidarity between the virulence achieved by one oisaaother 
"^of its tendencies and the intensity of the tendency in the whole social 
body. Altruism is more or less a force in the army depending on its 
role among the civilian population,^^ intellectual individualism is 
more developed and richer in suicides in Protestant environments the 
more pronounced it is in the rest of the nation, etc. Everything is 
tied together. 

But though there is no individual state except insanity which may 
be considered a determining factor of suicide, it seems certain that no 
collective sentiment can affect individuals when they are absolutely 
indisposed to it. The above explanation might be thought inadequate 
for this reason, until we have shown how the currents giving rise to 
suicide find at the very moment and in the very environments in 

^8 See above, Book II, Ch. 4. 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 323 

which they develop a sufficient number of persons accessible to their 
influence. 

If we suppose, however, that this conjunction is really always ne- 
cessary and that a collective tendency cannot impose itself by brute 
force on individuals with no preliminary predisposition, then this 
harmony must be automatically achieved; for the causes determining 
the social currents affect individuals simultaneously and predispose 
them to receive the collective influence. Between these two sorts of' 
factors there is a natural affinity, from the very fact that they are de- 
pendent on, and expressive of the same cause: this makes them com- 
bine and become mutually adapted. The hypercivilization which 
breeds the anomic tendency and the egoistic tendency also refines 
nervous systems, making them excessively delicate; through this very 
fact they are less capable of firm attachment to a definite object, more 
impatient of any sort of discipline, more accessible both to violent 
irritation and to exaggerated depression. Inversely, the crude, rough 
culture implicit in the excessive altruism of primitive man develops 
a lack of sensitivity which favors renunciation. In short, just as so- 
ciety largely forms the individual, it forms him to the same extent in 
its own image. Society, therefore, cannot lack the material for its 
needs, for it has, so to speak, kneaded it with its own hands. 

The role of individual factors in the origin of suicide can now be 
more precisely put. If, in a given moral environment, for example, 
in the same religious faith or in the same body of troops or in the 
same occupation, certain individuals are affected and certain others 
not, this is undoubtedly, in great part, because the formers' mental 
constitution, as elaborated by nature and events, offers less resistance 
to the suicidogenetic current. But though these conditions may share 
in determining the particular persons in whom this current becomes 
embodied, neither the special qualities nor the intensity of the cur- 
rent depend on these conditions. A given number of suicides is not 
found annually in a social group just because it contains a given 
number of neuropathic persons. Neuropathic conditions only cause 
the suicides to succumb with greater readiness to the current. Whence 
comes the great difference between the clinician's point of view and 
the sociologist's. The former confronts exclusively particular cases, 
isolated from one another. He establishes, very often, that the victim 
was either nervous or an alcoholic, and explains the act by one or the 



324 suicroE 

other of these psychopathic states. In a sense he is right; for if this 
person rather than his neighbors committed suicide, it is frequently 
for this reason. But in a general sense this motive does not cause 
people to kill themselves, nor, especially, cause a definite number to 
kill themselves in each society in a definite period of time. The pro- 
ductive cause of the phenomenon naturally escapes the observer of 
individuals only; for it lies outside individuals. To discover it, one 
must raise his point of view above individual suicides and perceive 
what gives them unity. It will be objected that if enough neuras- 
thenics did not exist, social causes would not produce all their effects. 
But no society exists in which the various forms of nervous degen- 
eration do not provide suicide with more than the necessary number 
of candidates. Only certain ones are called, if this manner of speech 
is permitted. These are the ones who through circumstances have 
been nearer the pessimistic currents and who consequently have felt 
their influence more completely. 

But a final question remains. Since each year has an equal number 
of suicides, the current does not strike simultaneously all those within 
its reach. The persons it will attack next year already exist; already, 
also, most of them are enmeshed in the collective life and therefore 
come under its influence. Why are they provisionally spared? It may 
indeed be understood why a year is needed to produce the current's 
full action; for since the conditions of social activity are not the same 
according to season, the current too changes in both intensity and 
direction at different times of the year. Only after the annual cycle 
is complete have all the combinations of circumstances occurred, in 
terms of which it tends to vary. But since, by hypothesis, the next 
year only repeats the last and causes the same combinations, why was 
not the first enough? Why, to use the familiar expression, does so- 
ciety pay its bill only in installments? 

What we think explains this delay is the way time affects the 
suicidal tendency. It is an auxiliary but important factor in it. In- 
deed, we know that the tendency grows incessantly from youth to 
maturity,^® and that it is often ten times as great at the close of life 
as at its beginning. The collective force impelling men to kill them- 

^' Let us note, to be sure, that this progression has been proved only for European 
societies, where altruistic suicide is relatively rare. Perhaps it does not apply to the 
altruistic type. Altruistic suicide may attain its height towards the period of matur- 



THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 325 

selves therefore only gradually penetrates them. All things being 
equal, they become more accessible to it as they become older, prob- 
ably because repeated experiences are needed to reveal the complete 
emptiness of an egoistic life or the total vanity of limitless ambition. 
Thus, victims of suicide complete their destiny only in successive 
layers of generations.^** 

ity, when a man is most zealously involved in social life. The relations of this form 
of suicide to homicide, to be mentioned in the following chapter, confirm this 
hypothesis. 

2" Without wishing to raise a question of metaphysics outside our province, we 
must note that this theory of statistics does not deny men every sort of freedom. On 
the contrary, it leaves the question of free will much more untouched than if one 
made the individual the source of social phenomena. Actually, whatever the causes 
of the regularity of collective manifestations, they are forced to produce their effects 
wherever they occur; because otherwise these effects would vary at random, whereas 
they are uniform. If they are inherent in individuals, they must therefore inevitably 
determine their possessors. Consequently, on this hypothesis, no way is found to 
avoid the strictest determinism. But it is not so if the stability of demographic data 
results from a force external to the individual. Such a force does not determine one 
individual rather than another. It exacts a definite number of certain kinds of ac- 
tions, but not that they should be performed by this or that person. It may be 
granted that some people resist the force and that it has its way with others. Actu- 
ally, our conception merely adds to physical, chemical, biological and psychological 
forces, social forces which like these act upon men from without. If the former do 
not preclude human freedom, the latter need not. The question assumes the same 
terms for both. When an epidemic center appears, its intensity predetermines the 
rate of mortality it will cause, but those who will be infected are not designated by 
this fact. Such is the situation of victims of suicide with reference to suicidogenetic 
currents. 



CHAPTER 2 RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER 
SOCIAL PHENOMENA 



^. 



INCH suicide is a social phenomenon by virtue of its essential 
element, it is proper to discuss the place it occupies among other so- 
cial phenomena. 

The first and most important question which concerns the subject 
is to discover whether or not suicide should be classed among the 
actions permitted by morality or among those proscribed by it. Should 
it be regarded to any degree whatever as a criminal act? The ques- 
tion, as is well known, has always been warmly discussed. For its 
solution a certain conception of ideal morality is usually first formu- 
lated and then the question is raised whether or not suicide logically 
contradicts it. For reasons elsewhere set forth ^ this cannot be our 
method. An uncontrolled deduction is always suspect, and as such, 
moreover, starts from a pure postulate of individual feeling; for 
everyone conceives in his own way the ideal morality so axiomatically 
assumed. Instead, let us first seek to discover how peoples actually 
have estimated suicide morally in the course of history; then try to 
find the reasons for this estimate. Then, we will have only to see 
whether and how far these reasons are founded in the nature of 
present-day societies.^ 

1 See Division du travail social, Introduction. 

2 Bibliography on the question. Appiano Buonafede, Histoire critique et philos- 
ophique du suicide, 1762, Fr. trans., Paris, 1843. — Bourquelot, Recherches sur les 
opinions de la législation en matière de morts volontaires, in Bibliothèque de l'Ecole 
des Chartes, 1842 and 1843. — Guernesey, Suicide, History of the Penal Laws, New 
York, 1883. — Garrison, Le suicide en droit romain et en droit français, Toulouse, 
1883. — Wynn Westcott, Suicide, London, 1885, pp. 43-58. — Geiger, Der Selbstmord 
im klassischen Altertum, Augsburg, 1888. 

326 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 327 

I 

As soon as Christian societies were formed, suicide was formally 
forbidden in them. In 452 the council of Aries declared suicide a 
crime and that it could only be caused by a diabolically inspired fury. 
But this order received a penal sanction only in the following cen- 
tury, at the council of Prague in 563. There it was decided that vic- 
tims of suicide would be "honored with no memorial in the holy 
sacrifice of the mass, and the singing of psalms should not accom- 
pany their bodies to the grave." Civil legislation followed the lead 
of canon law, adding material penalties to religious penalties. A 
chapter of St. Louis' institutions especially regulates the matter; the 
body of the suicide was tried before the authorities otherwise compe- 
tent in cases of the homicide of one person by another; the deceased's 
property was diverted from the usual heirs and reverted to the baron. 
Many customs did not stop at confiscation but prescribed various tor- 
tures in addition. "At Bordeaux the corpse was hung by the feet; at 
Abbeville it was dragged through the streets on a hurdle; at Lille, if 
it was a man, the corpse was hung after being dragged to the cross- 
roads, if a woman, burned.^ Even insanity was not always considered 
an excuse. The criminal ordinance issued by Louis XIV in 1670 codi- 
fied these usages without much modification. A regular sentence of 
condemnation was spoken ad perpetuatn rei memoriam; the body 
drawn on a hurdle, face down, through the streets and squares, was 
then hung or thrown upon the garbage heap. The property was con- 
fiscated. Nobles incurred the loss of nobility and were declared com- 
moners; their woods were cut, their castles demolished, their es- 
cutcheons broken. We still have a decree of the Parliament of Paris, 
given January 31, 1749, in agreement with this legislation. 
<jBy an abrupt reaction the revolution of 1789 abolished all these 
repressive measures and erased suicide from the list of legal crimes. 
But all the religions numbering) Frenchmen among their followers 
still prohibit and punish it, and common morality reproves it. It still 
inspires an aversion in popular consciousness extending to the place 
where the suicidal act was performed and to all persons closely re- 
lated to the victim. It constitutes a moral flaw although opinion 
seems tending to become more indulgent on this point than formerly. 

3 Garrison, op. cit., p. 77. 



328 SUICIDE 

But, it has preserved something of its old criminological character. 
According to the most widespread jurisprudence, an accomplice of 
suicide is prosecuted as a homicide. This would not be so if suicide 
were considered an act indifferent to morality. 

This same legislation is found among all Christian peoples and 
has remained more severe almost everywhere else than in France. In 
England, in the loth century. King Edward in one of his Canons 
associated suicides with robbers, assassins and criminals of every 
kind. Up to 1823 it was customary to drag the suicide's body, pierced 
crossways with a stick, through the streets and bury it on a highway 
without any ceremony. Even today burial is separate. The suicide was 
declared a felon (felo de se) and his property reverted to the Crown. 
Only in 1870 was this provision abolished together with all confisca- 
tions for felony. To be sure, the excessive character of the punish- 
ment had made it inapplicable for a long time before; the jury 
evaded the law, usually by declaring that the suicide had acted in a 
moment of insanity and was therefore irresponsible. But the act is 
still designated as a crime; whenever committed it is regularly re- 
ported and sentenced, and the attempt is punished in principle. Ac- 
cording to Ferri,* even in 1889, 106 legal proceedings were insti- 
tuted for the offence and 84 sentences of condemnation passed in 
England alone. This is still more the case with complicity. 

Michelet relates that at Zurich the corpse was formerly subject to 
horrible treatment. If the man had stabbed himself, a bit of wood in 
which the dagger was fixed was driven into the body near the head; 
if he had drowned himself, he was buried under five feet of water in 
the sand.^ In Prussia until the Penal Code of 1871, burial had to be 
without any display and without religious ceremony. The new Ger- 
man penal code still punishes complicity with three years of impris- 
onment (art. 216). In Austria, the old canonical prescriptions are 
almost completely observed. 

Russian law is more severe. If the suicide seems not to have acted 
under the influence of mental disturbance, chronic or temporary, his 
will is annulled and all the material dispositions he made in antici- 
pation of death are likewise annulled. Christian burial is refused 

* Omicidio-suicidio, pp. 61-62. 

5 Origines du droit français, p. 371. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 329 

him. The mere attempt is punished by a fine which is fixable by ec- 
clesiastical authority. Finally, whoever incites another to kill himself 
or helps him carry out his resolve in any way, as by supplying him 
with the necessary instruments, is treated as an accomplice of pre- 
meditated homicide.® The Spanish Code, besides religious and moral 
penalties, imposes confiscation of property and punishes any com- 
plicity.'' 

Finally, the Penal Code of the State of New York, though of 
recent date (1881), terms suicide a crime. To be sure, in spite of 
this, punishment has been given up for practical reasons, since the 
penalty could in no way affect the guilty person. But the attempt may 
incur a sentence either of imprisonment up to 2 years, a fine up to 
$200.00 or both penalties. The mere fact of advising the suicide or 
favoring its performance is associated with complicity in murder.^ 

Mahometan societies prohibit suicide with equal vigor. "Man," 
says Mahomet, "dies only by the will of God according to the book 
which fixes the term of his life." ^ "When the term has arrived they 
cannot delay or hasten it by a single moment." ^*^ "We have decreed 
that death shall strike you each in turn and no one shall anticipate 
us." ^1 Nothing, in fact, is more contrary to the general spirit of 
Mahometan civilization than suicide; for the virtue set above all 
others is absolute submission to the divine will, the docile resignation 
"which makes one endure all patiently." ^^ As an act of insubordina- 
tion and revolt suicide could therefore only be regarded as a grave 
offense to fundamental duty. 

If we turn from modern societies to the historically earlier ones 
of the Greco-Latin city-states, we find legislation concerning suicide 
there also, but not based wholly on the same principle. Suicide was 
only considered illegal if it was not authorized by the state. Thus at 
Athens a man who had killed himself was punished with "atimia" 

^ Ferri, op. cit., p. 62. 

^ Garrison, op. cit., pp. 144, 145. 

8 Ferri, op. cit., pp. 63 and 64. 

^ Koran, III, v. 139. 

^'^Ibid., XVI, V. 63. 

11 Ibid., LVI, V. 60. 

^^Ibid., XXXIII, V. 33. 



330 suicroE 

for having committed an injustice to the city; ^^ the honors of regular 
burial were denied him; also his hand was cut from his body and 
buried separately.^* It was the same at Thebes with variations in de- 
tail, and also at Cyprus. ^^ The rule was so severe at Sparta that Aris- 
todemus was punished for the way he sought and found death at the 
battle of Plataea. But these punishments were applicable only when 
the person had killed himself without having previously asked per- 
mission of the proper authorities. At Athens, if he asked authority of 
the Senate before killing himself, stating the reasons which made 
life intolerable to him, and if his request was regularly granted, sui- 
cide was considered a legitimate act. Libanius ^^ reports some pre- 
cepts on the matter, the period of which he does not state, but which 
were really enforced at Athens; besides, he praises these laws very 
highly and asserts that they had the desired effects. They read as fol- 
lows: "Whoever no longer wishes to live shall state his reasons to 
the Senate, and after having received permission shall abandon life. 
If your existence is hateful to you, die; if you are overwhelmed by 
fate, drink the hemlock. If you are bowed with grief, abandon life. 
Let the unhappy man recount his misfortune, let the magistrate sup- 
ply him with the remedy, and his wretchedness will come to an end." 
The same law is found at Ceos.^*^ It was carried to Marseilles by the 
Greek colonists who founded the city. The magistrates had a supply 
of poison, the necessary quantity of which they gave to all who, after 
having told the Council of the Six Hundred the reasons they thought 
they had for killing themselves received its authorization.^^ 

We are less well informed concerning the provisions of early 
Roman law: the fragments of the law of the XII Tables which have 
come down to us do not mention suicide. But since this Code was 
largely inspired by Greek legislation it probably contained similar 
provisions. At least, in his commentary on the Aeneid,^^ Servius tells 
us that according to the laws of the pontiffs, whoever had hung him- 
self was deprived of burial. The statutes of a religious confraternity 

13 Aristotle, Eth. Nic, V. ii, 3. 

1* Aeschines, Against Ctesiphon. — Plato, Laws, IX, 12. 

I'Dion Chrysostom, Orations, 4, 14 (Teubner ed. V, 2, p. 207). 

"^^ Mel et. Ed. Reiske, Altenburg, 1797, p. 198 flF. 

1^ Valerius Maximus, 2, 6, 8. 

18 Valerius Maximus, 2, 6, 7. 

19 XII, 603. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 331 

of Lanuvium prescribed the same penalty.^^ According to the annalist 
Cassius Hermina, quoted by Servius, Tarquin the Proud, to combat 
an epidemic of suicides, ordered the bodies of the dead crucified 
after torture and left a prey to birds and wild beasts.^^ The custom 
of denying burial to suicides seems to have persisted, at least in prin- 
ciple, for in the Digest one reads: Non soient autem lugeri suspendi- 
osi nee qui manus sibi intulerunt, non taedio vitae, sed mala consci- 
entia?'^ 

But according to a text of Quintilian ^3 until a rather late period 
there was an institution at Rome similar to the one just mentioned in 
Greece, intended to modify the severity of the above provisions. The 
citizen who wished to kill himself had to submit his reasons to the 
Senate, which decided upon their acceptability and even determined 
the kind of death. What makes it probable that some such practice 
really existed at Rome is that something like it survived in the army 
even under the emperors. The soldier who tried to kill himself to 
avoid service was punished with death; but if he could prove that he 
was impelled by some plausible reason, he was only dismissed from 
the army.2^ If, finally, his act was one of remorse for some military 
fault, his will was annulled and his property reverted to the public 
treasury.25 There is certainly no doubt that at Rome consideration of 
the motives leading to suicide always played a preponderant role in 
the moral or judicial estimation of it. Hence the precept: "Et merito, 
si sine causa sibi manus intulit, puniendus est: qui enim sibi non pe- 
percit, multo minus aliis parcet.^^ The public conscience, while reprov- 
ing it as a general rule, reserved the right to authorize it in certain 
cases. Such a principle is close kin to that which forms the basis of 
the institution of which Quintilian speaks; and it was so fundamental 
in Roman legislation concerning suicide that it remained even under 
the emperors. In time, however, the list of legitimate excuses length- 
ened. Finally there was practically only one causa in jus ta: the wish to 

2" See Lasaulx, Ueber die Bûcher des Koenigs Numa, in his Eludes d'antiquité 
classique. We quote from Geiger, p. 63. 

21 Servius, loc. cit. — Pliny, Natural History, XXXVI, 24. 

22 HI, title II, bk. II, par. 3. 

^^ Inst. orat. VII, 4, 39. — Orations, 337. 

24 Digest, bk. XLIX, title XVI, law 6, par. 7. 

25 Ibid., bk. XXVIII, title III, law 6, par. 7. 

26 Digest, bk. XLVIII, title XXI, law 3, par. 6. 



332 SUICIDE 

escape the consequences of a criminal sentence. There was even a 
moment when the law excluding this from tolerance seems not to 
have been applied.^^ 

If from the level of the city-state, we descend to the primitive peo- 
ples among whom altruistic suicide flourishes, it is hard to state any- 
thing exactly concerning the legislation that may obtain there. The 
complacency with which suicide is considered there, however, makes 
it probable that it is not formally forbidden. Yet it is possible that it 
is not absolutely tolerated in all cases. But however this may be, the 
fact remains that among all the societies above this lower level, none 
is known where the individual is unreservedly granted the right to 
kill himself. In both Greece and Italy, to be sure, there was a time 
when the old regulations concerning suicide became almost entirely 
a dead letter. But this was not until the city-state regime itself began 
to decline. This belated tolerance cannot be referred to as an example 
for imitation; for it is clearly interrelated with the serious disturb- 
ances which then afflicted these societies. It is the symptom of a mor- 
bid condition. 

Such general reprobation, except for these cases of retrogression, 
is even in itself an instructive fact which should check moralists too 
much inclined to indulgence. An author must have great faith in the 
strength of his logic to venture such a revolt, in the name of a system, 
against the moral conscience of humanity; or, if he considers the pro- 
hibition of suicide founded on the past and advocates its abolition 
only for the immediate present, he should first prove that some pro- 
found change in the basic conditions of collective life has occurred 
recently. 

A more striking conclusion springs from our sketch, practically ex- 
cluding the possibility of such a proof. Regardless of differences 
in detail in repressive measures of different peoples, legislation 
on the subject clearly passed through two chief phases. In the first, 
the individual is forbidden to destroy himself on his own authority; 
but the State may permit him to do so. The act is immoral only when 
it is wholly private and without collaboration through the organs of 
collective life. Under specific circumstances, society yields slightly and 
absolves what it condemns on principle. In the second period, con- 

^^ Towards the end of the Republic and the beginning of the Empire; see Geiger, 
p. 69. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 333 

demnation is absolute and universal. The power to dispose of a 
human life, except when death is the punishment for a crime,^^ is 
withheld not merely from the person concerned but from society it- 
self. It is henceforth a right denied to collective as well as to private 
disposition. Suicide is thought immoral in and for itself, whoever 
they may be who participate in it. Thus, with the progress of history 
the prohibition, instead of being relaxed, only becomes more strict. 
If the public conscience seems less assured in its opinion of this mat- 
ter today, therefore, this uncertainty may rise from fortuitous and 
passing causes; for it is wholly unlikely that moral evolution should 
so far reverse itself after having developed in a single direction for 
centuries. 

The ideas that set it in this direction are in fact still alive. It has 
occasionally been said that if suicide is and should be forbidden, it is 
because a man evades his obligations towards society by killing him- 
self. But if we were moved only by this thought we, like the Greeks, 
should leave society free to abrogate a prohibition issued only for its 
own benefit. If we refuse it this authority, it is because we see in the 
suicide more than an unscrupulous debtor to society. A creditor may 
always remit a debt by which he benefits. Besides, if this were the 
only reason for disapproving suicide, the reprobation should be more 
formal the more strictly the individual is subject to the State; so that 
it would be at its height in lower societies. On the contrary, its rigor 
increases with the growth of individual as contrasted with State 
rights. If it has become so formal and severe in Christian societies, 
this is not because of the idea of the State held by these people but 
because of their new conception of the human personality. It has be- 
come sacred, even most sacred in their eyes, something which no one 
is to offend. Of course, even under the city-state regime the indi- 
vidual's existence was no longer as self-eflfacing as among primitive 
tribes. Then it was accorded a social value, but one supposed to 
belong wholly to the State. The city-state could therefore dispose of 
him freely without the individual having the same right over him- 
self. But today he has acquired a kind of dignity which places him 
above himself as well as above society. So long as his conduct has not 
caused him to forfeit the title of man, he seems to us to share in some 
degree in that quality sui generis ascribed by every religion to its gods 

28 And even in this case the right of society is beginning to be disputed. 



334 suicroE 

which renders them inviolable by everything mortal. He has become 
tinged with religious value; man has become a god for men. There- 
fore, any attempt against his life suggests sacrilege. Suicide is such 
an attempt. No matter who strikes the blow, it causes scandal by 
violation of the sacrosanct quality within us which we must respect in 
ourselves as well as in others. 

Hence, suicide is rebuked for derogating from this cult of human 
personality on which all our morality rests. Proof of this explanation 
is the difference between our view and that of the nations of an- 
tiquity. Once suicide was thought only a simple civil wrong com- 
mitted against the State; religion had little or no interest in the 
matter.^^ Now it has become an act essentially involving religion. 
The judges condemning it have been church councils, and lay power 
in punishing it has only followed and imitated ecclesiastical au- 
thority. Because we have an immortal soul in us, a spark of divinity, 
we must now be sacred to ourselves. We belong completely to no 
temporal being because we are kin to God. 

But if this is why suicide has been classed among illicit actions, 
should we not henceforth consider the condemnation to be without 
basis? It seems that scientific criticism cannot concede the least 
value to these mystical conceptions, nor admit that man contains any- 
thing whatever that is superhuman. Reasoning thus, Ferri in his 
Omkidio-suicidio thought himself justified in regarding all prohibi- 
tions of suicide as survivals from the past, doomed to disappear. 
Considering it absurd from the rationalist point of view that the in- 
dividual could have an extra-personal aim, he deduces that we are al- 
ways free to renounce the advantages of community existence by 
renouncing life itself. The right to live seems to him logically to 
imply the right to die. 

But this method of argument draws its conclusion too abruptly 
from form to content, from the verbal expression through which we 
translate our feeling to the feeling itself. It is true that, both intrin- 
sically and abstractly, the religious symbols by means of which we 
explain the respect inspired in us by human personality are not ade- 
quate to reality, and this is easily proveable; but from all this it does 
not follow that this respect is itself unreasonable. On the contrary, 
its preponderant role in our law and in our morality must warn us 

29 See Geiger, op. cit., pp. 58-59. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 335 

against such an interpretation. Instead of taking a literal interpreta- 
tion of this conception, let us examine it in itself, let us discover its 
make-up, and we shall see that in spite of the crudeness of the popu- 
lar formula the conception nevertheless has objective value. 

Indeed, the sort of transcendency we ascribe to human personality 
is not a quality peculiar to it. It is found elsewhere. It is nothing but 
the imprint of all really intense collective sentiments upon matters re- 
lated to them. Just because these feelings derive from the collectivity, 
the aims to which they direct our actions can only be collective. So- 
ciety has needs beyond our own. The acts inspired in us by its needs 
therefore do not depend on our individual inclinations; their aim is 
not our personal interest, but rather involves sacrifices and privations. 
When I fast, when I accept mortification to be pleasing in God's 
sight, when I undertake some inconvenience out of respect for a tra- 
dition the meaning and import of which are usually unknown to me, 
when I pay my taxes, when I give any labor or life to the State, I re- 
nounce something of myself; and by the resistance offered by our 
egoism to these renunciations, we readily see that they are forced 
from us by a power to which we have submitted. Even when we 
defer gladly to its commands we feel that our conduct is guided by 
a sentiment of reverence for something greater than ourselves. How- 
ever willingly we obey the voice dictating this abnegation, we feel 
sure that its tone is imperative beyond that of instinct. That is why 
we cannot indisputably consider it our own, though it speaks within 
our consciences. We ascribe it to other sources, as we do our sensa- 
tions; we project it outside of ourselves, referring it to an existence 
we think of as exterior and superior to ourselves, since it commands 
us and we obey. Of course, whatever seems to us to come from the 
same origin shares the same quality. Thus we have been forced to 
imagine a world beyond this one and to people it with realities of a 
different order. 

Such is the source of all the ideas of transcendency which form 
the bases of religions and morals; for moral obligation is explicable 
only in this way. To be sure, the definite form in which we usually 
clothe these ideas is without scientific value. Whether we ascribe 
them to a personal being of a special nature or to some abstract force 
which we vaguely hypostasize under the title of moral ideal, they are 
solely metaphorical conceptions, giving no adequate explanation of 



33^ suicroE 

the facts. But the process which they symbolize is none the less real. 
It remains true that in every case we are urged to act by an authority 
exceeding ourselves, namely society, and that the aims to which it 
attaches us thus enjoy real moral supremacy. If so, all the objections 
applicable to the common conceptions by which men have tried to 
represent this sensed supremacy to themselves cannot lessen its re- 
ality. Such criticism is superficial, not reaching to the basis of things. 
If it is demonstrable that exaltation of human personality is one of 
the aims pursued, and which should be pursued, by modern societies, 
all moral regulation deriving from this principle is justified by that 
fact itself, whatever the manner of its usual justification. Though the 
reasons satisfying the crowd are open to criticism, they need only be 
transposed into another idiom to be given their full import. 

Now, not only is this aim really one of the aims of modern so- 
cieties, but it is a law of history that peoples increasingly detach 
themselves from every other objective. Originally society is every- 
thing, the individual nothing. Consequently, the strongest social feel- 
ings are those connecting the individual with the collectivity; society 
is its own aim. Man is considered only an instrument in its hands; he 
seems to draw all his rights from it and has no counter-prerogative, 
because nothing higher than it exists. But gradually things change. 
As societies become greater in volume and density, they increase in 
complexity, work is divided, individual differences multiply,*" and 
the moment approaches when the only remaining bond among the 
members of a single human group will be that they are all men. Under 
such conditions the body of collective sentiments inevitably attaches 
itself with all its strength to its single remaining object, communi- 
cating to this object an incomparable value by so doing. Since human 
personality is the only thing that appeals unanimously to all hearts, 
since its enhancement is the only aim that can be collectively pursued, 
it inevitably acquires exceptional value in the eyes of all. It thus rises 
far above all human aims, assuming a religious nature. 

This cult of man is something, accordingly, very different from the 
egoistic individualism above referred to, which leads to suicide. Far 
from detaching individuals from society and from every aim beyond 
themselves, it unites them in one thought, makes them servants of 
one work. For man, as thus suggested to collective affection and re- 

^^ See my Division du travail social, bk. II. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 337 

spect, is not the sensual, experiential individual that each one of 
us represents, but man in general, ideal humanity as conceived by 
each people at each moment of its history. None of us wholly incar- 
nates this ideal, though none is wholly a stranger to it. So we have, 
not to concentrate each separate person upon himself and his own 
interests, but to subordinate him to the general interests of human- 
kind. Such an aim draws him beyond himself; impersonal and dis- 
interested, it is above all individual personalities; like every ideal, it 
can be conceived of only as superior to and dominating reality. This 
ideal even dominates societies, being the aim on which all social ac- 
tivity depends. This is why it is no longer the right of these societies 
to dispose of this ideal freely. While we recognize that they too have 
their reason for existence, they have subjected themselves to the 
jurisdiction of this ideal and no longer have the right to ignore it; 
still less, to authorize men themselves to do so. Our dignity as moral 
beings is therefore no longer the property of the city-state; but it has 
not for that reason become our property, and we have not acquired 
the right to do what we wish with it. How could we have such a 
right if society, the existence greater than ourselves, does not have it? 
Under these conditions suicide must be classed among immoral 
acts; for in its main principle it denies this religion of humanity. A 
man who kills himself, the saying goes, does wrong only to himself 
and there is no occasion for the intervention of society; for so goes 
the ancient maxim Volenti non fit injuria. This is an error. Society is 
injured because the sentiment is offended on which its most respected 
moral maxims today rest, a sentiment almost the only bond between 
its members, and which would be weakened if this oflPense could be 
committed with impunity. How could this sentiment maintain the 
least authority if the moral conscience did not protest its violation? 
From the moment that the human person is and must be considered 
something sacred, over which neither the individual nor the group 
has free disposal, any attack upon it must be forbidden. No matter 
that the guilty person and the victim are one and the same; the social 
evil springing from the act is not affected merely by the author being 
the one who suffers. If violent destruction of a human life revolts us 
as a sacrilege, in itself and generally, we cannot tolerate it under any 
circumstances. A collective sentiment which yielded so far would 
soon lose all force. 



338 suicroE 

Of course, this does not mean that we must revert to the ferocious 
penalties imposed on suicide during the past centuries. They were 
established at a time when, under the influence of temporary circum- 
stances, the entire system of public repression was enforced with ex- 
cessive severity. But the principle that homicide of one's self should 
be reproved must be maintained. It remains to determine by what 
external tokens this reprobation is to be shown. Are moral sanctions 
enough or must there be juridical ones, and if so, what? This is a 
question of application which shall be treated in the next chapter. 

II 

But in order better to decide to what extent suicide partakes of im- 
morality, let us examine first its relation with other immoral acts, es- 
pecially crimes and misdemeanors. 

According to Lacassagne there is consistently an inverse relation 
between the variations of suicide and those of crimes against prop- 
erty (qualified thefts, incendiarism, fraudulent bankruptcies, etc.). 
This thesis was defended in his name by one of his pupils, Dr. 
Chaussinand, in his Contribution a l'étude de la statistique crimi- 
nelle^'^ But there are absolutely no proofs for it. According to the 
author, the two curves need only to be compared to show that they 
vary inversely with one another. Actually, no trace of relation, direct 
or inverse, can be seen between them. No doubt, property crimes 
have decreased since 1854 while suicides are increasing. But this de- 
crease is in part fictitious; it is due merely to the fact that at about 
that time judges began to send certain crimes before courts of sum- 
mary jurisdiction, in order to remove them from the jurisdiction of 
courts of assizes, by which they had hitherto been judiciable. A cer- 
tain number of offences therefore vanished from then on from the 
list of crimes, only to reappear in that of misdemeanors. Crimes 
against property have benefited most by this now established depar- 
ture in jurisprudence. So that, if statistics suggest a smaller number, 
this decrease is probably due merely to a procedure in bookkeeping. 

But no one can decide whether the decrease was real; for though 
starting from 1854 the two curves follow an inverse direction, from 

3^ Lyons, 1881. At the Congress on Criminology held at Rome in 1887, Lacas- 
sagne claimed responsibility for this theory. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 339 

1826 to 1854 *^he curve of crimes against property either rises con- 
jointly with that of suicides; though less rapidly, or is stationary. 
From 1831 to 1835 an average of 5,095 indicted was annually re- 
corded; this rose to 5,732 during the following period, was still 
4,918 in 1841-45, 4,992 from 1846 to 1850, a reduction of only 
2 per cent from 1830. Besides, the general shape of the two curves 
precludes any thought of comparison. That of property-crimes is 
very erratic; it makes abrupt leaps from year to year; its apparently 
capricious changes clearly depend on a quantity of fortuitous circum- 
stances. That of suicide, on the contrary, rises regularly and uniformly; 
with rare exceptions there are neither abrupt jumps nor sudden falls. 
Ascent is steady and progressive. Between phenomena the develop- 
ment of which is so different no connection of any sort can exist. 

Moreover, Lacassagne seems to have been alone in his opinion. 
But it is otherwise with another idea, relating suicide with crimes 
against persons and especially with homicide. It numbers many de- 
fenders and deserves serious examination.^^ 

As early as 1833 Guerry pointed out that crimes against persons 
are twice as numerous in the southern as in the northern depart- 
ments, while the reverse is true of suicide. Later, Despine estimated 
that in the 14 departments where sanguinary crimes are most fre- 
quent there were only 30 suicides per million inhabitants, whereas 
82 occurred in 14 other departments where such crimes were much 
more infrequent. The same author adds that in the Seine only 17 
crimes against persons are found per 100 proceedings and an average 
of 427 suicides per million, while in Corsica the proportion of the 
former is 83 per cent and that of the latter only 18 per million 
inhabitants. 

These remarks, however, had attracted no notice until the Italian 
school of criminology took them up. Ferri and Morselli especially 
made them the basis of an entire theory. 

According to them the polar character of suicide and homicide 

^- Bibliography. — Guerry, Essai sur la statistique morale de la France. — Cazau- 
vieilh, Du suicide, de l' aliénation mentale et des crimes contre les personnes, com- 
parés dans leurs rapports réciproques, 2 vols., 1840. — Despine, Psychologie natur., 
p. m. — Maury, Du mouvement moral des sociétés, in Revue des Deux-Mondes, 
i860. — Morselli, Il suicidio, p. 243 ff. — Actes du premier congrès international 
d' Anthropologie criminelle, Turin, 1886-87, P- 202 ff. — Tarde, Criminalité com- 
parée, p. 152 ff. — Ferri, Omicidio-suicidio, 4th éd., Turin, 1895, p. 253 ff. 



340 suicroE 

is an absolutely general law. Whether as regards their geographical 
distribution or their evolution in time, they are always found chang- 
ing inversely with one another. But this antagonism, once granted, 
may be explained in either of two ways. Either homicide and suicide 
form two opposite currents, so opposed that one can gain only 
through the other's loss, or they are two different channels of a single 
stream, fed by a single source, which consequently cannot move in 
one direction without receding to an equal extent in the other. The 
Italian criminologists adopted the second of these explanations. In 
suicide and homicide they see two manifestations of the same state, 
two effects of the same cause, expressing itself at times in one form, 
at times in another, but unable to assume both simultaneously. 

They chose this interpretation because, according to them, the in- 
version of the phenomena in certain respects does not exclude a 
certain parallelism. While they vary inversely in terms of some con- 
ditions, other conditions make them vary not inversely. Thus, says 
Morselli, temperature has the same effect on both; they reach their 
maximum at the same time of year, the beginning of the hot season; 
both occur more frequently among men than among women; both, 
finally, according to JFerri, increase with age. Therefore, while oppo- 
site in certain aspects they are partially of the same nature. Now, the 
factors under the influence of which they react similarly, are all 
individual; for they either consist directly of certain organic states 
(such as age or sex), or belong to the cosmic environment which can 
affect the moral individual only through the medium of the physical 
individual. Individual conditions would thus serve to bind suicide 
and homicide together. The psychological constitution predisposing 
to one or the other is supposed to be the same: the two inclinations 
are one. Following Lombroso, Ferri and Morselli have even tried 
to define this temperament. It is supposedly characterized by a decay 
of the organism, which puts the person at a disadvantage in the 
struggle of life. Both the murderer and the suicide accordingly are 
degenerates and impotents. Equally unable to play a useful part in 
society, they are consequently doomed to defeat. 

But, supposedly, this single predisposition which itself inclines no 
more one way than the other prefers the form of homicide or of sui- 
cide depending on the nature of the social environment; and so these 
contrasting phenomena are produced which, though real, nevertheless 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 34I 

conceal a fundamental identity. Where customs generally are gentle 
and pacific, where the shedding of blood is abhorred, the defeated 
person will resign himself, confess his impotence, and anticipating 
the effects of natural selection will withdraw from the fight by with- 
drawing from life. Where average morality has a ruder character and 
human life is less respected, he will revolt, declare war on society 
and kill, instead of killing himself. In short, the murder of one's 
self and of another are two violent acts. But sometimes the violence 
which is their source, finding no resistance in the social environment, 
overruns it and then it becomes homicide. Sometimes, incapable of 
outward expression because of the pressure of the public conscience, 
it reverts to its source, and then the same person from whom it 
springs is its victim. 

Suicide is, then, a transformed and attenuated homicide. In this 
riew, it seems almost salutary; for if it is not a good, it is at least 
a lesser evil, which spares us a greater. It would even seem that one 
should not try to restrain its scope by prohibitive measures; for by so 
doing one would be giving rein to homicide. It is a safety-valve 
which is useful to leave open. In short, suicide would have the very 
great advantage of ridding us of a number of useless or harmful 
persons without social intervention, and hence in the most simple 
and economical way. Is it not better to let them put themselves out 
of the way voluntarily and quietly, than to force society to eject them 
from its midst by violence? 

Is this ingenious thesis well-founded? The question is twofold and 
each part must be examined separately. Are the psychological condi- 
tions of crime and suicide the same? Is there a polarity between 
the social conditions on which they depend? 

Ill 

Three facts have been alleged to prove the psychological unity 
of the two phenomena. 

First there is the similar effect which sex is supposed to have upon 
suicide and homicide. To be exact, this influence of sex is an effect 
rather of social than of organic causes. Woman kills herself less, 
and she kills others less, not because of physiological differences 
from man but because she does not participate in collective life in 
the same way. Moreover, she is far from having the same antipathy 



342 SUICIDE 

to these two forms of immorality. Indeed we are inclined to forget 
that there are murders of which she has a monopoly, infanticides, 
abortions and poisonings. Whenever homicide is within her range 
she commits it as often or more often than man. According to 
Oettingen,^^ half the total number of domestic murders is attributable 
to her. So there is no reason to suppose that she has greater respect 
for another's life because of her congenital constitution; she merely 
lacks as frequent opportunities, being less deeply involved in the 
struggle of life. The causes impelling to sanguinary crimes affect her 
less than man because she is less within their sphere of influence. 
For the same reason she is less exposed to accidental forms of death; 
out of 100 of this sort, only 20 are women. 

Besides, if a single classification is made to cover all sorts of inten- 
tional homicide — premeditated and unpremeditated murders,^* parri- 
cides, infanticides, poisonings — woman's share in the total is still 
very high. In France, 38 or 39 out of 100 such crimes are committed 
by women, and even 42 if abortions are included. In Germany, the 
proportion is 51 per cent, in Austria 52 per cent. To be sure, invol- 
untary homicides are omitted in this calculation, but homicide is truly 
homicide only when it is intentional. On the other hand, the charac- 
teristically feminine forms of murder, such as infanticides, abortions, 
and domestic murders, are by their nature hard to discover. Many 
therefore are committed which escape justice and, accordingly, statis- 
tics. Remembering that woman must probably benefit by the same 
indulgence in preliminary investigations as she certainly does in sen- 
tences, where she is much more often acquitted than man, it is clear, 
finally, that aptitude for homicide cannot be very diflferent in the 
two sexes. On the contrary, we know how great is woman's immu- 
nity to suicide. 

^^ Moralstatistik, p. 526. 

3* Throughout this chapter, Durkheim uses several technical, French legal terms 
for the varieties of homicide. These terms are somewhat different from those em- 
ployed in English and American law. In French law there are five varieties of what 
is called homicide volontaire; they are assassinat, meurtre, parricide, infanticide, 
empoisonnement. The two most important for Durkheim's analysis are assassinat and 
meurtre. Assassinat is intentional homicide with aggravating circumstances such as 
premeditation or prearrangement. Meurtre is simple intentional homicide {homicide 
volontaire simple) without aggravating circumstances such as premeditation or pre- 
arrangement. Assassinat has been translated, therefore, as "premeditated murder," 
while meurtre has been translated as "unpremeditated murder." — Ed. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 343 

The injfluence of age on each phenomenon shows equal differences. 
According to Ferri, homicide and suicide both become more frequent 
as man advances in Hfe. To be sure, MorselH expresses the opposite 
view.^^ The truth is that there is neither inversion nor agreement. 
While suicide increases regularly until old age, premeditated and 
unpremeditated murder reach their height in maturity, at about 30 
or 35 years of age, and then decrease. This appears in Table XXXI. 
Not the shadovi^ of proof appears here that suicide and sanguinary 
crime are of identical or opposite character. 

The effect of temperature remains to be considered. If all crimes 
against persons are combined, the curve thus obtained seems to con- 
firm the theory of the Italian school. It rises until June and descends 
regularly to December, like that of suicides. But this results merely 
from the fact that under this common expression of crimes against 
persons not only homicides, but indecent assaults and rape are in- 
cluded. Since these crimes reach their maximum in June and are 

TABLE XXXI — Comparative Development of Murders (Pre- 
meditated and Unpremeditated) and Suicides 
at Different Ages, in France (1887) 

Per 100,000 Individuals Per 100,000 Individuals 

of Each Age, of Eoc/i Sex and Age, 
Number of Number of Suicides 

Unpremeditated Premeditated 

Age Murders Murders Men Women 

From 16 to 21 • 6.2 8 14 9 

21 to 25 9.7 14.9 23 9 

25 to 30 15.4 15.4 30 9 

30 to 40 11 15.9 33 9 

40 to 50 6.9 11 50 12 

50 to 60 2 6.5 69 17 

Above 60 2.3 2.5 91 20 

• The figures for the first two periods ore not strictly exact for homicide, since criminal sta- 
tistics begin their first period at 16 years ond corry it to 21, while the census gives the total 
figure of the populotion from 15 to 20. But this slight inexactness does not in the least affect 
the general results apparent in the table. For infanticide the maximum is reached earlier, 
towards 25 years, and the decrease is much more rapid. The reason is readily surmised. 

much more numerous than attempts against life, they give the curve 
its shape. But they have no relation to homicide; so that if we wish 
to know the variations of the latter at different times of year, we 
must isolate it from the others. If this is done, and especially if we 
carefully distinguish from each other the different forms of homicidal 

^' Op. cit., p. 333. — In the Actes du congrès de Rome, p. 205, the same author 
expresses doubt, however, as to the reality of this antagonism. 



344 suicroE 

TABLE XXXII — Monthly Variations of the Different Forms of 
Homicidal Criminality ' (1827-1870) 





Unpremeditated 


Premeditated 








Murders 


Murders 


infanticides 


Manslaughter 


January 


560 


829 


647 


830 


February 


664 


926 


750 


.937 


March 


600 


766 


783 


840 


April 


574 


712 


662 


867 


May 


587 


809 


666 


983 


June 


644 


853 


552 


938 


July 


614 


776 


491 


919 


August- 


716 


849 


501 


997 


September 


665 


839 


495 


993 


October 


653 


815 


478 


892 


November 


650 


942 


497 


960 


December 


591 


866 


542 


886 



* According to Chausslnand. 

criminality, no trace of the supposed parallelism is found (see Table 
XXXII). 

Indeed, while the growth of suicide is constant and regular from 
January to about June, like its decrease during the rest of the year, 
premeditated and unpremeditated murder, and infanticide oscillate 
from month to month most capriciously. Not only is the general 
development different, but neither the maxima nor the minima coin- 
cide. Unpremeditated murders have two maxima, one in February 
and the other in August. Premeditated murders also have two, one 
being the same, February, but the other is in November. The maxi- 
mum for infanticides is in May; for manslaughter ^^ in August and 
September. If the seasonal, not the monthly variations are calculated, 
the divergencies are equally striking. Autumn has almost as many 
unpremeditated murders as Summer (1,968 as against 1,974) ^^^ 
Winter has more than Spring. For premeditated murder. Winter 
leads (2,621), Autumn follows (2,596), then Summer (2,478) 
and finally Spring (2,287). ^'^^ infanticide Spring surpasses the 
other seasons (2,111) and is followed by Winter (1,939). ^'^^ man- 
slaughter. Summer and Autumn are on the same level (2,854 ^'^^ 
one and 2,845 for the other); then comes Spring (2,690) and, not 
far away. Winter (2,653). The distribution of suicide is entirely 
different, as we have seen. 

Besides, if the tendency to suicide were only a repressed tendency 

3^ The French legal terms "coups mortel" and "blessures mortels" — mortal blows 
and mortal wounds — refer in this context to that variety of homicide which we 
know as "manslaughter" and they are so translated here. They constitute uninten- 
tional homicide resulting from an act of violence itself not unintentional. — Ed. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 345 

to murder, as soon as murderers and assassins are arrested and their 
violent instincts can no longer find external expression, they should 
become their own victims. The homicidal tendency should therefore 
be transformed into the suicidal tendency under the influence of im- 
prisonment. On the contrary, it seems from the testimony of several 
observers that great criminals rarely kill themselves. Cazauvieilh gath- 
ered from the physicians of our different convict prisons information 
concerning the frequency of suicide among convicts.^'^ At Rochefort 
only a single case had been observed in thirty years; none at Toulon, 
where the population was usually from 3,000 to 4,000 ( 1818-1834) . 
At Brest the results obtained were a little different; in seventeen 
years, in an average population of about 3,000, 13 suicides had been 
committed, making an annual rate of 21 per 100,000. Although 
higher than the preceding, this figure is not excessive, since it refers 
to a population chiefly male and adult. According to Dr. Lisle, "out 
of 9,320 deaths registered in convict prisons from 18 16 to 1837 
inclusively, only 6 suicides were recorded." ^^ From a study by Dr. 
Ferrus it appears that only 30 suicides occurred in seven years in the 
different regional jails, in an average population of 15,111 prisoners. 
But the proportion was still lower in the convict prisons, where only 
5 suicides were recorded from 1838 to 1845 in an average population 
of 7,041.^^ Brierre de Boismont confirms the fact last mentioned, 
adding: "Professional assassins and great criminals have less fre- 
quent recourse to this violent means of escaping penal atonement 
than prisoners of less perversity." ^^ Dr. Leroy similarly remarks that 
"professional rogues, habitual convicts" rarely make attempts upon 
their own lives. ^^ 

Two statistical records, one quoted by Morselli ^^ and the other 
by Lombroso,^^ do indeed tend to prove that prisoners are in general 
unusually disposed to suicide. But as these documents do not distin- 
guish murderers and assassins from other criminals, nothing can be 
concluded as to the question before us. They even seem rather to con- 

3^ Op. cit., pp. 310 ff. 

38 Op. cit., p. 67. 

3' Des prisonniers, de I'imprisonnement et des prisons, Paris, 1850, p. 133. 

<" Op. cit., p. 95. 

*^ Le suicide dans le département de Seine-et-Marne. 

^2 Op. cit., p. 377. 

"•^ L'homme criminel, Fr. trans, p. 338. 



34^ suicroE 

firm the above observations. In fact they prove that imprisonment by 
itself develops a very strong tendency to suicide. Even if no account 
is made of persons who kill themselves immediately upon arrest and 
before condemnation, a considerable number of suicides remains 
which can only be attributed to the influence of prison life.^"* But 
then the imprisoned murderer ought to have a very pronounced dis- 
position for voluntary death, if the aggravation resulting from his 
mere imprisonment were reenforced by the congenital predisposition 
ascribed to him. The fact that, from this point of view, he is rather 
below than above the average, is therefore hardly favorable to the 
hypothesis that merely because of his temperament he has a natural 
affinity for suicide, ever ready to manifest itself as soon as circum- 
stances favor its development. Besides, we do not mean to affirm 
that he enjoys a real immunity; the information at our disposal is not 
sufficient to settle the question. Possibly, under certain conditions, 
great criminals hold their lives fairly cheaply and surrender them 
without great reluctance. But at least the fact does not have the gen- 
erality and inevitability tliat the Italian thesis logically involves. And 
this is all we had to establish. '^^ > 

IV 

But it remains to discuss this school's second proposition. Granted 
that homicide and suicide do not stem from the same psychological 
state, we must see if there is any real antagonism between the social 
conditions on which they depend. 

The question is more complex than the Italian authors and several 
of their adversaries have thought. Certainly, the law of inversion is 
not verified in a number of cases. Fairly often the two phenomena 

^* Of what does this influence consist? It seems due in part, certainly, to cell life. 
But we should not be surprised if the community-life of the prison were apt to 
have the same effects. The society of evil-doers and prisoners is known to be very 
coherent; the individual disappears completely and prison discipline has the same 
effacing tendency. Something similar to what we have observed in the army may 
take place. What confirms this hypothesis is that epidemics of suicide are frequent 
in prisons as well as in barracks. 

*5 Statistics reported by Ferri {Omicidio, p. 373) are no more conclusive. From 
1866 to 1876, 17 suicides were committed in Italian convict prisons by convicts 
condemned for crimes against persons, and only 5 committed by convicts guilty of 
crimes against property. But the former are much more numerous in convict prisons 
than the latter. These figures are therefore wholly inconclusive. Besides, we do not 
know whence the author of these statistics took the data he uses. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 347 

develop in a parallel manner instead of repulsing and excluding one 
another. Thus in France unpremeditated murders have shown a cer- 
tain tendency to increase since the end of the war of 1870. In annual 
average they numbered only 105 during the years 1861-65; from 
1 87 1 to 1876 they rose to 163 and during the same time premedi- 
tated murders rose from 175 to 201. Now suicides were increasing 
in considerable proportions at the same time. The same phenomenon 
had occurred during the years 1840-50. In Prussia suicides, which 
from 1865 to 1870 had not gone beyond 3,658, reached 4,459 in 
1876, 5,042 in 1878, an increase of 36 per cent. Premeditated and 
unpremeditated murders followed the same course; from 151 in 
1869 they rose successively to 166 in 1874, 221 in 1875, 253 in 
1878, an increase of 67 per cent.^*' The same thing happend in 
Saxony. Before 1870 suicides oscillated between 600 and 700; only 
once, in 1868, there were 800. Beginning with 1876 they rose to 
981, then to 1,114, to 1,126, until finally in 1880 they were 1,171.^'^ 
In parallel manner attempts at murder rose from 637 in 1873 to 
2,232 in 1878.^^ In Ireland, from 1865 to 1880, suicide increased 
29 per cent, and homicide also increased and in almost the same de- 
gree (23 per cent).'*^ In Belgium, from 1841 to 1885, homicides in- 
creased from 47 to 139 and suicides from 240 to 670; an increase of 
195 per cent for the first and 178 per cent for the second. These 
figures agree so little with the law that Ferri is reduced to question- 
ing the exactness of the Belgian statistics. But even if we confine our- 
selves to the most recent years, the data for which are least suspect, 
the same result is reached. From 1874 to 1885 the increase for homi- 
cides is 51 per cent (139 cases as against 92) and, for suicides, 79 
per cent (670 cases as against 374). 

The geographical distribution of the two phenomena gives rise to 
similar comment. The French departments with most suicides are: 
the Seine, Seine-et-Marne, Seine-et-Oise, Marne. Now, though they 
are not also highest in homicide, they still occupy a fairly high rank, 
the Seine being 26th in unpremeditated murders and 17th in pre- 
meditated murders, Seine-et-Marne 33rd and 14th, Seine-et-Oise 

*^ According to Oettingen, Moralstatistik, supplement, table 6i. 

*^ Ibid., table 109. 

^^Ibid., table 65. 

*^ According to Ferri's own tables. 



348 SUICIDE 

15th and 24th, Marne 27th and 21st respectively. Var, which is loth 
for suicides, is 5 th for premeditated and 6th for unpremeditated mur- 
ders. In Bouches-du-Rhône, where suicides are frequent, murders arc 
likewise so; it is in the 5th rank for unpremeditated and the 6th for 
premeditated.^" On the suicide-map as on that for homicide, Ile-de- 
France is represented by a dark area like that of the strip containing 
the Mediterranean departments, with the only difference that the 
former region is of a less deep shade on the map of homicides than 
on the suicide-map and that the reverse is true of the second region. 
Likewise in Italy, Rome which is the third judicial district for sui- 
cides is also the fourth for qualified homicides. Finally, as we have 
seen, suicides are often very numerous in lower societies where there 
is little respect for life. 

But incontestable as these facts are, and important as it is not 
to lose sight of them, there are contradictory facts equally stable 
and even much more numerous. If the two phenomena agree at least 
partially in certain cases, in others they are obviously in opposition: 

I. Although at certain moments during the century they move in 
the same direction, the two curves taken as wholes contrast very 
clearly, at least where they can be followed for any considerable pe- 
riod. In France, from 1826 to 1880, suicide regularly increases, as 
we have seen; homicide on the contrary tends to decrease, though 
less rapidly. In 1826-30 there were on the average 279 annual in- 
dictments for unpremeditated murder, only 160 in 1876-80 and, dur- 
ing the interval, the number had fallen to 121 in 1861-65 and to 119 
in 1856-60. At two periods, about 1845 and just after the war, there 
was a tendency to rise; but if these secondary oscillations are disre- 
garded, the general tendency to decrease is clear. The diminution is 
43 per cent, all the more noticeable since the population increased 
by 16 per cent at the same time. 

Regression is less clear for premeditated murder. There were 258 
indicted in 1826-30, there were still 239 in 1876-80. The fall is 
notable only if the increase in population is taken into account. This 
difference in the evolution of this type of murder has nothing sur- 
prising about it. It is actually a crime of mixed nature, having ele- 
ments in common with unpremeditated murder but also different 

^^ This classification of departments is from Bournet, De la Criminalité en France 
et en Italie, Paris, 1884, pp. 41 and 51. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 349 

ones; in part it springs from other causes. Sometimes it is merely a 
more deliberate and intentional murder, sometimes only the incident 
of a crime against property. On the last score it depends on other fac- 
tors than those determining homicide. These are not the sum of the 
varied tendencies which lead to the shedding of blood but the very 
different motives which lie at the root of robbery. The dual nature of 
both crimes was obvious even in the table of their monthly and sea- 
sonal variations. Premeditated murder reaches its height in Winter 
and especially in November, just as do attempts at robbery. The evo- 
lution of the trend of homicide cannot therefore be best observed 
through the variations of premeditated murder; its general orienta- 
tion is better brought out by the curve of unpremeditated murder. 

The same phenomenon is observed in Prussia. In 1834, 368 pre- 
liminary investigations were instituted for murders or manslaughter, 
or one per 29,000 inhabitants; in 1851 there were only 257, one for 
53,000 inhabitants. The movement then continued though a little 
more slowly. In 1852 there was still one preliminary investigation 
for 76,000 inhabitants; in 1873 only one for 109,000.''^ In Italy, 
from 1875 to 1890, the decrease in simple and qualified homicides 
was 18 per cent (2,660 as against 3,280) while suicides increased 
80 per cent.^2 Where homicide does not lose, neither does it gain. In 
England, from i860 to 1865, there were annually 359 cases, but only 
329 in 1881-85; ^^ Austria there were 528 in 1866-70, but only 
510 in 1881-85,°' ^"<^ if ^^ these countries homicide were differen- 
tiated from premeditated murder, the regression would probably be 
more marked. During the same time, suicide was increasing in all 
these States. 

Nevertheless, Tarde undertook to show that this diminution of 
homicide in France was only apparent.''* It is supposed to be due 
simply to the failure to combine cases judged by the courts of assize 
and those classified by the lawyers as not to be carried further, which 
ended in decrees of insufficient grounds. According to Tarde, the 
number of murders which were thus not prosecuted and which for 
this reason do not figure in the totals of judicial statistics has grown 

" Starke, Verbrechen und Verbrecher in Preussen, Berlin, 1884, pp. 144 flF. 

" According to Ferri's tables. 

'^ See Bosco, Gli Omicidii in alcuni Stati d'Europa, Rome, 1889. 

^ Philosophie pénale, pp. 347-48. 



350 suicroE 

constantly; by adding them to like crimes on which judgment has 
been passed, a constant increase would appear instead of the regres- 
sion above mentioned. Unfortunately, his proof of this assertion de- 
pends on too ingenious an arrangement of the figures. He merely 
compares the number of premeditated and unpremeditated murders 
not deferred to jurisdiction at the courts of assize during the five 
years 1861-65 with that of the years 1876-80 and 1880-85, ^^'^ 
shows that the second and especially the third is greater than the first. 
But it happens that the period 1861-65 is the one of all the century 
when there were much the fewest such cases estopped before judge- 
ment; the number is exceptionally minute, for unknown reasons. So 
it was the most improper period for comparison possible. Moreover, 
a law cannot be arrived at from the comparison of two or three fig- 
ures. If Tarde, instead of choosing such a starting point, had observed 
the variations of the number of these cases over a longer period, he 
would have reached a wholly different conclusion. The following is 
the result suggested by doing so. 

Number of Cases Not Prosecuted ^^ 

1835-38 1839-40 1846-50 1861-65 1876-80 1880-85 

Unpremeditated murders 442 503 408 223 322 322 

Premeditoted murders 313 320 333 217 231 252 

The variation of the figures is not very regular; but from 1835 to 
1885 they have perceptibly decreased in spite of the rise about 1876. 
The diminution is 37 per cent for unpremeditated murders and 24 
per cent for premeditated. Nothing therefore permits the conclusion 
that there was an increase in the criminality in question.^^ 

5^ Certain of these cases are not prosecuted because they are neither crimes nor 
delicts. They should therefore be deducted. However we avoided this in order to 
follow our author on his own ground ; besides, we are confident that this deduction 
would change nothing in the results shown by the above figures. 

^^ A secondary consideration, offered by the same author in support of his thesis, 
is no less unconvincing. According to this, one should also consider the homicides 
erroneously classed among voluntary or accidental deaths. Now, since the number 
of both has increased since the beginning of the century, he concludes that the sum 
of homicides under one or the other of these two classifications must have grown 
equally. Here, he says, is another serious increase which we must consider 
in order to estimate the course of homicide correctly. — But his reasoning is based 
on a confusion of ideas. It does not follow from the fact that the number of ac- 
cidental and voluntary deaths has grown, that the same is true of the homicides 
wrongly assigned to this classification. From the increase in suicides and accidents it 
does not follow that there are also more false suicides and false accidents. For such 
a hypothesis to possess any probability, it would have to be shown that the ad- 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 35 1 

2. If there are countries which accumulate suicides and homicides, 
it is never in the same proportions; the two manifestations never 
reach their maximum intensity at the same point. It is even a general 
rule that where homicide is very common it confers a sort of immu- 
nity against suicide. 

Spain, Ireland and Italy are the three countries of Europe where 
there is least suicide; the first has 17 cases per million inhabitants, 
the second 21 and the third 37. Inversely, nowhere else is murder so 
common. These are the only countries where the number of murders 
exceeds that of voluntary deaths. Spain has thrice as many of one as 
of the other (1,484 homicides on the average during the years 
1885-89 and only 514 suicides); Ireland twice as many (225 of 
one and 116 of the other); Italy one and a half times as many 
(2,322 as against 1,437), On the contrary, France and Prussia 
abound in suicides (160 and 260 cases per million); homicides 
there are only one-tenth as numerous: France has only 734 cases and 
Prussia 459 per average year for the period 1882-88. 

The same proportions appear within each country. In Italy, on the 
m.ap of suicides, the entire North is dark, the South absolutely clear; 
but exactly the reverse is true on the map of homicides. Moreover, if 
the Italian provinces are divided into two classes according to their 
suicide-rates and if the average rate of homicides in each is sought, 
the contrast appears most strikingly: 

ist class From 4.1 suicides to 30 per million 271.9 homicides per million 
2nd class From 30 suicides to 80 per million 95.2 homicides per million 

The province where there are most murders is Calabria, with 69 
qualified homicides per million; there is none where suicide is so 
rare. 

In France, the departments where most murders are committed are 
Corsica, Pyrénées-Orientales, Lozère and Ardèche. With respect to 

ministrative or judicial inquests in the doubtful cases are more poorly conducted 
than formerly; a supposition for which we know of no foundation. Tarde, to be 
sure, is surprised at the contemporary increase in deaths by submersion, and in this 
increase is inclined to see a hidden increase in the number of homicides. But the 
number of deaths by lightning has increased much more; it has doubled. Criminal 
malevolence had nothing to do with this. The truth is, first, that statistical tabula- 
tions are computed more exactly and, as for the cases of submersion, that more 
frequent sea bathing, more active harbors and more numerous river vessels occasion 
more accidents. 



352 SUICIDE 

suicides, Corsica falls from first place to 85th, Pyrénées-Orientales to 
63rd, Lo2ère to 83rd and Ardèche to 68th.^'^ 

In Austria suicide is at its maximum in Lower Austria, in Bo- 
hemia and in Moravia, while it is rare in Carniola and Dalmatia. On 
the contrary Dalmatia has 79 homicides per million inhabitants and 
Carniola 57.4, while Lower Austria has only 14, Bohemia 11 and 
Moravia 15. 

3. We have shown that wars have a restraining effect on the de- 
velopment of suicide. They have the same effect on robberies, frauds, 
abuses of confidence, etc. But one crime is an exception: homicide. 
In France, in 1870, unpremeditated murders which averaged 119 
for the years 1866-69 rose abruptly to 133 and then to 224 in 1871, 
an increase of 88 per cent,^^ falling to 162 in 1872. This increase 
will appear still more important if we reflect that the age at which 
most murders are committed is about thirty and that all young men 
were then with the colors. So that the crimes they would have com- 
mitted in time of peace do not appear in statistical calculations. No 
doubt moreover, the confusion of judicial administration must have 
prevented more than one crime from being known or more than one 
preliminary investigation from ending in prosecution. If the number 
of homicides increased in spite of these two causes of diminution, 
the seriousness of the real rise may be surmised. 

In Prussia, likewise, when war broke out against Denmark in 
1864, homicides rose from 137 to 169, a level they had not reached 
since 1854; in 1865 they fell to 153, but rose again in 1866 (159), 
although the Prussian army had been mobilized. In 1870 a slight fall 
in comparison with 1869 is registered (151 cases as against 185) 
which is accentuated in 187 1 (136 cases) , but how much less than for 
other crimes! At the same time, robberies qualified as crimes sank by 
one half, 4,599 in 1870 as against 8,676 in 1869. Moreover, unpre- 
meditated and premeditated murders are included together in these 
figures; but these two crimes do not have the same significance and 
we know that in France also only the former increase in wartime. So 
that if the whole decrease of all sorts of homicides is not greater, one 

^^ The inversion is less marked for premeditated murder; which confirms what 
was said above of the mixed character of this crime. 

^^ Premeditated murders, on the contrary, which were 200 in 1869, 215 in 1868, 
fall to 162 in 1870. The great difference between these two kinds of crime is clear. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 



353 



may believe that if premeditated murders were eliminated the unpre- 
meditated would show a considerable rise. Besides, if all cases un- 
doubtedly omitted for the two reasons above mentioned were added, 
this apparent fall would be reduced to very little. Finally, it is very 
strange that involuntary murders rose then very perceptibly, from 
268 in 1869 to 303 in 1870 and 310 in 1871.^® Does this not prove 
that less value was set upon life at that time than in time of peace? 

Political crises have the same effect. In France, while the curve of 
unpremeditated murders had remained stationary from 1840 to 
1846, it rose abruptly in 1848 and reached a maximum of 240 in 
1849.®^ The same thing had already happened during the first years 
of Louis Philippe's reign. The struggles of political parties were then 
very violent. It was just then that unpremeditated murders reached 
their highest point throughout the entire century. From 204 in 1830 
they rose to 264 in 1831, a figure never exceeded; in 1832 they were 
still 253 and in 1833, 257. In 1834 an abrupt fall occurred which in- 
creased steadily; in 1838 there were only 145 cases, a reduction of 
44 per cent. During this time suicide was developing in the opposite 
direction. In 1833 it was at the same level as in 1829 (1,973 cases 
on the one hand, 1,904 on the other) ; then in 1834 a very rapid rise 
began. In 1838 the increase was 30 per cent. 

4. Suicide is much more urban than rural. The opposite is true of 
homicide. By combining unpremeditated murders, parricides and in- 
fanticides, we find that in 1887, ii.i crimes of this nature were com- 
mitted in the country and only 8.6 in cities. In 1880 the figures are 
about the same; respectively ii.o and 9.3. 

5. We have seen that Catholicism reduces the tendency to suicide 
while Protestantism increases it. Inversely, homicides are much more 
frequent in Catholic countries than among Protestant peoples : 





Simple 


Premeditated 




Si 


mole 


Premeditated 


Catholic 


Homicides 


M 


urders 


Protestant 


Homicides 


Murders 


Countries 


per Million 


per 


Million 


Countries 


per 


Million 


per Million 


Italy 


70 




23.1 


Germany 




3.4 


3.3 


Spain 


64.9 




8.2 


England 




3.9 


1.7 


Hungary 


56.2 




11.9 


Denmark 




4.6 


3.7 


Austria 


10.2 




8.7 


Holland 




3.1 


2.5 


Ireland 


8.1 




2.3 


Scotland 




4.4 


0.70 


Belgium 


8.5 




4.2 










Fronce 


6.4 




5.6 











Averoges 32.1 



9.1 



Averages 



3.8 



2.3 



53 According to Starke, op. cit., p. 133. 

6" Premeditated murders remain about stationary. 



354 suicroE 

The contrast between these two groups of societies is especially 
striking as regards simple homicide. 

The same contrast appears within Germany. The districts most 
above the average are all Catholic: Posen (18.2 premeditated and 
unpremeditated murders per million inhabitants), Donau (16.7), 
Bromberg (14.8), Upper and Lower Bavaria (13.0). Within Ba- 
varia, likewise, the fewer Protestants in a province, so much the 
greater its abundance in homicides: 











Premedi- 






Premeditated 




tated and 




Premeditated & 


and Unpre- 




Unpremedi- 




Unpremeditated 


meditated 




tated Mur- 


Catholic 


Murders 


Catholic Murders 


More Than 


ders per 


Minority 


per Million 


Majority per Million 


90% Catholic 


Million 


Rhine 










Palatinate 


2.8 


Lower 


Upper 




Central 




Franconia 9 


Palatinate 


4.3 


Franconia 


6.9 




Upper 




Upper 






Bavaria 


13.0 


Franconia 


6.9 


Swobia 9.2 


Lower 
Bavaria 


13.0 


Average 


53 


Average 9.1 


Average 


10.1 



Only the Upper Palatinate is an exception to the law. Besides, we 
need only compare the above table with that on page 353 for the in- 
verse proportion between the distribution of suicide and that of 
homicide to appear clearly. 

6. Finally, while family life has a moderating effect upon suicide, 
it rather stimulates murder. During the years 1884-87, a million 
married men showed on the average 5.07 murders per year; a mil- 
lion unmarried above 15 years, 12.7. The former therefore seem to 
enjoy a coefficient of preservation with relation to the latter of about 
2.3. Only we must remember that the two categories of persons are 
not of the same age and that the intensity of the homicidal tendency 
varies at the different periods of life. The unmarried average from 
25 to 30 years, married men about 45. Now the tendency to murder 
is maximal between 25 and 30 years; a million individuals of this 
age show 15.4 murders annually while at 45 years the rate is only 6.9. 
The proportion of the first to the second number is 2.2. Thus, merely 
because of their greater age, married men would commit only half 
as many murders as unmarried. Their apparently privileged situation 
therefore does not depend on the fact that they are married, but on 
the fact that they are older. Domestic life gives them no immunity. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 355 

Not only does it furnish no protection against homicide but it more 
probably supplies a stimulus to it. It is probable indeed that the mar- 
ried population has, on principle, a higher morality than the unmar- 
ried. We believe that it owes this superiority less to matrimonial 
selection, the effects of which however are not negligible, than to the 
actual influence of the family on each of its members. A person is 
almost certainly less well insured morally when isolated and left to 
himself than when constantly under the beneficent discipline of fam- 
ily surroundings. If then, so far as homicide is concerned, married 
men are not better off than unmarried men, it is because the moraliz- 
ing influence they undergo, which should deflect them from all sorts 
of crime, is partly neutralized by an aggravating influence, which im- 
pels them to murder and which must be connected with family lif e.^^ 

By way of summary, then, suicide sometimes coexists with homi- 
cide, sometimes they are mutually exclusive; sometimes they react 
under the same conditions in the same way, sometimes in opposite 
ways, and the antagonistic cases are the most numerous. How explain 
the^ apparently contradictory facts? 

(The only way to reconcile them is by admitting that there are dif- 
ferent sorts of suicide, some of which have a certain kinship to homi- 
cide, while it is repugnant to others. 1|^or the identical phenomenon 
cannot possibly behave so differently under the same circumstances. 
The suicide which varies in the same proportion with murder and 
that which varies inversely with it cannot be of like nature. 

Actually we have shown that there are different types of suicide, 
the characteristics of which are not at all the same. The conclusion of 
the preceding book is thus confirmed, while also serving to explain 
the facts just set forth. They would have suflaced by themselves to 
suggest the inner diversity of suicide; but the hypothesis ceases to be 
only an hypothesis when confronted with the results just previously 
obtained, while these receive a supplementary confirmation from this 
interconnection. Now that we know the different sorts of suicide and 
of what they consist, we may even easily perceive which are incom- 
patible with homicide; which, on the contrary, depend partly on the 

^1 These remarks, however, are intended rather to raise than to settle the question. 
It could be settled only if the influences of age and of marital status were isolated, 
as we have done for suicide. 



356 suicroE 

same causes; and why incompatibility is the more common phe- 
nomenon. 

The type of suicide actually the most widespread and which con- 
tributes most to raise the annual total of voluntary deaths is egoistic 
suicide?^It is characterized by a state of depression and apathy pro- 
duced by exaggerated individuation. The individual no longer cares 
to live because he no longer cares enough for the only medium which 
attaches him to reality, that is to say, for society.Q|j[aving too keen a 
feeling for himself and his own value, he wishes to be his own only 
goal, and as such an objective cannot satisfy him, drags out languidly 
and indifferently an existence which henceforth seems meaningless to 
him. Homicide depends on opposite conditions. It is a violent act in- 
separable from passion.lNow, whenever society is integrated in such 
a way that the individuation of its parts is weakly emphasized, the 
intensity of collective states of conscience raises the general level of 
the life of the passions; it is even true that no soil is so favorable to 
the development of the specifically homicidal passions. Where family 
spirit has retained its ancient strength, offences against the family 
are regarded as sacrileges which cannot be too cruelly avenged and 
the vengeance for which cannot be left to third persons. This is the 
source of the practice of vendetta which still leaves its bloody trace 
on our Corsica and certain southern countries. Where religious faith 
is very intense, it often inspires murders and this is also true of po- 
litical faith. 

Moreover and above all, the homicidal current, generally speaking, 
is more violent the less it is restrained by the public conscience, that 
is, the more venial attempts against life are considered; and since, 
less weight is attached to them, the less value common morality at- 
taches to the individual and his interests, weak individuation or, to 
use our term again, a state of excessive altruism, impels to homicides. 
This is why they are both frequent and little repressed in lower so- 
cities. This frequency and the relative indulgence accorded homicides 
spring from one and the same cause. The less respect there is for in- 
dividual persons, the more they are exposed to violence, while this 
violence at the same time appears less criminal. Egoistic suicide and 
homicide, therefore, spring from antagonistic causes, and conse- 
quently it is impossible for the one to develop readily where the 
other flourishes. Where social passions are strong, men are much less 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 357 

inclined either to idle revery or to cold, epicurean calculation. When 
man is used to set little value on individual destinies, he is not in- 
clined to much self-interrogation concerning his own destiny. When 
he cares little for human pain, he feels the weight of his personal 
sufferings less. 

fOn. the contrary, and for the same reasons, altruistic suicide and 
ftcTmicide may get along very well together; for they depend on con- 
ditions different only in degree!]When one is trained to think little 
of his own life, he cannot have much regard for another's. For this 
reason homicides and voluntary deaths are equally endemic among 
certain primitive peoples. But the cases of parallelism which we have 
found among civilized nations probably cannot be attributed to the 
same source. A state of exaggerated altruism cannot have produced 
the suicides which we have occasionally found to coexist ia great 
numbers with murders in the most cultivated environments. Tor al- 
truism must be extraordinarily strong to impel to suicide, even 
stronger than to give the impulse to homicide. In fact, however low 
an estimate I put on individual life in general, I shall always value 
my own individual life more than that of others. All things being 
equal, the average man tends to respect human personality in himself 
more than in his fellows; consequently, a more powerful cause is re- 
quired to destroy this sentiment of respect in the first case than in 
the second. Now today, outside of some few special environments 
like the army, the taste for impersonality and renunciation is too little 
pronounced and the opposite feelings too strong and general to make 
self-immolation so easy as thj^ There must therefore be another, 
more modern form of suicide, equally capable of combination with 
homicide. 

This is anomic suicide.) Anomy, in fact, begets a state of exaspera- 
tion and irritated weariness which may turn against the person him- 
self or another according to circumstances; in the first case, we have 
suicide, in the second, homicide. The causes determining the direc- 
tion of such over-excited forces probably depend on the agent's 
moral constitution. According to its greater or less resistance, it will 
incline one way rather than the other. A man of low morality will 
kill another rather than himself. We have even seen that these two 
manifestations sometimes occur one after the other and that they are 
only two aspects of a single act, which shows their close relation- 



358 SUICIDE 

ship. The exacerbated condition of the individual is then such that it 
requires two victims to be assuaged. 

This is why there exists today, especially in great centers and re- 
gions of intense civilization, a certain parallelism between the devel- 
opment of homicide and that of suicide. It is because anomy is in an 
acute state there. The same cause prevents murders from decreasing 
as rapidly as suicides increase. Though the advance of individualism 
closes off one of the sources of homicide, anomy, accompanying eco- 
nomic development, opens another. It is particularly probable that if 
in France and especially in Prussia the slaying of one's self and the 
slaying of others have increased simultaneously since the war, the 
reason is the increase of moral instability in both countries, though 
for different causes. This is, finally, also the explanation why antagon- 
ism is the commoner relation, in spite of these partial correspond- 
ences. Anomic suicide occurs in large numbers only at special points, 
where industrial and commercial activity are very great. Egoistic sui- 
cide is probably the most widespread; but this precludes sanguinary 
crime. ^ 

We thus reach the following conclusion.^ suicide and homicide 
often vary inversely to one another, it is not because they are two dif- 
ferent aspects of the same phenomenon; but because in some respects 
they form two opposed social currents?NJ[n these respects they are as 
mutually exclusive as day and night, just as the diseases of extreme 
drought preclude those of extreme humidity. If this general opposi- 
tion still does not completely prevent harmony, it is because certain 
types of suicide, instead of depending on causes opposed to those 
which occasion homicide, are on the contrary expressions of the same 
social condition and develop in the midst of the same moral environ- 
ment. Besides, it may be anticipated that homicides which coexist 
with anomic suicide and those which are reconcilable with altruistic 
suicide cannot be of the same nature; that homicide, therefore, like 
suicide is not a single, indivisible criminological entity, but must in- 
clude a variety of species very different from one another. But this 
is not the place to dwell on this important proposition of crimi- 
nology. 

It is inexact, then, to say that suicide has desirable counter-effects 
which lessen its immorality, and that it may therefore be well not 
to interfere with its spread. It is not a derivative of homicide. 



RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL PHENOMENA 359 

Doubtless, the moral constitution on which egoistic suicide depends 
and that which retards murder among the most civilized peoples are 
closely related. But the victim of this sort of suicide, far from being 
an abortive murderer, has nothing of the murderer about him. He is 
a sad, depressed person. His act may accordingly be condemned with- 
out transforming those in the same class with him into assassins. 
Will it be objected that condemning suicide is a simultaneous con- 
demnation, and consequent weakening of the state of mind which 
gives rise to it, that is, a condemnation and weakening of that hyper- 
aesthesia for everything relating to the individual? And that by so 
doing we risk strengthening the taste for impersonality and for the 
homicide which springs from this impersonality? But to restrain the 
inclination to murder, individualism need not attain this excessive in- 
tensity which makes it a source of suicide. For the individual to be 
averse to shedding the blood of his fellows, it is not imperative that 
he care for nothing but himself. He need only love and respect 
human personality generally. The tendency to individuation may 
therefore be restrained within proper limits without the tendency to 
homicide being thereby strengthened. 

As for anomy, since it produces both homicide and suicide, what- 
ever checks it checks both of these. There need be no fear that, if 
prevented from appearing in the form of suicide, it may be trans- 
lated into more numerous murders; for a man sensitive enough to 
moral discipline to renounce suicide out of respect for the public con- 
science and its prohibitions will be much less inclined to homicide 
which is more severely reproved and repressed. Besides, we have 
seen that the best types kill themselves in such cases, so that there is 
no reason to favor a selection which would be retrogressive. 

This chapter may help to solve an often debated problem. 

The discussions are well-known that are occasioned by the ques- 
tion whether our feelings for our fellow-men are only extensions of 
egoistic sentiments or, on the contrary, independent of them. We 
have just seen that both hypotheses are baseless. Certainly, pity for 
another and pity for ourselves are not foreign to each other, since 
their development or recession is parallel; but one does not spring 
from the other. If a bond of kinship exists between them, it is their 
common derivation from a single state of the collective conscience, 



360 suicroE 

of which they are only different aspects. What they express is the 
manner in which public opinion estimates the moral value of the in- 
dividual in general. If the individual looms large in public estima- 
tion, we apply this social judgement to others as well as to ourselves; 
their persons, as well as our own, assume more value in our eyes, 
and we become more sensitive to whatever concerns each of them 
individually as well as to what concerns us particularly. Their griefs, 
like our own, are more readily intolerable to us. Our sympathy for 
them is not, accordingly, a mere extension of what we feel for our- 
selves. But both are effects of one cause and constituted by the same 
moral state. Of course this varies, depending on whether it is ap- 
plied to ourselves or to others; in the first case our egoistic instincts 
reenforce it, in the second, weaken it. But it exists and is active in 
both cases. So true is it that even the feelings apparently most associ- 
ated with the individual's personal temperament depend on causes 
greater than himself! Our very egoism is in large part a product of 
society. 



CHAPTER 3 PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 



^o. 



^w that we know what suicide is, its species and its principal 
laws, we must seek to find what attitude present-day societies should 
take toward it. 

But this question itself presupposes another. Should the present 
state of suicide among civilized peoples be considered as normal or 
abnormal? According to the solution one adopts, he will consider 
reforms necessary and possible with a view to restraining it, or, on 
the contrary, will agree, not without censure, to accept it as it is. 

I 

Some are perhaps astonished that this question could be raised. 

It is true, we usually regard everything immoral as abnormal. 
Therefore, if suicide offends the public conscience, as has been estab- 
lished, it seems impossible not to see in it a phenomenon of social 
pathology. But we have shown elsewhere ^ that even the preeminent 
form of immorality, crime itself, need not necessarily be classed 
among morbid manifestations. To be sure, this declaration shocked 
certain persons and may have seemed, on superficial examination, to 
shake the foundations of morality. Nevertheless there is nothing sub- 
versive about it. To assure one's self one need only refer to the argu- 
ment on which it rests, which may be summarized as follows. 

Either the word disease means nothing or it means something 
avoidable. Doubtless, not everything avoidable is morbid, but what- 
ever is morbid may be avoided, at least by most people. Without 

1 See Règles de la Méthode sociologique, chap. III. 

361 



362 SUICIDE 

abandoning all distinctions of ideas and terms alike, one cannot call 
a state or characteristic morbid which members of a species cannot 
avoid having, one necessarily implied in their constitution. On the 
other hand, we have only one objective and empirically determinable 
sign, controllable by others, by which we may recognize the existence 
of this necessity: universality. When two facts always and everywhere 
occur together without a single cited exception, it is contrary to all 
methodology to suppose that they can be separated. Not that one is 
always the other's cause. The bond between them may be mediate,^ 
but it exists and is necessary, none the less. 

Now there is no society known where a more or less developed 
criminality is not found under different forms. No people exists 
whose morality is not daily infringed upon. We must therefore call 
crime necessary and declare that it cannot be non-existent, that the 
fundamental conditions of social organization, as they are under- 
stood, logically imply it. Consequently it is normal. It is useless to 
invoke the inevitable imperfections of human nature and maintain 
that evil does not cease to be evil even though it cannot be prevented; 
this is the preacher's language, not the scholar's. A necessary imper- 
fection is not a disease; otherwise disease would have to be postu- 
lated everywhere, since imperfection is everywhere. No organic 
function, no anatomical form exists, some further perfection of 
which may not be conceived. It has been said that an oculist would 
blush to have constructed so crude an instrument of vision as the 
human eye. But from this it has not been and could not be concluded 
that the structure of this organ is abnormal. Moreover, to employ 
the somewhat theological language of our adversaries, whatever is nec- 
essary must have some perfection in it. Whatever is an indispensa- 
ble condition of life cannot fail to he useful, unless life itself is not 
useful. The proposition is inescapable. And we have actually shown 
how crime may be of service. But it serves only when reproved and 
repressed. The mere fact of cataloguing it among the phenomena of 
normal sociology has been wrongly thought to imply its absolution. 
If it is normal that there should be crimes, it is normal that they 
should be punished. Punishment and crime are two terms of an in- 

2 And is not every logical connection thus mediate ? Close as the two terms it 
connects may be, they are always distinct, and thus there is always a space, a logical 
interval between them. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 363 

separable pair. One is as indispensable as the other. Every abnormal 
relaxation of the system of repression results in stimulating crimi- 
nality and giving it an abnormal intensity. 

Let us apply these ideas to suicide. 

We have not sufficient data, it is true, to be sure that there is no 
society where suicide is not found. Statistics on suicide are available 
to us for only a small number of peoples. For the rest, the existence 
of chronic suicide can be proved only by the traces it leaves in legis- 
lation. Now, we do not know with certainty that suicide has every- 
where been the object of juridical regulation. But we may affirm 
that this is usually the case. It is sometimes proscribed, sometimes 
reproved; sometimes its interdiction is formal, sometimes it includes 
reservations and exceptions. But all analogies permit the belief that 
it can never have remained a matter of indifference to law and 
morality; that is, it has always been sufficiently important to attract 
the attention of the public conscience. At any rate, it is certain that 
suicidogenetic currents of different intensity, depending on the his- 
torical period, have always existed among the peoples of Europe; sta- 
tistics prove it ever since the last century, and juridical monuments 
prove it for earlier periods. Suicide is therefore an element of their 
normal constitution, and even, probably, of any social constitution. 

It is also possible to see their mutual connection. 

This is especially true of altruistic suicide with respect to lower 
societies. Precisely because the strict subordination of the individual to 
the group is the principle on which they rest, altruistic suicide is there, 
so to speak, an indispensable procedure of their collective discipline. 
If men, there, did not set a low value on life, they would not be 
what they should be; and from the moment they value it so lightly, 
everything inevitably becomes a pretext for them to abandon it. So 
there is a close connection between the practice of this sort of suicide 
and the moral organization of this sort of society. It is the same today 
in those special settings where abnegation and impersonality are es- 
sential. Even now, military esprit can only be strong if the individual 
is self-detached, and such detachment necessarily throws the door 
open to suicide. 

For opposite reasons, in societies and environments where the dig- 
nity of the person is the supreme end of conduct, where man is a 
God to mankind, the individual is readily inclined to consider the 



364 SUICIDE 

man in himself as a God and to regard himself as the object of his 
own cult. When morality consists primarily in giving one a very 
high idea of one's self, certain combinations of circumstances readily 
suffice to make man unable to perceive anything above himself. Indi- 
vidualism is of course not necessarily egoism, but it comes close to it; 
the one cannot be stimulated without the other being enlarged. Thus, 
egoistic suicide arises. Finally, among peoples where progress is and 
should be rapid, rules restraining individuals must be sufficiently 
pliable and malleable; if they preserved all the rigidity they possess 
in primitive societies, evolution thus impeded could not take place 
promptly enough. But then inevitably, under weaker restraint, desires 
and ambitions overflow impetuously at certain points. As soon as 
men are innoculated with the precept that their duty is to progress, 
it is harder to make them accept resignation; so the number of the 
malcontent and disquieted is bound to increase. The entire morality 
of progress and perfection is thus inseparable from a certain amount 
of anomy. Hence, a definite moral constitution corresponds to each 
type of suicide and is interconnected with it. One cannot exist with- 
out the other, for suicide is only the form inevitably assumed by each 
moral constitution under certain conditions, particular, to be sure, 
but inescapably arising. 

We shall be answered that these varied currents cause suicide only 
if exaggerated; and asked whether they might not have everywhere 
a single, moderate intensity? This is wishing for the conditions of life 
to be everywhere the same, which is neither possible nor desirable. 
There are special environments in every society which are reached by 
collective states only through the latter being modified; according to 
circumstances, they are strengthened or weakened. For a current to 
have a certain strength in most of the country, it therefore has to ex- 
ceed or fail to reach this strength at certain points. 

But not only are these excesses in one or the other direction neces- 
sary; they have their uses. For if the most general state is also the 
one best adapted to the most general circumstances of social life, it 
cannot be so related with unusual circumstances; yet society must be 
capable of being adapted to both. A man in whom the taste for ac- 
tivity never surpassed the average could not maintain himself in situ- 
ations requiring an unusual effort. Likewise, a society in which intel- 
lectual individualism could not be exaggerated would be unable to 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 365 

shake off the yoke of tradition and renew its faiths, even when this 
became necessary. Inversely, where this same spiritual state could not 
on occasion be reduced enough to allow the opposite current to de- 
velop, what would happen in time of war, when passive obedience 
is the highest duty? But, for these forms of activity to be produced 
when they are needed, society must not have totally forgotten them. 
Thus, it is indispensable that they have a place in the common exist- 
ence; there must be circles where an unrelenting spirit of criticism 
and free examination is maintained, others, like the army, where 
the old religion of authority is preserved almost intact. Of course, in 
ordinary times, the influence of these special foci must be restricted 
to certain limits; since the sentiments which flourish there relate to 
particular circumstances, they must not be generalized. But if they 
must remain localized, it is equally important that they exist. This 
need will seem still clearer if we remember that societies not only 
are required to confront different situations in the course of a single 
period, but that they cannot even endure without transformation. 
Within one century, the normal proportions of individualism and al- 
truism fitting for modern peoples will no longer be the same. But 
the future would be impossible if its germs were not contained in 
the present. For a collective tendency to be able to grow weaker or 
stronger through evolution, it must not become set once for all in a 
single form, from which it could not free itself; it could not vary in 
time if it were incapable of variation in space.^ 

The different currents of collective sadness which derive from 
these three moral states have their own reasons for existence so long 
as they are not excessive. Indeed, it is wrong to believe that un- 
mixed joy is the normal state of sensibility. Man could not live if he 
were entirely impervious to sadness. Many sorrows can be endured 
only by being embraced, and the pleasure taken in them naturally 
has a somewhat melancholy character. So, melancholy is morbid only 

^ What helps make this question unclear is the failure to observe how relative 
these ideas of sickness and health are. What is normal today will no longer be so 
tomorrow, and vice versa. The large intestines of primitive man are normal for 
his environment but would not be so today. What is morbid for individuals may be 
normal for society. Neurasthenia is a sickness from the point of view of individual 
physiology; but what would a society be without neurasthenics? They really have 
a social role to play. When a state is said to be normal or abnormal, one must add, 
"With reference to this or that," or else one is misunderstood. 



366 SUICIDE 

when it occupies too much place in life; but it is equally morbid for 
it to be wholly excluded from life. The taste for happy expansive- 
ness must be moderated by the opposite taste; only on this condition 
will it retain measure and harmonize with reality. It is the same with 
societies as with individuals. Too cheerful a morality is a loose mo- 
rality; it is appropriate only to decadent peoples and is found only 
among them. Life is often harsh, treacherous or empty. Collective 
sensibility must reflect this side of existence, too. This is why there 
has to be, beside the current of optimism which impels men to re- 
gard the world confidently, an opposite current, less intense, of 
course, and less general than the first, but able to restrain it partially; 
for a tendency does not limit itself, it can never be restrained except 
by another tendency. From certain indications it even seems that the 
tendency to a sort of melancholy develops as we rise in the scale of 
social types. As we have said in another work,^ it is a quite remarka- 
ble fact that the great religions of the most civilized peoples are 
more deeply fraught with sadness than the simpler beliefs of earlier 
societies. This certainly does not mean that the current of pessimism 
is eventually to submerge the other, but it proves that it does not lose 
ground and that it does not seem destined to disappear. Now, for it 
to exist and maintain itself, there must be a special organ in society 
to serve as its substratum. There must be groups of individuals who 
more especially represent this aspect of the collective mood. But the 
part of the population which plays this role is necessarily that where 
ideas of suicide easily take root. 



But it does not follow from the fact that a suicidogenetic current 
of a certain strength must be considered as a phenomenon of normal 
sociology, that every current of the same sort is necessarily of the 
same character. If the spirit of renunciation, the love of progress, the 
taste for individuation have their place in every kind of society, and 
cannot exist without becoming generators of suicide at certain points, 
it is further necessary for them to have this property only in a certain 
measure, varying with various peoples. It is only justified if it does 
not pass certain limits. Likewise, the collective penchant for sadness 

* Division du travail social, p. 266. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 367 

is only wholesome as long as it is not preponderant. So the above re- 
marks have not settled the question whether the present status of 
suicide among civilized nations is or is not normal. We need further 
to consider whether its tremendous aggravation during the past cen- 
tury is not pathological in origin. 

It has been called the ransom-money of civilization. Certainly, it is 
general in Europe and more pronounced the higher the culture of 
European nations. In fact, it rose 411 per cent in Prussia from 1826 
to 1890, 385 per cent in France from 1826 to 1888, 318 per cent in 
German Austria from 1841-45 to 1877, 238 per cent in Saxony 
from 1841 to 1875, 212 per cent in Belgium from 1841 to 1889, 
only 72 per cent in Sweden from 1841 to 1871-75, 35 per cent in 
Denmark during the same period. Italy, since 1870, or since it be- 
came an active sharer in European civilization, saw the number of its 
suicides rise from 788 cases to 1,653, ^^ increase of 109 per cent in 
twenty years. Moreover, suicide is most widespread everywhere in 
the most cultivated regions. Thus it was conceivable that a link might 
exist between the progress of intelligence and of suicide, that one 
went hand in hand with the other; ^ this is a thesis similar to that of 
an Italian criminologist, that the increase of crimes was caused and 
compensated by the parallel increase of economic transactions.^ If it 
were admitted, one would have to conclude that the characteristic 
constitution of higher societies implies an exceptional stimulation of 
suicidogenetic currents; so that their actual extreme violence would 
be normal because necessary, and there would be no way of taking 
special measures against it without simultaneously taking them against 
civilization.'^ 

But one fact especially should throw us on our guard against this 
reasoning. In Rome, at the very height of the empire, a veritable 
hecatomb of voluntary deaths likewise occurred. So that one might 

^ Oettingen, Ueber acuten und chronischen Selbstmord, pp. 28-32 and Moralsta- 
tistik, p. 761. 

^ Poletti ; we know his theory, however, only through its exposition by Tarde, in 
his Criminalité comparée, p. 72. 

^ To escape this conclusion, to be sure, it is said (Oettingen) that suicide is only 
one of the evil aspects {Schattenseiten) of civilization, and that it may be diminished 
without affecting civilization. But this is playing with words. If suicide springs 
from the same causes on which culture depends, we cannot diminish one without 
reducing the other; for the only means of combatting it effectively is to attack its 
causes. 



368 SUICIDE 

have concluded then as now that this was the price of the intellectual 
development achieved and that it is a law of cultivated peoples that 
they must furnish a greater number of victims to suicide than others. 
But the historical sequel showed how unfounded such an induction 
would have been; for this epidemic of suicides lasted only for a time, 
while Roman culture survived. Not only did the Christian societies 
assimilate its best fruits, but from the i6th century on, after the dis- 
covery of printing, after the Renaissance and the Reformation, these 
societies had far surpassed the highest level ever attained by the so- 
cities of antiquity. Yet suicide had developed only slightly until the 
1 8th century. Progress was not therefore the necessary cause of so 
much bloodshed, since its results could be preserved and even sur- 
passed with no continuation of these homicidal effects. Is it not 
probable, therefore, that the same is true today, that the course of 
our civilization and that of suicide do not logically involve one an- 
other, and that the latter may accordingly be checked without the 
other stopping simultaneously? Besides, we have seen that suicide is 
found in the first stages of evolution and that it is even, sometimes, 
of the utmost virulence. If, then, it exists among the crudest peoples, 
there is no reason to suppose it to be necessarily related to extreme 
refinement of manners. Those types of suicide observed at these dis- 
tant periods have, of course, partly disappeared; but this very disap- 
pearance should somewhat reduce our annual tribute and it is thus 
much more surprising that it keeps becoming heavier. 

Thus, we may believe that this aggravation springs not from the 
intrinsic nature of progress but from the special conditions under 
which it occurs in our day, and nothing assures us that these condi- 
tions are normal. For we must not be dazzled by the brilliant devel- 
opment of sciences, the arts and industry of which we are the wit- 
nesses; this development is altogether certainly taking place in the 
midst of a morbid effervescence, the grievous repercussions of which 
each one of us feels. It is then very possible and even probable that 
the rising tide of suicide originates in a pathological state just now 
accompanying the march of civilization without being its necessary 
condition. 

The rapidity of the growth of suicides really permits no other hy- 
pothesis. Actually, in less than fifty years, they have tripled, quad- 
rupled, and even quintupled, depending on the country. On the 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 369 

Other hand, we know their connection with the most ineradicable 
element in the constitution of societies, since they express the mood 
of societies, and since the mood of peoples, like that of individuals, 
reflects the state of the most fundamental part of the organism. Our 
social organization, then, must have changed profoundly in the 
course of this century, to have been able to cause such a growth in 
the suicide-rate. So grave and rapid an alteration as this must be 
morbid; for a society cannot change its structure so suddenly. Only 
by a succession of slow, almost imperceptible modifications does it 
achieve different characteristics. The possible changes, even then, are 
limited. Once a social type is fixed it is no longer infinitely plastic; a 
limit is soon reached which cannot be passed. Thus the changes pre- 
supposed by the statistics of contemporary suicides cannot be normal. 
Without even knowing exactly of what they consist, we may begin 
by affirming that they result not from a regular evolution but from 
a morbid disturbance which, while able to uproot the institutions of 
the past, has put nothing in their place; for the work of centuries 
cannot be remade in a few years. But if the cause is so abnormal, the 
effect must be so, as well. Thus, what the rising flood of voluntary 
deaths denotes is not the increasing brilliancy of our civilization but 
a state of crisis and perturbation not to be prolonged with impunity. 
To these various reasons another may be added. Though it is true 
that collective sadness has, normally, a role to play in the life of so- 
cieties, it is not ordinarily general or intense enough to reach the 
higher centers of the social body. It remains a submerged current, 
felt vaguely by the collective personality, which therefore undergoes 
its influence without clearly taking it into account. At least, if these 
vague dispositions do affect the common conscience, it is only by 
tentative and intermittent thrusts. Generally they are expressed 
merely by fragmentary judgments, isolated maxims, unrelated to 
one another and which, in spite of their intransigeant aspect, are in- 
tended to convey only one side of reality, to be corrected and supple- 
mented by contradictory maxims. Thence come the melancholy say- 
ings and proverbial sallies at life's expense in which sometimes is 
put the wisdom of nations, but without being more frequent than 
their opposite numbers. Clearly they convey passing impressions, 
which have transiently touched consciousness without taking full pos- 
session of it. Only when such sentiments acquire unusual strength do 



370 suicffiE 

they sufficiently absorb public attention to be seen as a whole, co- 
ordinated and systematized, and then become the bases of complete 
theories of life. In fact, in Rome and in Greece, it was when society 
felt itself seriously endangered that the discouraging theories of Epi- 
curus and Zeno appeared. The formation of such great systems is 
therefore an indication that the current of pessimism has reached a 
degree of abnormal intensity which is due to some disturbance of the 
social organism. We well know how these systems have recently mul- 
tiplied. To form a true idea of their number and importance it is not 
enough to consider the philosophies avowedly of this nature, such as 
those of Schopenhauer, Hartmann, etc. We must also consider all 
the others which derive from the same spirit imder different names. 
The anarchist, the aesthete, the mystic, the socialist revolutionary, 
even if they do not despair of the future, have in common with the 
pessimist a single sentiment of hatred and disgust for the existing 
order, a single craving to destroy or to escape from reality. Collective 
melancholy would not have penetrated consciousness so far, if it had 
not undergone a morbid development; and so the development of 
suicide resulting from it is of the same nature.^ 

All proofs combine therefore to make us consider the enormous 
increase in the number of voluntary deaths within a century as a path- 
ological phenomenon becoming daily a greater menace. By what 
means shall we try to overcome it? 

II 

Some authors have recommended the reestablishment of the com- 
minatory penalties formerly in use,® 

It is willingly accepted that our present indulgence towards suicide 
is really excessive. Since it offends morality, it should be repulsed 
more energetically and precisely, and this reprobation should be ex- 
pressed by definite external signs, that is, penalties. The relaxation of 

^ This argument is open to an objection. Buddhism and Jainism are systematically 
pessimistic doctrines of life; should the indication of a morbid state of the peoples 
who have practiced them be assumed? The author knows too little of them to de- 
cide the question. But let our reasoning be considered only with reference to the 
European peoples, and even to the societies of a metropolitan type. Within these 
limits we think it open to little dispute. It is still possible that the spirit of re- 
nunciation characteristic of certain other soceities may be formulated into a system 
without anomaly. 

^ Among others, Lisle, op. cit., p. 327 and fï. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 37 1 

our repressive system at this point is in itself an abnormal phenome- 
non. Yet somewhat severe punishments are impossible; they would 
not be tolerated by the public conscience. For as we have seen, sui- 
cide is a close kin to genuine virtues, which it simply exaggerates. 
So public opinion is easily divided in its judgment. Since suicide, up 
to a certain point, emanates from sentiments respected by public 
opinion, the latter' s blame is tempered with reserve and hesitation. 
Thus arise the ever-recurring controversies between theorists as to 
whether or not it is contrary to morality. Since a continuous series 
of graduated, intermediary acts connects it with other acts approved 
or tolerated by morality, it has naturally enough been regarded at 
times as of the same nature as they and been apt to benefit by the 
same tolerance. Far more rarely have such doubts been aroused in 
behalf of homicide and robbery, because the line of demarcation is 
more clearly drawn here.^^ Moreover, the mere fact of the death 
which the victim has inflicted on himself inspires, in spite of every- 
thing, too much pity for the censure to be implacable. 

For all these reasons only moral penalties could be decreed. The 
only possible thing would be to refuse the suicide the honors of a 
regular burial, to deprive the author of the attempt of certain civic, 
political or family rights, such as certain attributes of the paternal 
power and eligibility to public office. We believe that public opinion 
would readily agree that whoever tried to evade his fundamental 
duties should be deprived of his corresponding rights. But however 
legitimate these measures were, they could never have more than a 
very secondary influence; it is childish to suppose that they could 
check so violent a current. 

Besides, all by themselves, they would not touch the evil at its 
source. Actually, if we have renounced the legal prohibition of sui- 
cide, it is because its immorality is too little felt. We let it develop 
freely because it no longer revolts us to the same extent as formerly. 
But our moral sensitiveness will never be aroused by legislative 
measures. It does not depend on the legislator that a fact shall ap- 

^*' It is not that the distinction between moral and immoral acts is absolute, even 
in these cases. The opposition between good and evil lacks the radical character 
ascribed to it by the popular conscience. Imperceptible gradations lead from one to 
the other and frontiers are often unclear. Only when acknowledged crimes are in- 
volved is the distance great, and the relation between extremes less evident than in 
the case of suicide. 



372 SUICIDE 

pear morally hateful or not. When the law forbids acts which public 
sentiment considers inoffensive, we are indignant with the law, not 
with the act it punishes. Our excessive tolerance with regard to sui- 
cide is due to the fact that, since the state of mind from which it 
springs is a general one, we cannot condemn it without condemning 
ourselves; we are too saturated with it not partly to excuse it. But 
then the only way of making ourselves more severe is to act directly 
on the current of pessimism, to lead it back to its normal bed and 
confine it there, to relieve most consciences from its influence and to 
strengthen them. Once they have recovered their moral equilibrium 
they will react appropriately against whatever offends them. A re- 
pressive system will no longer have to be created out of nothing; it 
will take shape itself under the pressure of need. Until then it will 
be artificial and of little use for that reason. 

Would not education be the surest means of obtaining this result? 
As characters may be influenced through it, would it not suffice for 
them to be so shaped as to become braver and thus less indulgent to- 
wards those who willingly give themselves up? This is Morselli's 
opinion. For him, the prophylactic treatment for suicide entirely con- 
sists of the following precept: ^^ "To develop in man the power of 
coordinating his ideas and feelings, so that he may be able to follow 
a definite purpose in life; in brief, to give strength and energy to the 
moral character." A thinker of quite a different school reaches the 
same conclusion: "How," asks Franck, "shall we attack suicide at its 
source? By improving the great work of education, by striving to im- 
prove character as well as intelligence, convictions as well as ideas." ^^ 

But this is to ascribe to education a power it lacks. It is only the 
image and reflection of society. It imitates and reproduces the latter 
in abbreviated form; it does not create it. Education is healthy when 
peoples themselves are in a healthy state; but it becomes corrupt 
with them, being unable to modify itself. If the moral environment 
is affected, since the teachers themselves dwell in it they cannot avoid 
being influenced; how then should they impress on their pupils a dif- 
ferent orientation from what they have received? Each new genera- 
tion is reared by its predecessor; the latter must therefore improve in 
order to improve its successor. The movement is circular. It may well 

^1 Op. cit., p. 499. 

^2 Art. Suicide, in Diction. Philos. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 373 

happen that at great intervals a person emerges whose ideas and as- 
pirations go beyond those of his fellows; but isolated individuals are "A 
not enough to remake the moral constitution of peoples. Of course, .^j 
we enjoy believing that an eloquent voice is enough to transform 
magically the material of society; but here as elsewhere nothing 
comes from nothing. The strongest wills cannot elicit non-existent 
forces from nothingness and the shocks of experience constantly 
dissipate these facile illusions. Besides, even though through some 
incomprehensible miracle a pedagogical system were constituted in 
opposition to the social system, this very antagonism would rob it of 
all effect. If the collective organization whence comes the moral state 
it is desired to combat, is intact, the child is bound to feel its effect 
from the moment he first has contact with it. The school's artificial 
environment can protect him only briefly and weakly. To the extent 
that real life increasingly takes possession of him, it will come to de- 
stroy the work of the teacher. Education, therefore, can be reformed 
only if society itself is reformed. To do that, the evil from which it 
suffers must be attacked at its sources. 

Now, these sources we know. We discovered them when we 
showed the springs from which the chief suicidogenetic currents 
flow. There is one, however, which certainly has no share in the pres- 
ent progress of suicide: the altruistic current. Today, indeed, it is 
losing much more ground than it gains; it appears principally in 
lower societies. Though persisting in the army it does not seem to be 
of an abnormal intensity there; for to a certain extent it is required 
to maintain military spirit. Besides, even there it is constantly declin- 
ing. Egoistic suicide and anomic suicide are the only forms, there- 
fore, whose development may be regarded as morbid, and so we have 
only them to consider. 

Egoistic suicide results from the fact that society is not sufficiently 
integrated at all points to keep all its members under its control. If it 
increases inordinately, therefore, it is because the state on which it 
depends has itself excessively expanded; it is because society, weak 
and disturbed, lets too many persons escape too completely from its 
influence. Thus, the only remedy for the ill is to restore enough con- 
sistency to social groups for them to obtain a firmer grip on the indi- 
vidual, and for him to feel himself bound to them. He must feel 



374 SUICIDE 

himself more solidary with a collective existence which precedes him 
in time, which survives him, and which encompasses him at all 
points. If this occurs, he will no longer find the only aim of his con- 
duct in himself, and, understanding that he is the instrument of a 
purpose greater than himself, he will see that he is not without sig- 
nificance. Life will resume meaning in his eyes, because it will re- 
cover its natural aim and orientation. But what groups are best calcu- 
lated constantly to reimpress on man this salutary sentiment of 
solidarity.'' 

Not political society. Especially today, in our great modern States, 
it is too far removed from the individual to effect him uninter- 
ruptedly and with sufficient force. Whatever connection there may be 
between our daily tasks and the whole of public life, it is too indirect 
for us to feel it keenly and constantly. Only when matters of serious 
import are at stake do we feel our dependence on the body politic 
strongly. Of course, the idea of country is rarely wholly obscured 
among the moral elite of the people; but in ordinary times it is 
overshadowed, barely perceptible, and even wholly eclipsed. Such 
unusual circumstances as a great national or political crisis are neces- 
sary for it to assume primary importance, invade the consciences of 
men, and become the guiding motive of action. No such intermittent 
influence as this can regularly restrain the suicidal tendency. Not 
only occasionally but continually the individual must be able to realize 
that his activity has a goal. For his existence not to seem empty to 
him, he must constantly see it serving an end of immediate concern 
to him. But this is possible only if a simpler and less extensive social 
environment enwraps him with real intimacy and offers his activity 
a nearer aim. 

Religious society is equally unadapted to this function. Of course, 
it has been able to exert a beneficent influence under given condi- 
tions; but the necessary conditions are no longer given. In reality, it 
secures against suicide only if powerfully enough constructed to have 
a close grip on the individual. Because the Catholic religion imposes 
on its faithful a vast system of dogmas and practices, and so pene- 
trates all the details of even their earthly life, it attaches them to this 
life with greater force than Protestantism. The Catholic is much less 
likely to lose sight of the ties binding him to the confessional group 
of which he is part, because at every moment this group is recalled 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 375 

to him in the shape of imperative precepts applying to different cir- 
cumstances of life. He need not anxiously watch his step; he refers 
each step to God because most of them are divinely regulated, that is, 
by the Church which is the visible body of God. But furthermore, 
because these commands supposedly emanate from superhuman au- 
thority, human reflection has no right to bring itself to bear on them. 
It would be actual contradiction to attribute such an origin to them 
and permit free criticism of them. Religion, therefore, modifies the 
inclination to suicide only to the extent that it prevents men from 
thinking freely. This seizure of possession of human intelligence is 
difficult at present and will become more and more so. It offends our 
dearest sentiments. We increasingly refuse to admit that limits may 
be set to reason and that one may say : Thou shalt go no further. And 
this is no movement of yesterday; the history of the human mind is 
the very history of the progress of free thought. It is childish to wish 
to check a current which everything proves irresistible. Unless the 
great societies of today helplessly crumble and we return to the little 
social groups of long ago,^^ that is, unless humanity returns to its 
starting-point, religions will no longer be able to exert very deep or 
wide sway on consciences. This does not mean that new ones will not 
be founded. But the only viable ones will be those permitting more 
freedom to the right of criticism, to individual initiative, than even 
the most liberal Protestant sects. So they could not have the strong 
effect on their members necessary to set up an obstacle to suicide. 

Though many authors have considered religion the only remedy 
for the evil, they are mistaken as to the sources of its power. They 
make it consist almost wholly of a number of lofty thoughts and 
noble maxims which are capable, on the whole, of accommodating 
themselves to rationalism, and which they think need only be rooted 
in the heart and mind of men to prevent weakness. But th'iÈ is an 
error, both as to the essence of religion and especially as to the causes 
of the immunity it has sometimes conferred against suicide. Actually, 
this privilege belonged to religion, not because it encouraged in men 

^3 Let us not be misunderstood. Of course, the time will come for our present 
societies to perish; they will therefore decompose into smaller groups. But, if the 
future is to be judged by the past, this situation will be merely temporary and these 
partial groups will be the material of new societies, much larger than those of today. 
One may even foresee that these partial groups will be much greater than those 
whose combination formed present-day societies. 



376 SUICIDE 

some vague sentiment of a more or less mysterious beyond, but from 
/ I the powerful and scrupulous discipline to which it subjected thought 
\ and conduct. When religion is merely a symbolic idealism, a tradi- 
tional philosophy, subject to discussion and more or less a stranger 
to our daily occupations, it can hardly have much influence upon us. 
A God relegated by his majesty outside of the universe and every- 
thing temporal, cannot serve as a goal for our temporal activity, which 
is thus left without an objective. From that moment on, too many 
things are unrelated to him for him to give a sense to life. Abandon- 
ing the world to us, as unworthy of himself, he simultaneously abandons 
us to ourselves in everything respecting the world's life. Men cannot 
be prevented from taking their lives through meditations on the 
mysteries surrounding us, nor even through belief in an all-powerful 
being, but one infinitely removed from ourselves, to whom we shall 
have to give account only in an undetermined future. In a word, we 
are only preserved from egoistic suicide in so far as we are socialized; 
but religions can socialize us only in so far as they refuse us the 
right of free examination. They no longer have, and probably will 
never again have, enough authority to wring such a sacrifice from us. 
We therefore cannot count on them to rear barriers to suicide. Be- 
sides, if those who see our only cure in a religious restoration were 
self-consistent, they would demand the reestablishment of the most 
archaic religions. For against suicide Judaism preserves better than 
Catholicism, and Catholicism better than Protestanism. Yet the Prot- 
estant religion is the freest from material practices and consequently 
the most idealistic. On the contrary, Judaism, in spite of its great 
historic role, still clings to the most primitive religious forms in 
many respects. How true it is that moral and intellectual superiority 
of dogma counts for naught in its possible influence on suicide! 

We are left with the family, the prophylactic virtue of which is 
assured. But it would be delusive to believe that one need only reduce 
the number of the unmarried to stop the growth of suicide. For if 
married persons have less tendency to kill themselves, this tendency 
itself increases with the same regularity and in the same proportions 
as that in the case of unmarried persons. From 1880 to 1887 suicides 
of married persons grew 35 per cent (3,706 cases as against 2,735); 
suicides of unmarried persons only 13 per cent (2,894 cases as against 
2,554). ^'^ 1863-68, according to Bertillon's calculations, the rate 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 377 

of the former was 154 per million; it was 242 in 1887, an increase 
of 57 per cent. During the same time the rate for unmarried persons 
rose very little more; it went from 173 to 289, an increase of 67 per 
cent. The aggravation appearing in the course of the century is there- 
fore independent of marital status. 

Changes have actually occurred in the constitution of the family 
which no longer allow it to have the same preservative influence as 
formerly. While it once kept most of its members within its orbit 
from birth to death and formed a compact mass, indivisible and 
endowed with a quality of permanence, its duration is now brief. It 
is barely formed when it begins to disperse. As soon as the children's 
first growth is over, they very often leave to complete their edu- 
cation away from home; moreover, it is almost the rule that as 
soon as they are adult they establish themselves away from their 
parents and the hearth is deserted. For most of the time, at present, 
the family may be said to be reduced to the married couple alone, 
and we know that this union acts feebly against suicide. Conse- 
quently, since it plays a smaller role in life, it no longer suffices as 
an object for life. Not, certainly, that we care less for our children; 
but they are entwined less closely and continuously with our exis- 
tence and so this existence needs some other basis for being. Since 
we have to live without them, we also have to attach our thoughts 
and acts to other objects. 

But it is especially the family as a collective being which this 
periodic dispersion reduces to non-entity. Formerly, domestic society 
was not just a number of individuals united by bonds of mutual 
affection; but the group itself, in its abstract and impersonal unity. 
It was the hereditary name, together with all the memories it re- 
called, the family house, the ancestral field, the traditional situation 
and reputation, etc. All this is tending to disappear. A society mo- 
mentarily dissolving, only to reform elsewhere but under wholly new 
conditions and with quite new elements, has not sufficient continuity 
to acquire a personal aspect, a history of its own, to which its mem- 
bers may feel attachment. If men therefore do not replace this age- 
old objective of their activity, as it little by little disappears from 
among them, a great void must inevitably appear in existence. 

This cause multiplies the suicides not only of married but of un- 
married persons. For this state of the family forces the young people 



378 SUICIDE 

to leave their native home before they are able to found another; 
partly for this reason, households of a single person become increas- 
ingly numerous, and this isolation has been shown to increase the 
tendency to suicide. Yet nothing can stop the movement. Once, when 
each local environment was more or less closed to others by usages, 
traditions, the scarcity of communications, each generation remained 
perforce in its place of origin or at least could not move far from it. 
But as these barriers vanish, as these small environments are levelled 
and blended with one another, the individuals inevitably disperse 
in accordance with their ambitions and to further their interests into 
the wider spaces now open to them. No scheme can therefore offset 
this inevitable swarming of the bees and restore the indivisibility 
which was once the family's strength. 

Ill 

Is the evil then incurable? At first glance one might think so, 
because not one of all the societies whose beneficent influence we 
have demonstrated above seems able to afford a genuine remedy. But 
we have shown that, while religion, the family and the nation are 
preservatives against egoistic suicide, the cause of this does not lie 
in the special sort of sentiments encouraged by each. Rather, they 
all owe this virtue to the general fact that they are societies and they 
possess it only in so far as they are well integrated societies; that is, 
without excess in one direction or the other. Quite a different group 
may, then, have the same effect, if it has the same cohesion. Besidesj 
the society of faith, of family and of politics, there is one other on 
which no mention has yet been made; that of all workers of the same] 
sort, in association, all who cooperate in the same function, that is,| 
the occupational group or corporation. \ 

Its aptness for this role is proved by its definition. Since it con- 
sists of individuals devoted to the same tasks, with solidary or 
even combined interests, no soil is better calculated to bear social 
ideas and sentiments. Identity of origin, culture and occupation 
makes occupational activity the richest sort of material for a common 
life. Moreover, in the past the corporation has proved that it could 
form a collective personality, jealous, even excessively so, of its 
autonomy and its authority over its members; so there is no doubt 
of its capacity to be a moral environment for them. There is no 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 379 

reason for the corporative interest not acquiring in its workers' eyes 
the respectable character and supremacy always possessed by social 
interests, as contrasted with private interests, in a well-organized so- ...., 
ciety. From another point of view, the occupational group has the 
three-fold advantage over all others that it is omnipresent, ubiquitousl 
and that its control extends to the greatest part of life. Its influence I 
on individuals is not intermittent, like that of political society, but 
it is always in contact with them by the constant exercise of the func- 
tion of which it is the organ and in which they collaborate. It follows 
the workers wherever they go; which the family cannot do. Wherever 
they are, they find it enveloping them, recalling them to their duties, 
supporting them at need. Finally, since occupational life is almost 
the whole of life, corporative action makes itself felt in every detail 
of our occupations, which are thus given a collective orientation. 
Thus the corporation has everything needed to give the individual 
a setting, to draw him out of his state of moral isolation; and faced 
by the actual inadequacy of the other groups, it alone can fulfil this 
indispensable office 

But for it to have this influence it must be organized on wholly 
diff^erent bases from those of today. First, it is essential that it become 
a definite and recognized organ of our public life, instead of remain- 
ing a private group legally permitted, but politically ignored. By 
this we do not mean that it must necessarily be made obligatory, but 
the important thing is for it to be so constituted as to play a social 
role instead of expressing only various combinations of particular 
interests. This is not all. For the frame not to remain empty, all the 
germs of life of such a nature as to flourish there must find their 
places in it. For this grouping to remain no mere label, it must be 
given definite functions, and there are some which it can fulfil better 
than any other agency. 

At present, European societies have the alternative either of leav- 
ing occupational life unregulated, or of regulating it through the 
State's mediation, since no other organ exists which can play this 
role of moderator. But the State is too far removed from these com- 
plex manifestations to find the special form appropriate to each of 
them. It is a cumbersome machine, made only for general and clear- 
cut tasks. Its ever uniform action cannot adapt and adjust itself to 
the infinite variety of special circumstances. It is therefore necessarily 



38o SUICIDE 

compressive and levelling in its action. On the other hand, we feel 
how impossible it is to leave unorganized all the life thus unattached. 
In so doing, by an endless series of oscillations we alternately pass 
from authoritarian regulation made impotent by its excessive rigidity 
to systematic abstention which cannot last because it breeds anarchy. 
Whether the question is one of hours of work, or health, or wages, 
or social insurance and assistance, men of good will constantly en- 
counter the same difficulties. As soon as they try to set up some rules, 
they prove inapplicable to experience because they lack pliability; or 
at least, they apply to the matter for which they are made only by 
doing violence to it. 
y* The only way to resolve this antinomy is to set up a cluster of col- 
I lective forces outside the State, though subject to its action, whose 
\ regulative influence can be exerted with greater variety. Not only will 
our reconstituted corporations satisfy this condition, but it is hard to 
see what other groups could do so. For they are close enough to the 
facts, directly and constantly enough in contact with them, to detect 
all their nuances, and they should be sufficiently autonomous to be 
able to respect their diversity. To them, therefore, falls the duty of 
presiding over companies of insurance, benevolent aid and pensions, 
the need of which are felt by so many good minds but which we 
rightly hesitate to place in the hands of the State, already so powerful 
and awkward; theirs it should likewise be to preside over the disputes 
constantly arising between the branches of the same occupation, to 
fix conditions — but in diflferent ways according to the different sorts 
of enterprise — with which contracts must agree in order to be valid, in 
the name of the common interest to prevent the strong from unduly 
exploiting the weak, etc. As labor is divided, law and morality 
assume a different form in each special function, though still resting 
everywhere on the same general principles. Besides the rights and 
duties common to all men, there are others depending on qualities 
peculiar to each occupation, the number of which increases in impor- 
tance as occupational activity increasingly develops and diversifies. 
For each of these special disciplines an equally special organ is 
needed, to apply and maintain it. Of whom could it consist if not 
of the workers engaged in the same function? 

Here, in broad outlines, is what corporations should be in order 
to render the services rightly to be expected of them. When their 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 381 

present state is considered, of course, it is somewhat hard to conceive 
of their ever being elevated to the dignity of moral powers. Indeed, 
they are made up of individuals attached to one another by no bond, 
with only superficial and intermittent relations, even inclined to 
treat each other rather as rivals and enemies than as cooperators. 
But when once they have so many things in common, when the re- 
lations between themselves and the group to which they belong are 
thus close and continuous, sentiments of solidarity as yet almost un- 
known will spring up, and the present cold moral temperature of 
this occupational environment, still so external to its members, would 
necessarily rise. And these changes would occur not only among the 
agents of economic life, as the above examples might lead one to 
believe. Every occupation in society would demand such an organiza- 
tion and be capable of receiving it. Thus the social fabric, the meshes 
of which are so dangerously relaxed, would tighten and be strength- 
ened throughout its entire extent. 

This restoration, the need of which is universally felt, unfortunately 
has to contend with the bad name left in history by the corporations 
of the ancient regime. Yet is there not more proof of their indis- 
pensability in the fact that they have lasted not merely since the Mid- 
dle Ages but since Greco-Roman antiquity,^^ than of their uselessness 
in the fact of their recent abrogation? If occupational activity has 
been corporatively organized, except for a single century, wherever 
it has developed to any extent, is it not most probable that such 
organization is necessary, and that if it was no longer equal to its 
role a hundred years ago, the remedy was to restore and improve, not 
radically to suppress it? Certainly, it had finally become an obstacle 
to the most urgent progress. The old, narrowly local corporation, 
closed to all outside influence, had become an anomaly in a morally 
and politically unified nation; the excessive autonomy it enjoyed, 
making it a State within a State, could not be retained while the 
governmental organ, ramifying itself in all directions, was more and 
more subordinating all secondary organs of socitety to itself. So the 
base on which the institution rested had to be enlarged and the insti- 
tution itself reconnected with the whole of national life. But if simi- 
lar corporations of different localities had been connected with one 

1* The first colleges of artisans go back to imperial Rome. See Marquardt, Privât- 
leben der Roemer, II, p. 4. 



382 SUICIDE 

another, instead of remaining isolated, so as to form a single system, 
if all these systems had been subject to the general influence of the 
State and thus kept in constant awareness of their solidarity, bureau- 
cratic despotism and occupational egoism would have been kept within 
proper limits. It is true, tradition is not preserved with such facile 
invariability in a great association, spread over an immense territory, 
as in a little coterie not exceeding the boundaries of a municipality; ^^ 
but at the same time each particular group is less inclined to see and 
pursue only its own interest, once it is in regular relationship with 
the directive center of public life. Only on this condition, indeed, 
could awareness of the public welfare be kept constantly alert in 
the individual consciousness. For, as communications would then be 
uninterrupted between each single organ and the power charged 
with representing general interests, society would no longer be re- 
called only intermittently or vaguely to the individual; we should 
feel it present in the whole course of our daily life. But by over- 
throwing existing order without putting anything in its place, cor- 
porative egoism has only been replaced by a still more corrosive in- 
dividual egoism. For this reason, this is the only demolition of all 
those then accomplished which we have to regret. By dispersing the 
only groups which could persistently unite individual wills, we our- 
selves have broken the appointed instrument of our moral reorgani- 
zation. 

But not only egoistic suicide would be combatted in this way. 
Anomic suicide, closely related to it, might be dealt with by the 
same treatment. Anomy indeed springs from the lack of collective 
forces at certain points in society; that is, of groups established for 
the regulation of social life. Anomy therefore partially results from 
the same state of disaggregation from which the egoistic current also 
springs. But this identical cause produces different effects, depending 
on its point of incidence and whether it influences active and practical 
functions, or functions that are representative. The former it agitates 
and exasperates; the latter it disorients and disconcerts. In both cases 
the remedy is therefore the same. And as a matter of fact we have 
just seen that the chief role of corporations, in the future as in the 
past, would be to govern social functions, especially economic func- 

1^ See the reasons in my Division du travail social, Bk. II, ch. Ill, especially p. 
335 ff. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 383 

tions, and thus to extricate them from their present state of disorgani- ^ 
zation. Whenever excited appetites tended to exceed all limits, the 
corporation would have to decide the share that should equitably 
revert to each of the cooperative parts. Standing above its own mem- 
bers, it would have all necessary authority to demand indispensable 
sacrifices and concessions and impose order upon them. By forcing 
the strongest to use their strength with moderation, by preventing 
the weakest from endlessly multiplying their protests, by recalling 
both to the sense of their reciprocal duties and the general interest, 
and by regulating production in certain cases so that it does not de- 
generate into a morbid fever, it would moderate one set of passions 
by another, and permit their appeasement by assigning them limits. 
Thus, a new sort of moral discipline would be established, without 
which all the scientific discoveries and economic progress in the 
world could produce only malcontents. 

Clearly, in no other environment could this urgent law of distri- 
butive justice be developed, nor could it be applied by any other 
organ. Religion, which once partially assumed this role, would now 
be unadapted to it. For the essential principle of the only regulation 
to which it can subject economic life is contempt for riches. If reli- 
gion exhorts its followers to be satisfied with their lot, it is because 
of the thought that our condition on earth has nothing to do with our 
salvation. If religion teaches that our duty is to accept with docility 
our lot as circumstances order it, this is to attach us exclusively to 
other purposes, worthier of our efforts; and in general religion rec- 
ommends moderation in desires for the same reason. But this passive 
resignation is incompatible with the place which earthly interests 
have now assumed in collective existence. The discipline they need 
must not aim at relegating them to second place and reducing them 
as far as possible, but at giving them an organization in harmony 
with their importance. The problem has increased in complexity, 
and while it is no remedy to give appetites free rein, neither is it 
enough to suppress them in order to control them. Though the last 
defenders of the old economic theories are mistaken in thinking that 
regulation is not necessary today as it was yesterday, the apologists 
of the institution of religion are wrong in believing that yesterday's 
regulation can be useful today. It is precisely its lack of present use- 
fulness which causes the evil. 



384 suicroE 

These easy solutions have no relation to the difficulties of the 
situation. Of course, nothing but a moral power can set a law for 
men; but this must also be sufficiently associated with affairs of this 
world to be able to estimate them at their true value. The occupa- 
tional group has just this two-fold character. Being a group, it suf- 
ficiently dominates individuals to set limits to their greed; but sees 
too much of their life not to sympathize with their needs. Of course, 
it remains true that the State itself has important functions to fulfill. 
It alone can oppose the sentiment of general utility and the need for 
organic equilibrium to the particularism of each corporation. But we 
know that its action can be useful only if a whole system of secon- 
dary organs exists to diversify the action. It is, above all, these secon- 
dary organs that must be encouraged. 



There is one form of suicide, however, which could not be halted 
by this means; the form springing from conjugal anomy. We seem 
here confronted by an antinomy which is insoluble. 

As we have said, its cause is divorce with all the ideas and cus- 
toms from which this institution arises and which it merely estab- 
lishes more firmly. Does it follow that where divorce exists it must 
be abrogated? This question is too complex to be treated here; it 
can be profitably approached only after a study of marriage and its 
evolution. At present we need only concern ourselves with the rela- 
tions of divorce and suicide. From this point of view we shall say: 
The only way to reduce the number of suicides due to conjugal anomy 
is to make marriage more indissoluble. 

What makes the problem especially disturbing and lends it an al- 
most dramatic interest is that the suicides of husbands cannot be 
diminished in this way without increasing those of wives. Must one 
of the sexes necessarily be sacrificed, and is the solution only to 
choose the lesser of the two evils? Nothing else seems possible as 
long as the interests of husband and wife in marriage are so obviously 
opposed. As long as the latter requires above all, liberty, and the 
former, discipline, the institution of matrimony cannot be of equal 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 385 

benefit to both. But this antagonism which just now makes the solu- 
tion impossible is not without remedy, and it may be hoped tiiat it 
will disappear. 

It originates in fact because the two sexes do not share equally in 
social life. Man is actively involved in it, while woman does little 
more than look on from a distance. Consequently man is much more 
highly socialized than woman. His tastes, aspirations and humor 
have in large part a collective origin, while his companion's are more 
directly influenced by her organism. His needs, therefore, are quite 
different from hers, and so an institution intended to regulate their 
common life cannot be equitable and simultaneously satifying to 
such opposite needs. It cannot simultaneously be agreeable to two 
persons, one of whom is almost entirely the product of society, while 
the other has remained to a far greater extent the product of nature. 
But it is by no means certain that this opposition must necessarily be 
maintained. Of course, in one sense it was originally less marked 
than now, but from this we cannot conclude that it must develop 
indefinitely. For the most primitive social states are often reproduced 
at the highest stages of evolution, but under different forms, forms 
almost the opposites of their original ones. To be sure, we have no 
reason to suppose that woman may ever be able to fulfill the same 
functions in society as man; but she will be able to play a part in 
society which, while peculiarly her own, may yet be more active and 
important than that of today. The female sex will not again become 
more similar to the male; on the contrary, we may foresee that it 
will become more different. But these differences will become of 
greater social use than in the past. Why, for instance, should not 
aesthetic functions become woman's as man, more and more absorbed 
by functions of utility, has to renounce them? Both sexes would thus 
approximate each other by their very differences. They would be 
socially equalized, but in different ways.^*^ And evolution does seem 
to be taking place in this direction. Woman differs from man much 

^^ It may be foreseen that this differentiation would probably no longer have the 
strictly regulative character that it has today. Woman would not be officially ex- 
cluded from certain functions and relegated to others. She could choose more 
freely, but as her choice would be determined by her aptitudes it would generally 
bear on the same sort of occupations. It would be perceptibly uniform, though not 
obligatory. 



386 SUICIDE 

more in cities than in the country; and yet her intellectual and moral 
constitution is most impregnated with social life in cities. 

In any case, this is the only way to reduce the unhappy moral con- 
flict actually dividing the sexes, definite proof of which the statistics 
of suicide have given us. Only when the difference between husband 
and wife becomes less, will marriage no longer be thought, so to 
speak, necessarily to favor one to the detriment of the other. As for 
the champions today of equal rights for woman with those of man, 
they forget that the work of centuries cannot be instantly abolished; 
that juridical equality cannot be legitimate so long as psychological 
inequality is so flagrant. Our efforts must be bent to reduce the latter. 
For man and woman to be equally protected by the same institution, 
they must first of all be creatures of the same nature. Only then will 
the indissolubility of the conjugal bond no longer be accused of 
serving only one of the two parties pleading. 

IV 

In resume, just as suicide does not proceed from man's difliculties 
in maintaining his existence, so the means of arresting its progress 
is not to make the struggle less difficult and life easier. If more sui- 
cides occur today than formerly, this is not because, to maintain 
ourselves, we have to make more painful efforts, nor that our legiti- 
, mate needs are less satisfied, but because we no longer know th e 
[ limits o f legitimate needs nor perceive the directionof our_£fforts. 
Competition is of course becoming keener every day, because the 
greater ease of communication sets a constantly increasing number 
of competitors at loggerheads. On the other hand, a more perfected 
division of labor and its accompanying more complex cooperation, 
by multiplying and infinitely varying the occupations by which men 
can make themselves useful to other men, multiplies the means of 
existence and places them within reach of a greater variety of persons. 
The most inferior aptitudes may find a place here. At the same time, 
the more^ iotense production r esulting from this subtler cooperation, 
by increasing humanity's total resources, assures each worker an 
ampler pay and so achieves a balance between the greater wear on 
vital strength and its recuperation. Indeed, it is certain that average 
comfort has increased on all levels of the social hierarchy, although 
perhaps not always in equal proportions. The maladjustment from 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 387 

which we suffer does not exist because the objective causes of suffer- 
ing have increased in number or intensity; it bears witness not to 
greater economic poverty, but to an alarming poverty of morahty. 
We must not, however, mistake the meaning of the word. When 
an individual or social ill is said to be entirely moral, the usual mean- 
ing is that it does not respond to any actual treatment but can be 
cured only be repeated exhortations, methodical objurgations, in a 
word, by verbal influence. We reason as though a system of ideas had 
no reference to the rest of the universe and as if it were enough, 
consequently, to utter some particular formulae in a particular way 
in order to destroy or change it. We fail to see that this is applying to 
things of the spirit the beliefs and methods applied by primitive man 
to things of the physical world. Just as he believes in the existence 
of magical words capable of changing one being into another, we 
implicitly admit without seeing the grossness of our own conception 
that men's undertakings and characters can be transformed by ap- 
propriate words. Like the savage, who by vehement declaration of 
his will to see some cosmic phenomenon occur, believes he can make 
it happen through the use of sympathetic magic, we think that if 
we warmly state our wish to see such a change accomplished, it will 
spontaneously take place. In reality, a people's mental system is a sys- 
tem of definite forces not to be disarranged or rearranged by simple 
injunctions. It depends really on the grouping and organization of 
social elements.. Given a people composed of a certain number of in- 
dividuals arranged in a certain way, we obtain a definite total of col- 
lective ideas and practices whic h remaiiTconstant so long as the con di- 
tions on which they dep en d are themselves the same. To be sure, the 
nature of the collective existence necessarily varies depending on 
whether its composite parts are more or less numerous, arranged on 
this or that plan, and so its ways of thinking and acting change; but 
the latter may be changed only by changing the collective existence 
itself and this cannot be done without modifying its anatomical con- 
stitution. By calling the evil of which the abnormal increase in sui- 
cides is symptomatic a moral evil, we are far from thinking to reduce 
it to some superficial ill which may be conjured away by soft words. 
On the contrary, the change in moral temperament thus betrayed 
bears witness to a profound ch ange in our social struc ture. To cure 
one, therefore, the o^hcrTnusTBereformed. 



388 suicroE 

We have explained what, it seems to us, this reform should be. 
But the final proof of its urgency is that it is forced on us not only 
by the actual state of suicide but by the whole of our historical de- 
velopment. 

The latter's chief characteristic is to have swept cleanly away all 
the older social forms of organization. One after another, they have 
disappeared either through the slow usury of time or through great 
disturbances, but without being replaced. Society was originally or- 
ganized on the family basis; it was formed by the union of a number 
of smaller societies, clans, all of whose members were or considered 
themselves kin. This organization seems not to have remained long 
in a pure state. The family quite soon ceases to be a political division 
and becomes the center of private life. Territorial grouping then 
succeeds the old family grouping. Individuals occupying the same 
area gradually, but independently of consanguinity, contract common 
ideas and customs which are not to the same extent those of their 
neighbors who live farther away. Thus, little aggregations come to 
exist with no other material foundation than neighborhood and its 
resultant relations, each one, however, with its own distinct physiog- 
nomy; we have the village, or better, the city-state and its dependent 
territory. Of course, they do not usually shut themselves off in savage 
isolation. They become confederated, combine under various forms 
and thus develop more complex societies which they enter however 
without sacrificing their personalities. They remain the elemental 
segments of which the whole society is merely an enlarged reproduc- 
tion. But bit by bit, as these confederations become tighter, the ter- 
ritorial surroundings blend with one another and lose their former 
moral individuality. From one city or district to another, the differ- 
ences decrease. ^"^ The great change brought about by the French 
Revolution was precisely to carry this levelling to a point hitherto 
unknown. Not that it improvised this change; the latter had long 
since been prepared by the progressive centralization to which the 
ancient regime had advanced. But the legal suppression of the for- 
mer provinces and the creation of new, purely artificial and nominal 
divisions definitely made it permanent. Since then the development 

1^ Of course, we can only show the chief stages of this evolution. We do not 
mean to imply that modern societies succeeded directly from the city-state; we 
omit intermediate stages. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 389 

of means of communication, by mixing the populations, has almost 
eliminated the last traces of the old dispensation. And since what re- 
mained of occupational organization was violently destroyed at the 
same time, all secondary organs of social life were done away with. 

Only one collective form survived the tempest: the State. By the 
nature of things this therefore tended to absorb all forms of activity 
which had a social character, and was henceforth confronted by 
nothing but an unstable flux of individuals. But then, by this very 
fact, it was compelled to assume functions for which it was unfitted 
and which it has not been able to discharge satisfactorily. It has often 
been said that the State is as intrusive as it is impotent. It makes a 
sickly attempt to extend itself over all sorts of things which do not be- 
long to it, or which it grasps only by doing them violence. Thence the 
expenditure of energy with which the State is reproached and which 
is truly out of proportion with the results obtained. On the other 
hand, individuals are no longer subject to any other collective control 
but the State's, since it is the sole organized collectivity. Individuals 
are made aware of society and of their dependence upon it only 
through the State. But since this is far from them, it can exert only a 
distant, discontinuous influence over them; which is why this feeling 
has neither the necessary constancy nor strength. For most of their 
lives nothing about them draws them out of themselves and imposes 
restraint on them. Thus they inevitably lapse into egoism or anarchy. 
Man cannot become attached to higher aims and submit to a rule if 
he sees nothing above him to which he belongs. To free him from 
all social pressure is to abandon him to himself and demoralize him. 
These are really the two characteristics of our moral situation. While 
the State becomes inflated and hypertrophied in order to obtain a 
firm enough grip upon individuals, but without succeeding, the latter, 
without mutual relationships, tumble over one another like so many 
liquid molecules, encountering no central energy to retain, fix and 
organize them. 

To remedy this evil, the restitution to local groups of something 
of their old autonomy is periodically suggested. This is called de- 
centralization. But the only really useful decentralization is one 
which would simultaneously produce a greater concentration of social 
energies. Without loosening the bonds uniting each part of society 
with the State, moral powers must be created with an influence, 



390 SUICIDE 

which the State cannot have, over the multitude of individuals. To- 
day neither the commune, the department nor the province has 
enough ascendency over us to exert this influence; we see in them 
only conventional labels without meaning. Of course, other things 
being equal, people usually prefer to live where they were born and 
have been reared. But local patriotisms no longer exist nor can they 
exist. The general life of the country, permanently unified, rebels at 
all dispersion of this sort. We may regret the past — but in vain. It is 
impossible to artificially resuscitate a particularist spirit which no 
longer has any foundation. Henceforth it will be possible to lighten 
somewhat the functioning of the machinery of government by various 
ingenious combinations; but the moral stability of society can never 
be affected in this way. By so doing the burden of overloaded minis- 
tries can be reduced or a little more scope given to the activity of 
regional authorities; but not in this way will so many moral environ- 
ments be constructed from the different regions. For in addition to 
the fact that administrative measures would be inadequate to achieve 
such a result, the result itself is neither possible nor desirable. 

The only decentralization which would make possible the multi- 
plication of the centers of communal life without weakening national 
unity is what might be called occupational decentralization. For, as 
each of these centers would be only the focus of a special, limited 
activity, they would be inseparable from one another and the indi- 
vidual could thus form attachments there without becoming less 
solidary with the whole. Social life can be divided, while retaining 
its unity, only if each of these divisions represents a function. This 
has been understood by the ever growing number ^^ of authors and 
statesmen, who wish to make the occupational group the base of our 
political organization, that is, divide the electoral college, not by sec- 
tions of territory but by corporations. But first the corporation must be 
organized. It must be more than an assemblage of individuals who 
meet on election day without any common bond. It can fulfill its 
destined role only if, in place of being a creature of convention, it 
becomes a definite institution, a collective personality, with its cus- 
toms and traditions, its rights and duties, its unity. The great dif- 
ficulty is not to decree that the representatives shall be selected by 

^* See on this point Benoist, L'organisation du suffrage universel, in Revue des 
Deux-Mondes, 1886. 



PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 39I 

occupation and what each occupation's share shall be, but to make 
each corporation become a moral individuality. Otherwise, only 
another external and artificial subdivision will be added to the exist- 
ing ones which we wish to supplant. 

Thus a monograph on suicide has a bearing beyond the special 
class of facts which it particularly embraces. The questions it raises 
are closely connected with the most serious practical problems of the 
present time. The abnormal development of suicide and the general 
unrest of contemporary societies spring from the same causes. The 
exceptionally high number of voluntary deaths manifests the state of 
deep disturbance from which civilized societies are suffering, and 
bears witness to its gravity. It may even be said that this measures it. 
When these sufferings are expressed by a theorist they may be con- 
sidered exaggerated and unfaithfully interpreted. But in these statis- 
tics of suicide they speak for themselves, allowing no room for 
personal interpretation. The only possible way, then, to check this 
current of collective sadness is by at least lessening the collective 
malady of which it is a sign and a result. We have shown that it is 
not necessary, in order to accomplish this, to restore, artificially, 
social forms which are outworn and which could be endowed with 
only an appearance of life, or to create out of whole cloth entirely 
new forms without historical analogies. We must seek in the past 
the germs of new life which it contained, and hasten their develop- 
ment. 

As for determining more exactly the special forms under which 
these germs are destined to develop from now on, that is, the details 
of the occupational organization that we shall need, this cannot be 
attempted within the compass of this work. Only after a special 
study of the corporative regime and the laws of its development 
would it be possible to make the above conclusions more precise. Nor 
must one exaggerate the importance of the too definite programs 
generally embraced by our political philosophers. They are imagina- 
tive flights, too far from the complexity of facts to be of much prac- 
tical value; social reality is not neat enough and is too little under- 
stood as yet to be anticipated in detail. Only direct contact with 
things can give the teachings of science the definiteness they lack. 
Once the existence of the evil is proved, its nature and its source, and 



392 SUICIDE 

we consequently know the general features of the remedy and its 
point of application, the important thing is not to draw up in ad- 
vance a plan anticipating everything, but rather to set resolutely to 
work. 



APPENDIX 



I'lanôhe I, 



SUICIDES ET ALCOOLISME. 







393 



APPENDIX II 



SUICIDES EN FRANCE. PAR ARRONDISSEMENTS (1887-9J). 




394 



APPENDIX III 



Planche III. 



SUICIDES DANS L'EUROPE CENTRALE 

(d'après Morselli). 




395 



APPENDIX IV 



Pl,\nxbk IV. 



SUICIDES ET DENSITY FAMILIALE. 





APPENDIX V 

Planobe V. 



SUICIDE ET RICHESSE. 





396 



APPENDIX VI — Suicides, by Ages, of Married and Widowed 
Persons, Classified as with or without Chil- 
dren (French Departments Minus the Seine) *' 

ABSOLUTE NUMBERS (YEARS 1889-91) 





Married 


Married with 


Widowed 


Widowed with 


Age 


No Children 


Children 


No Children 


Children 






Men 






From to 15 


1.3 


0.3 


0.3 




15 to 20 


0.3 


0.6 






20 to 25 


6.6 


6.6 


a.k 




25 to 30 


33 


34 


2.6 


"Ï' 


30 to 40 


109 


246 


11.6 


20.6 


40 to 50 


137 


367 


28 


48 


50 to 60 


190 


457 


48 


108 


60 to 70 


164 


385 


90 


173 


70 to 80 


74 


187 


86 


212 


80 and above 


9 


36 
Women 


25 


71 


From to 15 






, 




15 to 20 


"2.3 


' ' 0.3 


'0.3 


, 


20 to 25 


15 


15 


0.6 


0.3 


25 to 30 


23 


31 


2.6 


2.3 


30 to 40 


46 


84 


9 


12.6 


40 to 50 


55 


98 


17 


19 


50 to 60 


57 


106 


26 


40 


60 to 70 


35 


67 


47 


65 


70 to 80 


15 


32 


30 


68 


80 and above 


1.3 


2.6 


12 


19 



* This table was made with the aid of unpublished documents of the Ministry of Justice. We 
have been able to make little use of it, because the census of populotion does not tell the 
number of married and widowed persons without children at each age. We publish the results 
of our work nevertheless, hoping that it will be of use later when this omission of the census 
is rectified. 



397 



DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 



EDITOR'S PREFACE 9 

EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 13 

PREFACE 35 

INTRODUCTION 41 

I Need to establish the subject of study by an objective definition. Objec- 

tive definition of suicide. How it evades arbitrary exclusions and 
illusory comparisons; elimination of animal suicide. How the defini- 
tion shows the relation of suicide to the ordinary forms of conduct. 
II Difference between suicide as an individual and as a collective phenome- 
non. The social suicide-rate; its definition. Its stability and specific 
character beyond those of general mortality. The social suicide-rate 
is therefore a phenomenon sui generis; this is the subject of the present 
study. Divisions of the work. General bibliography. 

Book One: Extra-social Factors 
CHAPTER 1 SUICIDE AND PSYCHOPATHIC STATES 57 

Principal extra-social factors having a possible influence on the social 
suicide-rate: individual tendencies suflSciently general in character, 
states of physical environment. 
I Theory that suicide is only a consequence of insanity. Two ways of 
proving it: (i) suicide a monomania sui generis; (2) a syndrome 
of insanity, not found elsewhere. 

II Is suicide a monomania? Existence of monomanias no longer admitted. 

Clinical and psychological reasons against this hypothesis. 
Ill Is suicide a specific incident of madness? Reduction of all vesanic 
suicides to four types. Existence of reasonable suicides not falling 
under these groups. 

399 



400 DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 

IV But may suicide, without being a product of insanity, be intimately 
dependent upon neurasthenia? Reasons for beUeving the neurasthenic 
type is the commonest psychological type among suicides. Influence 
of this individual condition on suicide-rate still to be determined. 
Method to determine it: discover whether the suicide-rate varies with 
that of insanity. No relation between variations of the two phenomena 
with sex, faith, age, country, degree of civilization. Explanation of 
this lack of relation: uncertainty of effects implied by neurasthenia. 
V A more direct relation with the rate of alcoholism? Comparison with the 
geographical distribution of drunken misdemeanors, alcoholic insanity, 
consumption of alcohol. Negative results of this comparison. 

CHAPTER 2 SUICIDE AND NORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES 
—RACE, HEREDITY 82 

I Necessity of defining race. Definable only as an hereditary type; but 
then the word takes an indefinite meaning. Thus need for great reserve. 
II Three great races distinguished by Morselli. Very great diversity of 
suicidal aptitude among the Slavs, Celto-Romans, and Germanic 
nations. Only the Germans have a generally intense tendency, but 
lose it outside of Germany. The supposed relationship between suicide 
and stature; result of a coincidence. 
Ill Race can be a factor in suicide only if it is essentially hereditary; in- 
sufficiency of proofs of this heredity: (i) the relative frequency of 
cases imputable to heredity unknown; (2) possibility of another 
explanation; influence of insanity and imitation. Reasons against this 
special heredity: (a) why should suicide be less often transmitted 
to women? (b) suicide's evolution with age irreconcilable with this 
hypothesis. 

CHAPTER 3 SUICIDE AND COSMIC FACTORS 104 

I Climate has no influence. 

II Temperature. Seasonal variations of suicide; their very general character. 
Italian school's explanation of them by temperature. 

Ill Contestable conception of suicide at the basis of this theory. Examina- 
tion of facts: influence of abnormal heat or cold proves nothing; no 
relation between suicide-rate and seasonal or monthly temperature; 
suicide rare in many hot countries. Hypothesis that the first hot 
periods are harmful. Irreconcilable: (i) with the continuity of the 
curve of suicides in rise and descent; (2) with fact that first cold 
periods which should have same effect are harmless. 

rV Nature of causes on which these variations depend. Perfect parallelism 
between monthly variations of suicide and that of length of days; 
confirmed by the fact that suicides occur especially by day. Reason 
for this parallelism: during the day social life is in full activity. Ex- 
planation confirmed by fact that suicide is maximum at days and 



DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 4OI 

hours when social activity is maximum. How it accounts for seasonal 
variations of suicide; various confirmative proofs. Monthly variations 
of suicide therefore depend on social causes. 

CHAPTER 4 IMITATION 123 

Imitation is a phenomenon of individual psychology. Usefulness of dis- 
covering whether it has any influence on the social suicide-rate. 
I Difference between imitation and several other phenomena with which 

it has been confused. Definition of imitation. 
II Numerous cases where suicides are communicated by contagion from 
person to person; distinction between the facts of contagion and 
epidemics. Problem of the possible influence of imitation on suicide- 
rate unsolved. 

Ill This influence must be studied through geographical distribution of 
suicides. Criteria by which it may be known. Application of this 
method to the map of suicides in France by arrondissements, the map 
by communes of Seine-et-Marne, the map of Europe in general. No 
clear trace of imitation in the geographical distribution. Experiment 
suggested: does suicide increase with number of readers of news- 
papers? Reasons for the contrary opinion. 

rV Reason why imitation has no appreciable effects on suicide-rate: because 
not an original factor, but merely reinforcing the influence of others. 
Practical consequence of this discussion: that there is no occasion to 
forbid publicity for judicial interpretations of suicide. Theoretical con- 
sequence: imitation lacks the social effectiveness ascribed to it. 

Book Two: Social Causes and Social Types 

CHAPTER 1 HOW TO DETERMINE SOCIAL CAUSES AND 

SOCIAL TYPES 145 

I Presumed usefulness of morphological classification of types of suicide 
as a way to trace their causes; impossibility of this classification. 
Only practicable method consists of classifying suicides by causes. Why 
this is more appropriate than any other for a sociological study of 
suicide. 
II How discover these causes? Information given by statistics on assumed 
reasons for suicides (i) are suspect, (2) do not give true causes. Only 
effective method is to discover how the suicide-rate varies in terms of 
different social concomitants. 

CHAPTER 2 EGOISTIC SUICIDE 152 

I Suicide and religions. General aggravation due to Protestantism; immu- 
nity of Catholics and especially of Jews. 
II Immunity of Catholics not due to their minority status in Protestant 
countries, but to their lesser religious individualism, that is, to the 



4 



402 DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 

greater integration of the Catholic church. Application of this ex- 
planation to the Jews. 

III Verification of this explanation: (i) relative immunity of England with 

relation to other Protestant countries is connected with stronger in- 
tegration of Anglican church; (2) religious individualism varies with 
desire for knowledge: a) desire for knowledge stronger among Protes- 
tant peoples than among Catholics, b) desire for knowledge varies 
with suicide whenever corresponding to progress in religious indi- 
vidualism. Confirmation of the law by the exception of the Jews. 

IV Consequences of this chapter: (i) science the remedy but not the cause 

of the evil symptomized by the progress of suicide; (2) while religious 
society protects against suicide, it is only because it is a strongly 
integrated society. 

CHAPTER 3 EGOISTIC SUICIDE (continued) 171 

I General immunity of married persons as calculated by Bertillon. Incon- 
veniences of the method he had to follow. Need to separate more com- 
pletely the influences of age and civil status. Tables in which this 
separation is made. Laws derived from them. 
II Explanation of these laws. The coefficient of preservation of married 
persons unconnected with matrimonial selection. Proofs: (i) reasons 
a priori; (2) reasons of fact drawn from: a) variations of coefficient 
at different ages; b) unequal immunity of husbands and wives. Is 
this immunity due to marriage or the family? Reasons contrary to the 
former hypothesis: (i) contrast between the stationary condition of 
marriage rate and progress of suicide; (2) slight immunity of hus- 
bands without children; (3) aggravation among wives without chil- 
dren. 

III Is slight immunity of married men without children due to conjugal 

selection? Contrary proof from aggravation of childless wives. Explana- 
tion of partial persistence of this coefficient among childless widowers 
without reference to conjugal selection. General theory of widowhood. 

IV Recapitulatory table of the above results. Almost all the immunity of 

husbands and all that of wives due to the influence of the family. It 
increases with family density, that is, with its degree of integration. 
V Suicide and political and national crises. Its regression at such times is 
real and general. Due to the group's acquisition of a stronger integra- 
tion during these crises. 
VI General conclusion of the chapter. Direct relation between suicide and 
the degree of integration of social groups, of whatever sort. Cause of 
this relation; why and under what conditions society is necessary to 
the individual. How suicide develops when he lacks it. Confirmative 
proofs of this explanation. Constitution of egoistic suicide. 

CHAPTER 4 ALTRUISTIC SUICIDE 217 

I Suicide among lower societies: its distinguishing characteristics con- 



DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 4O3 

trasted with those of egoistic suicide. Constitution of obligatory altru- 
istic suicide. Other forms of this type. 
II Suicide in European armies; general character of the aggravation re- 
sulting from military service. It is independent of the non-marital 
state, and alcoholism. Not due to disgust with the service. Proofs: (i) 
it grows with the duration of service; (2) it is stronger among volun- 
teers and re-enlisted men; (3) among officers and non-commissioned 
officers than among privates. It is due to military spirit and the state 
of altruism it involves. Confirmative proofs: (i) it is stronger the less 
inclination peoples have to egoistic suicide; (2) it is maximum among 
elite troops; (3) it decreases to the degree that egoistic suicide de- 
velops. 
Ill How the above results justify the method followed. 

CHAPTER 5 ANOMIC SUICIDE 241 

I Suicide grows with economic crises. This progression is sustained during 
crises of prosperity: examples of Prussia and Italy. International ex- 
positions. Suicide and wealth. 
II Explanation of this relation. Man can live only if his needs are in har- 
mony with his means; which implies a limitation of the latter. Society 
limits them; how this moderating influence is normally exercised. How 
it is prevented by crises; whence come irregularity, anomy, suicides. 
Confirmation from the relations of suicide with wealth. 

III Anomy is at present chronic in the economic world. Suicides resulting 

from it. Constitution of anomic suicide. 

IV Suicides due to conjugal anomy. Widowhood. Divorce. Parallelism 

between divorces and suicides. Due to a matrimonial constitution 
acting in opposite senses on husbands and wives; proofs. Nature 
of this matrimonial constitution. The weakening of matrimonial dis- 
cipline implicit in divorce aggravates the tendency of men to suicide 
and diminishes that of women. Reason for this opposition. Proofs in 
confirmation of this explanation. Conception of marriage emerging 
from this chapter. 

CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES 
OF SUICIDE 277 

Utility and possibility of completing the above aetiological classification 
by a morphological one. 
I Fundamental forms assumed by the three suicidogenetic currents in their 
individual embodiments. Mixed forms resulting from the combination 
of these fundamental forms. 
II Is the chosen instrument of death to be considered in this classification? 
This choice depends on social causes. But these causes are independent 
of those determining suicide. They are therefore unconnected with the 
present study. Synoptic table of the diff^erent types of suicides. 



404 DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Book Three: General Nature of Suicide as a Social Phenomenon 
CHAPTER 1 THE SOCIAL ELEMENT OF SUICIDE 297 

I Results of the above. Lack of relations between the suicide-rate and cos- 
mic or biological phenomena. Definite relations to social facts. The 
social rate therefore corresponds to a collective tendency of society. 
II Stability and individuality of this rate not otherwise explicable. Theory 
of Quetelet to account for it: the average man. Refutation: regular- 
ity of statistical data found also in facts outside the average. Necessity 
to admit a collective force or group of collective forces the intensity of 
which the social suicide-rate expresses. 

III What this collective force must mean: a reality external to and above the 

individual. Sketch and examination of objections made to this concep- 
tion: (i) Objection that a social fact can only be transmitted by inter- 
individual traditions. Answer: the suicide-rate cannot be so trans- 
mitted. (2) Objection that the individual is the only reality of society. 
Answer: a) how material things external to individuals are erected 
into social facts and play a role sui generis in this capacity; b) those 
social facts not thus objectivized unparalleled by individual conscious- 
ness. Their substratum is the aggregate of social consciences combined 
in society. This conception has nothing ontological about it. 

IV Application of these ideas to suicide. 

CHAPTER 2 RELATIONS OF SUICIDE WITH OTHER SOCIAL 
PHENOMENA 326 

Method to determine whether suicide should be classed among moral 
or immoral facts. 
I Historical sketch of juridical or moral regulations in use in different so- 
cieties with respect to suicide. Steady progress of the reprobation of 
it, except in periods of decadence. Reason for this reprobation; it is 
more than ever founded on the normal constitution of modern so- 
cieties. 
II Relations of suicide to other forms of immorality. Suicide and crimes 
against property; no relation. Suicide and homicide; theory that both 
consist of a single organic-psychic state, but depend on opposite social 
conditions. 

Ill Discussion of the first part of the proposition. Sex, age, temperature do 
not affect the two phenomena in the same way. 

rV Discussion of the second part. Cases in which the antagonism is not veri- 
fied. More numerous cases of its verification. Explanation of these ap- 
parent contradictions: existence of different types of suicide, some ex- 
cluding homicide, while others depend on the same social conditions. 
Nature of these types; why the former are now more numerous than 
the latter. 



DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 405 

How the above throws light on the question of the historical relation- 
ship of egoism and altruism. 

CHAPTER 3 PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES 361 

I Solution of the practical problem varies as the present state of suicide is 
regarded as normal or abnormal. Statement of the question regardless 
of suicide's immoral nature. Reasons why a moderate suicide-rate may 
not be morbid. But why the present rate among European peoples is 
the index of a pathological state. 
II Means suggested to obviate the evil: (i) repressive measures. What 
measures are possible. Why they could have only a limited efficacy; 
(2) education. Being only a reflection of the moral state of society, it 
cannot reform it. Necessity of reaching the causes of the suicidogenetic 
currents themselves; though altruistic suicide, not in an abnormal state, 
may be disregarded. 
Remedy for egoistic suicide: to achieve greater consistency in the groups 
which enfold the individual. Which are best suited for the role.' 
Neither political society, too far removed from the individual — nor 
religious society, which socializes only by withdrawing liberty of 
thought — nor the family, which tends to be reduced to the married 
couple. The suicides of married persons are growing, as well as those 
of the unmarried. 

Ill The occupational group. Why it alone can fulfill this function. What 
it must become, for the purpose. How it may constitute a moral en- 
vironment. How it may also restrain anomic suicide. Cases of con- 
jugal anomy. Antinomial statement of the problem: antagonism of the 
sexes. Means of remedy. 

rV Conclusion. Present state of suicide is the index of a poverty of morals. 
What is meant by a moral affection of society. The proposed reform 
demanded by the whole of our historical evolution. Disappearance of 
all intermediate social groups between the individual and the State; 
necessity for reconstituting them. Occupational decentralization con- 
trasted with territorial decentralization; why it is the necessary basis 
for social organization. Importance of the question of suicide; its 
solidarity with the greatest practical problems of the present time. 

APPENDICES 393 

I Suicides and alcoholism in France (4 maps) 
II Suicides in France by arrondissements 
III Suicides in central Europe 

rV Suicides and family density in France (2 maps) 
V Suicides and wealth in France (2 maps) 

VI Table of suicides by age of spouses and the widowed of both sexes, with 
or without children, in French departments except the Seine, in abso- 
lute figures, for the years 1889-91. 



University of California Library 
Los Angeles 

This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 



hone ReHewals 

9188 



nO/825- 



4 WK JUL 03 

REC'DYRL JUNl2'C'3 

4 WK titf 2 7 200(^ 
•■^^OYkL NAa 25'ÛL 



«WN J 4 2roa 



BCD YRL --'i V. 1 ™^ 



.'UN 1 3 2aof 

PEC'DC.L.JUN15'01. 
MAR 2 RBrD 



eblXcOL LIB 
RECEIVED 



9-} 



OCr 1 8 2006 



m 

y 



L 007 285 384 9 



